CITY CODE
of
LEMOORE, CALIFORNIA
1989
Code current through:
Ord. 2025-02, passed 4-1-2025
 
Published by:
American Legal Publishing
525 Vine Street, Suite 310
Cincinnati, Ohio 45202
Tel: (800) 445-5588
Internet: http://www.amlegal.com
PREFACE
         This code of the City of Lemoore, as supplemented, contains ordinances
up to and including ordinance 2025-02, passed April 1, 2025. Ordinances of the
City adopted after said ordinance supersede the provisions of this code to the
extent that they are in conflict or inconsistent therewith. Consult the City
office in order to ascertain whether any particular provision of the code has
been amended, superseded or repealed.
                     American Legal Publishing
                     Cincinnati, Ohio
ORDINANCES PENDING REVIEW FOR CODIFICATION
Listed ordinances have been passed, but they are pending review by the
publisher, and they may not affect the code of ordinances. Additionally,
ordinances listed in this section may not show the original ordinances in their
entirety. Please contact the office of the clerk if there are any questions
concerning any listed ordinances.
ORDINANCE NO. 2025-03
AN ORDINANCE OF THE CITY COUNCIL OF THE CITY OF LEMOORE AMENDING CHAPTER 7 OF
TITLE 3 OF THE LEMOORE MUNICIPAL CODE RELATING TO PEDDLERS, SOLICITORS, AND
TRANSIENT MERCHANTS
 
The City Council of the City of Lemoore does hereby ordain as follows:
 
Chapter 7 (“Peddlers, Solicitors and Transient Merchants”) is hereby amended to
read as follows:
 
Chapter 7
PEDDLERS, SOLICITORS, AND TRANSIENT MERCHANTS
 
SECTION:
3-7-1: Definitions
3-7-2: Uninvited Peddling or Soliciting
3-7-3: Exemptions
3-7-4: Application for Peddler’s License
3-7-5: Handbills in Public Places
3-7-6: Handbills on Residential Property
3-7-7: Time, Place and Manner of Solicitations
 
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/08286aa2a408810754fa2332ce2e067d759ab116/
IMAGES/0-0-0-5161_2305x180.jpg]
Notes
1. See also Section 3-1A-2-8 of this Title.
 
3-7-1: DEFINITIONS:
The words and terms used in this chapter shall be defined as follows:
“Applicant” means the person applying to the Chief of Police for a registration
card.
“Commercial solicitation” means solicitation related primarily to an economic
transaction, such as the exchange of goods or services for a financial fee or
cost. This definition shall automatically incorporate court rulings defining
the terms “commercial speech” and “commercial solicitation.” This definition
shall also include solicitation by for-profit entities that solicit funds on
behalf of nonprofit entities, when such for-profit entities are paid for
solicitation on the nonprofit entity’s behalf, or retain any portion of funds
raised on a nonprofit entity’s behalf.
“Handbill” means any document or written matter such as a circular, leaflet, or
pamphlet which advertises, promotes or informs of a product, business, service,
event, commercial enterprise or any noncommercial activity, event, organization
or purpose.
“Newspaper” means and includes any newspaper of general circulation as defined
by State law, any newspaper duly entered with the U.S. Postal Service in
accordance with Federal statute or regulation and shall include any periodical
or current magazine regularly published with not less than four issues per
month and sold to the public.
“Noncommercial solicitation” means religious and political contacts, and
solicitation not primarily commercial in nature, and not primarily related to
an economic transaction such as the exchange of goods or services for a
financial fee or cost. Non-commercial solicitation may include solicitation of
monetary or non-monetary donations to nonprofit entities, when such
solicitation is not conducted by a for-profit entity that is paid for
solicitation on the nonprofit entity’s behalf, or that retains any portion of
the funds solicited on behalf of the nonprofit entity.
“Peddler” means a person who goes from place to place selling items.
“Police Department” means the Lemoore Police Department.
“Public place” means and includes all publicly owned and maintained streets,
sidewalks, alleys, parks, grounds and buildings.
“Registration card” means the card which authorizes a person to engage in
solicitation.
“Residential property” means any dwelling, house, building or other structure
designed or used in whole or in part for residential purposes and shall include
any yard, walkway or driveway appurtenant to the structure.
“Solicit” and “solicitation” means a request for, or offer of, money, services,
opinion, support, information or property.
“Solicitor” means an individual who solicits.
3-7-2: UNINVITED PEDDLING OR SOLICITING:
A.   Nuisance Declared: The practice of going in and upon private residences in
the City by solicitors, peddlers, hawkers, itinerant merchants and transient
vendors of merchandise, not having been requested or invited so to do by the
owner or owners, occupant or occupants of said private residence, for the
purpose of soliciting orders for the sale of goods, wares and merchandise, and/
or for the purpose of disposing of and/or peddling or hawking the same is
hereby declared to be a nuisance and punishable as such nuisance as a
misdemeanor. (1975 Code §4-3.01)
 
B.   Enforcement: The Chief of Police and police force of the City are hereby
required and directed to suppress the same and to abate any such nuisance as is
described in subsection A of this Section. (1975 Code §4-3.02)
 
C.   Penalties: Any person convicted of perpetrating a nuisance as described
and prohibited in subsection A hereof, upon conviction thereof, shall be fined
a sum of not less than twenty five dollars ($25.00) nor more than one hundred
dollars ($100.00) together with costs of proceedings, which said fine may be
satisfied, if not paid in cash, by execution against the person of anyone
convicted of committing the misdemeanor herein prohibited. (1975 Code §4-3.03)
 
3-7-3: EXEMPTIONS:
The following are exempt from the provisions of this chapter:
A.   Any organization’s solicitation of its members.
B.   Solicitation on premises owned or controlled by the solicitor.
C.    Solicitation which is subject to disclosure under State or Federal
political disclosure laws.
D.   The issuance of any announcement or advertisement that such solicitation
as described in subsection (A), (B), or (C) of this section will occur or which
announces or advertises an event at which unannounced solicitation as described
in subsection (A), (B), or (C) of this section occurs.
 
E.   Newspapers or magazines that have not been contacted by owners or
occupants of property and instructed not to deliver such materials to that
property or dwelling unit.
 
F.   Electronic solicitation, direct solicitation through United States mail or
conducted solely by means of radio or television broadcasts.
 
G.   Any person who is engaged in, or acting as an agent for, any business
entitled to an exemption from local taxation by reason of its being engaged in
interstate commerce shall be required to make application for a registration
card in accordance with the requirements of this chapter, but shall be exempt
from any fee upon satisfactory evidence being presented to the Chief of Police
of his/her right to an exemption.
 
H.   Solicitors under the age of 18.
 
3-7-4: APPLICATION FOR PEDDLER'S LICENSE:
No application for a peddler's license under the provisions of this Title shall
be acted upon or any such license issued without referring such application
first to the Chief of Police for investigation and fingerprinting report in
order to protect the public peace, health and safety; and no business license
shall be issued to any such peddler until the Chief of Police shall have first
endorsed his approval thereon in writing. (1975 Code §5-1.17)
No person shall engage in commercial solicitation in the City of Lemoore
without first applying for, and receiving, a registration card. Multiple
registration cards may be issued pursuant to a single application for all
solicitors engaged in commercial solicitation on behalf of, and under the
immediate direction and control of, the applicant. Commercial solicitors shall
carry registration cards on their persons at all times while soliciting and
shall display the registration card upon request of any person being solicited
or anyone authorized to enforce this Code.
The Chief of Police has no authority to, and shall not, grant, deny, suspend,
revoke or refuse to renew any registration card by reason of disapproval or
disagreement with the philosophy, opinion, or belief of the card holder.
A.   At least ten (10) days prior to the date the applicant intends to engage
in commercial solicitation, an application for a registration card shall be
made to the Police Department on forms supplied by the City. The Police
Department may, for good cause shown, allow the filing of an application less
than ten (10) days prior to the date the card is requested.
 
B.   The application shall contain the following information:
 
 
1.   The full name, mailing address, principal business or residential address
and telephone number, and the nature of the relationship between the applicant
and the card holder, including whether the applicant is a volunteer, a paid
officer or employee, an independent contractor, or an agent of the card holder.
 
2.   Written authorization of permission to solicit from any person or
organization for which the applicant intends to solicit.
 
3.   Where applicable, documentation from the State that the cardholder is in
compliance with California Government Code Section 12599.
 
4.   If the applicant is:
 
a.   An individual, the application shall state the full name, mailing address
and principal business or residential address and telephone number.
 
b.   A partnership, the application shall state the full name, mailing address,
and principal business or residential address and telephone number of each
partner. However, if there are more than ten (10) principal partners, only the
ten (10) principal partners need to be listed.
 
c.   A corporation, the application shall state whether it is organized under
the laws of California or is a foreign corporation and, if a foreign
corporation, the place of incorporation, the full name, mailing address, and
principal business or residential address, the State Corporation or Federal
Employer Identification Number, and telephone number of the individual in
charge of the local office of the corporation and of three principal officers
or directors of the corporation;
 
d.   An association, the application shall state mailing address, principal
business or residential address, State Corporation or Federal Employer
Identification Number, and telephone number of the association and the full
name, mailing address, principal business or residential address and telephone
number of three principal members of the association. If the association is
part of a multistate association, the mailing address and principal business or
residential address and telephone number of its central office shall also be
given.
 
5.   The full name, mailing address, principal business or residential address
and telephone number of each individual who will be in charge of supervising
the solicitation.
 
6.   The full name of each individual who will be soliciting on behalf of the
card holder.
 
7.   The time during the day when the solicitation will be made and the dates
for the commencement and termination of the solicitation.
 
8.   A general outline of the method or methods to be used in conducting the
solicitation, including the number of solicitors to be used.
 
9.   A statement that the registration card will not be used or represented in
any way as an endorsement by the City or any department, officer, or employee
thereof.
C.   If, while the application is pending or during the term of any card
granted thereon, there is any change in fact, policy, or method that would
alter the information given in the application, the applicant shall notify the
Police Department in writing within twenty-four (24) hours after such change. 
 
D.   An applicant for a registration card shall, when the application is filed,
pay the fee established by resolution of the City Council. The filing fee shall
not exceed the administrative cost of processing the application and issuing
the card.
 
E.   The Police Department shall issue the card to the applicant within ten
(10) days after the date the completed application is filed. 
 
F.   A registration card shall be valid for the period of time stated in the
application but in no case shall the time exceed a period of one year from the
date of the issuance of the permit.
 
G.   No registration card issued pursuant to this chapter shall be transferred
or assigned, and any attempted assignment or transfer shall be void.
 
H.   The Chief of Police may waive the requirements of this chapter in whole or
in part when he/she determines that a waiver is necessary to allow the
solicitation of immediate aid in response to an emergency.
 
3-7-5: HANDBILLS IN PUBLIC PLACES:
A.   No person shall distribute, deposit or place any handbill or any other
written material intended for a commercial purpose in or on any public place.
The provisions of this section shall not prohibit any person from personally
delivering a handbill in any public place to any person willing to accept the
handbill.
 
B.   No person shall distribute, deposit or place any handbill, or any other
written material, in or upon any automobile or other vehicle in the City that
displays a sign stating “No Handbills” or sign with similar wording that
indicates the vehicle’s owner, or driver does not wish to receive such
materials.
 
3-7-6: HANDBILLS ON RESIDENTIAL PROPERTY:
A.   No person shall distribute, deposit or place any handbill, or any other
written material, in or to any residential property which has displayed any
sign indicating “No Solicitors” or similar wording that no solicitation is
desired by the occupant. All handbills distributed to, or deposited or placed
in, any residential property shall contain a legible notice to the effect that
anyone who does not desire to receive additional handbills may notify the
person or organization responsible for the distribution, whose name, address
and phone number shall be listed on the handbill. Subsequent to receipt of
notice that the occupant does not desire additional handbills, the registration
card holder(s) shall not distribute handbills to that residential property.
 
B.   Occupants of residential properties who visibly display “No Soliciting”
signs, or signs with similar wording, may annually request to have their
addresses included on a registry of residential properties whose occupants do
not wish to receive unsolicited handbills or commercial solicitation. The
registry shall be maintained by the Police Department and through the
Department’s website and shall be available on the City’s website to the public
and all potential commercial and noncommercial solicitors. It shall be a
violation of this section for any commercial or noncommercial solicitor to
distribute handbills or engage in commercial solicitation at or to any dwelling
unit that is included on the City’s “no soliciting” registry. 
 
The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to the distribution of mail by
the United States Post Office.
 
3-7-7: TIME, PLACE AND MANNER OF SOLICITATION:
No person shall solicit in violation of any of the following provisions:
A.    No solicitation is permitted between the hours of 7:00PM and 9:00 a.m.,
except by prior appointment.
B.    No commercial solicitation is permitted at any residential property at
which a sign is displayed indicating “No Solicitors” or a similar indication
that no solicitation is desired by the occupant(s).
C.    No solicitor shall use profane or abusive language or verbal threats
during any solicitation or following any refusal by the person solicited.
D.    No solicitor shall step onto or over the threshold of a doorway, unless
invited to do so by the occupant(s).
E.    No solicitor shall place his/her hands, legs, or any portion of the body
in any doorway or exit so that it would reasonably appear to the occupant that
the door may not be closed or the exit may not be accessible, unless the
occupant grants permission to do so.
F.    No solicitor shall refuse to leave the premises when asked to do so by
the occupant(s).
G.    No solicitation shall occur when the person to be solicited is in or on
any of the following places:
1.    During a live presentation or performance on any City property, unless
the solicitation is authorized by the City or a special event permit.
2.    Inside a public transportation vehicle or public facility.
3.    Within fifty (50) feet of any automated teller machine.
4.    Outdoor and/or indoor dining areas of restaurants or other dining
establishments serving food for immediate consumption without the express
permission of the restaurant owner, manager or operator; or
5.    A queue of five or more people waiting to gain admission to a place or
vehicle or waiting to purchase an item or admission ticket.
H.    No solicitor shall block or impede the path of the individual(s) being
solicited.
I.    No solicitor shall continue to solicit, follow, or accompany any
individual who has been solicited after the individual has asked the solicitor
to leave or after the individual being solicited has declined the solicitation.
J.    No solicitor shall touch the individual(s) being solicited without that
individual(s)’ consent.
K.    No solicitor shall make any statements, gestures, or other communication
which a reasonable person in the situation of the individual(s) being solicited
would perceive to be a threat and has a reasonable likelihood to produce in the
victim a fear that the threat will be carried out.
L.    No solicitor shall knowingly make false statements or misrepresentations
during the course of the solicitation
M. No solicitation will take place at any time on Sunday.
 
SECTION 2. EFFECTIVE DATE. This ordinance becomes effective 30 days after
passage, and within 15 days after passage shall be published once with the
names of councilmembers voting for or against it in a newspaper of general
circulation within the City of Lemoore.
The foregoing Ordinance was introduced by the City Council of the City of
Lemoore, California, at a regularly scheduled meeting held on December 16,
2025, and was passed and adopted by the City Council at a regular meeting held
on January 6, 2026, by the following vote:
 
   AYES:
   NOES:
   ABSENT:
   ABSTAINING:                     
 
ATTEST:                  APPROVED:
 
                                    
Marisa Avalos                  Patricia Matthews
City Clerk                  Mayor
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
ORDINANCE NO. 2026-01
AN ORDINANCE OF THE CITY COUNCIL OF THE CITY OF LEMOORE AMENDING TITLE 4 OF THE
MUNICIPAL CODE TO ESTABLISH AN EVENT-BASED ENTERTAINMENT ZONE.
WHEREAS, California Senate Bill 969 (2024) authorizes cities to establish
"Entertainment Zones" where alcohol may be consumed on public property adjacent
to licensed premises; and
WHEREAS, the City Council desires to utilize this authority narrowly to support
specific community festivals and special events in the Downtown District,
rather than establishing a permanent, year-round open container district; and
WHEREAS, this "Event-Based" model ensures that public consumption is limited to
times when increased security, sanitation, and street closures are already in
place.
NOW, THEREFORE, THE CITY COUNCIL OF THE CITY OF LEMOORE DOES ORDAIN AS FOLLOWS:
SECTION 1. AMENDMENT TO MUNICIPAL CODE Title 4 (Public Health and Safety) is
amended to add Chapter 4.10: EVENT-BASED ENTERTAINMENT ZONES.
4.10.010 Purpose and Intent. The purpose of this Chapter is to establish the
legal framework for an Entertainment Zone that is activated only during
specific special events designated by the City Council. This Chapter does not
authorize open containers on public property at any time other than during such
designated events.
4.10.020 Definitions. A. "Active Zone Period" means the specific date and time
window authorized by a City Council Resolution or Special Event Permit during
which alcohol rules are relaxed. B. "District Cup" means a single-use, non-
glass container approved by the City for use only during an Active Zone Period.
4.10.030 Establishment of Dormant Boundaries. The geographic boundaries of the
Entertainment Zone shall be established by Resolution. These boundaries
represent the maximum possible footprint of the zone. The actual area active
for any specific event may be the full zone or a subset thereof, as determined
by the specific Event Permit.
4.10.040 Activation Required. The provisions of this Chapter allowing public
consumption shall be void and unenforceable except during an Active Zone
Period. At all other times, standard open container laws (LMC Section 5-2-2)
shall remain in full force and effect.
4.10.050 Permitted Activities. During an Active Zone Period, persons 21 years
of age or older may possess and consume alcoholic beverages within the zone,
provided:
1.   Event Connection: The beverage was purchased from a Participating Vendor
within the zone during the event hours.
2.   Vessel: The beverage is in an official District Cup specific to that
event.
3.   Wristbands: The person is wearing a verified age-check wristband issued by
the event organizers or vendors.
(Sections 4.10.060 - 4.10.080 regarding Vendor Requirements and Enforcement
remain standard).
SECTION 2. EFFECTIVE DATE. This ordinance becomes effective 30 days after
passage, and within 15 days after passage shall be published once with the
names of councilmembers voting for or against it in a newspaper of general
circulation within the City of Lemoore.
The foregoing Ordinance was introduced by the City Council of the City of
Lemoore, California, at a regularly scheduled meeting held on January 6, 2026,
and was passed and adopted by the City Council at a regular meeting held on
January 20, 2026, by the following vote:
 
   AYES:
   NOES:
   ABSENT:
   ABSTAINING:                     
 
ATTEST:                  APPROVED:
 
                                    
Lysaundra Aquino               Patricia Matthews
Deputy City Clerk                  Mayor
 
 
 
 
 
ORDINANCE NO. 2026-02
 
AN ORDINANCE OF THE CITY COUNCIL OF THE CITY OF LEMOORE
ADOPTING PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENT NO. 2025-01 LOCATED AT
109 HAMLET STREET IN THE CITY OF LEMOORE
 
   THE CITY COUNCIL OF THE CITY OF LEMOORE HEREBY DOES ORDAIN:
SECTION 1.  FINDINGS.
(a)   The property owner, Sequoia Investors (Steven Macias), has requested
approval of a Planned Unit development located at 109 Hamlet Street in the City
of Lemoore (APN: 020-184-020).
(b)   This Planned Unit Development is consistent with the City of Lemoore
General Plan, Lemoore Municipal Code and the Zoning Ordinance and would not be
detrimental to the public interest, health, safety, convenience, and welfare of
the City.
(c)   A Categorical Exemption has been prepared and adopted in accordance with
the California Environmental Quality Act (CEQA).
(d)   On December 8, 2025, the Planning Commission for the City of Lemoore
recommended approval of the PUD, including specific building setbacks, subject
to approval by the City Council of a zoning overlay for the PUD.
SECTION 2.   PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENT ESTABLISHMENT.
A planned unit development is hereby established on property located at 109
Hamlet Street, in the City of Lemoore (APN: 020-184-020). The official Zoning
Map shall be amended to reflect this change.
SECTION 3.   AMENDMENT OF CODE: ADOPTION OF PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENT OVERLAY
ZONES
 
Article “B” of Chapter 9 of Title 9 of the Lemoore Municipal Code is amended as
follows:
Table 9-9B-3-1, containing the adopted PUD overlay zones, is hereby amended to
add PUD 2025-01:
 
Number  Name            Date Approved   Resolution Number Average Density Per
                                                          Gross Acre (du/ac)
2025-01 Macias - Parcel January 6, 2026 2026-02           9.09
        Map 2025-03
 
Table 9-9B-4-1, containing specific development standards in the adopted PUD
overlay zones, is hereby amended to add PUD 2025-01:
 
 
Number  Name               Front Setback   Side Setback            Rear Setback
                                           5 feet minimum interior
2025-01 Macias –         20 feet minimum side                    10 feet
        Parcel Map 2025-03                 10 feet minimum street
                                           side
 
SECTION 4.   DEVELOPMENT OF SITE.
 
New homes on the site shall be developed in substantial conformance with the
conceptual plans shown in Attachment “A”.
 
SECTION 5.   SEVERABILITY.
 
If any provision of this ordinance is declared unlawful by a court of competent
jurisdiction, the City Council intends that the remaining provisions of this
ordinance remain in effect.
 
SECTION 6.   EFFECTIVE DATE.
 
The ordinance codified herein shall take effect and be in full force and effect
from and after thirty (30) days after its final passage and adoption. Within
fifteen (15) days after its adoption, the ordinance codified herein, or a
summary of the ordinance codified herein, shall be published once in a
newspaper of general circulation.
 
* * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * *
 
The foregoing Ordinance was introduced at a Regular Meeting of the City Council
of the City of Lemoore held on the 20th day of January 2026 and adopted at a
Regular Meeting held on the 3rd day of February 2026 by the following vote:
 
AYES:
NOES:
ABSTAINING:
ABSENT:
 
ATTEST:                  APPROVED:
 
 
 
                                    
Marisa Avalos, City Clerk            Patricia Matthews, Mayor
 
 
Attachment “A”
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/08286aa2a408810754fa2332ce2e067d759ab116/
IMAGES/0-0-0-5166_8271x4885.jpg]
 
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/08286aa2a408810754fa2332ce2e067d759ab116/
IMAGES/0-0-0-5169_6893x4065.jpg]
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/08286aa2a408810754fa2332ce2e067d759ab116/
IMAGES/0-0-0-5172_6912x4052.jpg]
 
 
ADOPTING ORDINANCE
ORDINANCE NO. 8905
   AN ORDINANCE OF THE CITY COUNCIL OF THE CITY OF LEMOORE,
   ADOPTING THE CITY CODE OF LEMOORE, CALIFORNIA
   WHEREAS, the official ordinances of the City of Lemoore have heretofore been
collected in binder form, both codified and uncodified, and entitled "Lemoore
Municipal Code"; and
   WHEREAS, Sterling Codifiers, Inc. has prepared an official and comprehensive
codification of all of the ordinances adopted by the City Council of the City
of Lemoore previously collected in the Lemoore Municipal Code; and
   WHEREAS, the codification of the ordinances of the City of Lemoore has been
gathered, printed and published in a code book entitled "City Code of Lemoore,
California", which is incorporated herein by this reference; and
   WHEREAS, official copies of the "City Code of Lemoore, California" is now on
file with the office of the City Clerk; and
   WHEREAS, On July 5, 1989, a noticed public hearing was held with respect to
the adoption of this Ordinance, all in accordance with the provisions of
California Government Code Section 50020, et seq.
   NOW, THEREFORE, BE IT ORDAINED by the City Council of the City of Lemoore,
California, as follows:
   SECTION 1: From and after the date of passage of this Ordinance, the City
Code of the City of Lemoore, California, prepared by Sterling Codifiers, Inc.,
containing the compilation of all ordinances of a general nature together with
the changes made to said ordinances, under the direction of the City Council of
the City, shall be accepted in all courts without question as the Official Code
and Law of the City as enacted by the City Council.
   SECTION 2: There is hereby adopted, as a method of perpetual codification,
the loose-leaf type of binding together with the continuous supplement service,
provided by Sterling Codifiers, Inc., whereby each newly adopted ordinance of a
general and permanent nature amending, altering, adding or deleting provisions
of the Official City Code is identified by the proper heading or caption and is
inserted in the proper place in each
of the official copies, three (3) copies of which shall be maintained in the
office of the City Clerk, certified as to correctness and available for
inspection at any and all times that said office is regularly open.
   SECTION 3: All ordinances of a general nature included in this Official City
Code shall be considered as a continuation of the said ordinances and their
respective provisions and the adoption of this Ordinance and the Official City
Code incorporated herein by reference shall not serve to cause any interruption
in the continuous effectiveness of ordinances included in said Official City
Code. All ordinances of a special nature, such as but not limited to tax levy
ordinances, rezoning ordinances, franchises and vacating ordinances shall
continue in full force and effect unless specifically repealed and amended by a
provision of the City Code. Such ordinances are not intended to be included in
the Official City Code. All ordinances of the City adopted following the
commencement of the work of codification by Sterling Codifiers, Inc., and which
are not yet included in the Official Code Book shall continue in full force and
effect without interruption and shall be included in the Official Code Book in
due course.
   SECTION 4: It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to
change or amend by additions or deletions, any part or portion of such Code, or
to insert or delete pages or portions thereof, or to alter or tamper with such
Code in any manner whatsoever which will cause the law of the City of Lemoore
to be misrepresented thereby.
   SECTION 5: All ordinances or parts of ordinances in conflict herewith are,
to the extent of such conflict, hereby repealed.
   SECTION 6: In accordance with the provisions of Government Code Section
36900 and Penal Code Section 19, any person violating any provision of this
Ordinance or any provision of the Code adopted hereby shall be punished by a
fine of not more than one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) or by imprisonment in
the County jail for a period not exceeding six (6) months, or by both such fine
and imprisonment.
   SECTION 7: This Ordinance and the Code adopted hereby shall be in full force
and effect from and after its passage and publication in accordance with law.
   The foregoing Ordinance was introduced at a Regular Meeting of the City
Council of the City of Lemoore held on the 6th day of June, 1989 and was passed
and adopted at a Regular Meeting of the City Council held on the 5th day of
July 1989 by the following vote:
AYES:   Lee, Edwards, Wyckoff, Lyon, Luis
NOES:   None
ABSENT:   None
ABSTAINING:   None
* * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * *
   CERTIFICATE
STATE OF CALIFORNIA   )
COUNTY OF KINGS   ) ss
CITY OF LEMOORE   )
   I, HELEN M. MURRAY, City Clerk of the City of Lemoore, do certify that the
foregoing Ordinance was duly introduced at a Regular Meeting of the City
Council of the City of Lemoore held on the 6th day of June, 1989, and passed
and adopted at a Regular Meeting of the City Council held on the 5th day of
July, 1989.
[Image]DATED: July 18, 1989
TITLE 1
ADMINISTRATIVE
CHAPTER 1
OFFICIAL MUNICIPAL CODE
SECTION:
1-1-1: Title
1-1-2: Acceptance
1-1-3: Amendments
1-1-4: Code Alterations
1-1-5: Copies Of Code
1-1-1: TITLE:
This code shall be known as the LEMOORE MUNICIPAL CODE. It shall be sufficient
to refer to this code as the Lemoore municipal code in any prosecution for the
violation of any provision hereof. It shall also be sufficient to designate any
ordinance adding to, amending or repealing this code, or portions thereof, as
an amendment to or a repeal of the Lemoore municipal code, or a portion
thereof. (1975 Code §0-1.01)
Except as otherwise herein or hereafter provided, this code consists of all the
regulatory, penal and administrative laws of general application of the city,
codified pursuant to the authority contained in article 2 of chapter 1 of part
1 of division 1 of title 5 of the Government Code of the state of California.
(1975 Code §0-1.02)
This code shall take effect upon the effective date of the ordinance adopting
this code by reference. (1975 Code §0-1.03)
1-1-2: ACCEPTANCE:
This code, as hereby presented in printed form, shall hereafter be received
without further proof in all courts and in all administrative tribunals of this
state as the ordinances of the city of general and permanent effect, except the
excluded ordinances enumerated in section
1-2-1 of this title. (1989 Code)
1-1-3: AMENDMENTS:
Any ordinance amending this code shall set forth the title, chapter and section
number of the section or sections to be amended, and this shall constitute
sufficient compliance with any statutory requirement pertaining to the
amendment or revision by ordinance of any part of this code. (1989 Code)
Upon the adoption of any amendment or addition to this code, or upon the repeal
of any of its provisions, the city clerk shall certify thereto and shall make
appropriate notation in the official volumes of this code of the taking of such
action, noting thereon the number and date of the ordinance pursuant to which
such action is taken.
Duly certified copies of each ordinance making changes in this code shall be
filed in the office of the city clerk in books for such purpose, duly indexed
for ready reference.
At least quarterly, the city clerk shall cause the looseleaf pages of this code
in which changes have been made to be reproduced, including the notation as to
the ordinance number and date pursuant to which such change is adopted, and
distributed in order that the looseleaf copies of this code prepared for the
use and convenience of the officers and employees of the city and the general
public may be brought up to date. (1975 Code §0-1.08)
1-1-4: CODE ALTERATIONS:
It shall be deemed unlawful for any person to alter, change, replace or deface
in any way any section or any page of this code in such a manner that the
meaning of any phrase or order may be changed or omitted. Replacement pages may
be inserted according to the official instructions when so authorized by the
city council. The city clerk shall see that the replacement pages are properly
inserted in the official copies maintained in the office of the clerk. Any
person having in his custody an official copy of this code shall make every
effort to maintain said code in an up to date and efficient manner. He shall
see to the immediate insertion of new or replacement pages when such are
delivered to him or made available to him through the office of the city clerk.
Said code books, while in actual possession of officials and other interested
persons, shall be and remain the property of the city and shall be returned to
the office of the clerk when directed so to do by order of the city council.
(1989 Code)
1-1-5: COPIES OF CODE:
Not less than two (2) copies of this code shall be filed for use and
examination by the public in the office of the city clerk. One additional copy
or copies shall be maintained as follows: At the office of the city attorney,
and additional copies for every council member and city department, upon
request of the member or department. Additionally, an electronic copy of this
code will be maintained and available to the public. (Ord. 2005-01, 2-15-2005)
CHAPTER 2
SAVING CLAUSE
SECTION:
1-2-1: Repeal of General Ordinances
1-2-2: Public Utility Ordinances
1-2-3: Court Proceedings
1-2-4: Reference to Specific Ordinances
1-2-5: Severability Clause
1-2-1: REPEAL OF GENERAL ORDINANCES:
All general ordinances of City passed prior to the adoption of this City Code
are hereby repealed, except such as are included in this City Code or are by
necessary implication herein reserved from repeal (subject to the saving
clauses contained in the following sections), and excluding the following
ordinances which are not hereby repealed: zoning ordinances; tax levy
ordinances; appropriation ordinances; ordinances relating to boundaries and
annexations; franchise ordinances and other ordinances granting special rights
to persons or corporations; contract ordinances and ordinances authorizing the
execution of a contract or the issuance of warrants; salary ordinances;
ordinances establishing, naming or vacating streets, alleys or other public
places; improvement ordinances; bond ordinances; ordinances relating to
elections; ordinances relating to the transfer or acceptance of real estate by
or from the City; and all special ordinances.
1-2-2: PUBLIC UTILITY ORDINANCES:
No ordinance relating to railroad crossings with streets and other public ways,
or relating to the conduct, duties, service or rates of public utilities shall
be repealed by virtue of the adoption of this City Code or by virtue of the
preceding Section, excepting as the City Code may contain provisions for such
matters, in which case this City Code shall be considered as amending such
ordinance or ordinances in respect to such provisions only.
1-2-3: COURT PROCEEDINGS:
   A.   No new ordinance shall be construed or held to repeal a former
ordinance whether such former ordinance is expressly repealed or not, as to any
offense committed against such former ordinance or as to any act done, any
penalty, forfeiture or punishment so incurred, or any right accrued or claim
arising under the former ordinance, or in any way whatever to affect any such
offense or act so committed or so done, or any penalty, forfeiture or
punishment so incurred or any right accrued or claim arising before the new
ordinance takes effect, save only that the proceedings thereafter shall conform
to the ordinance in force at the time of such proceeding. So far as
practicable, if any penalty, forfeiture or punishment be mitigated by any
provision of a new ordinance, such provision may be, by consent of the party
affected, applied to any judgment announced after the new ordinance takes
effect.
   B.   This Section shall extend to all repeals, either by express words or
implication, whether the repeal is in the ordinance making any new provisions
upon the same subject or in any other ordinance.
   C.   Nothing contained in this Chapter shall be construed as abating any
action now pending under or by virtue of any general ordinance of the City
herein repealed, and the provisions of all general ordinances contained in this
Code shall be deemed to be continuing provisions and not a new enactment of the
same provision; nor shall this Chapter be deemed as discontinuing, abating,
modifying or altering any penalty accrued or to accrue, or as affecting the
liability of any person, firm or corporation, or as waiving any right of the
City under any ordinance or provision thereof in force at the time of the
adoption of this City Code. (1989 Code)
   D.   Neither the adoption of this Code nor the repeal hereby of any
ordinance of the City shall be construed as a waiver of any license or penalty
at the effective date of this Code due and unpaid under such ordinance, nor be
construed as affecting any of the provisions of such ordinances relating to the
collection of any such license or penalty or the penal provisions applicable to
any violation thereof, nor to affect the validity of any bond or cash deposit
in lieu thereof required to be posted, filed or deposited pursuant to any
ordinance, and all vested rights and obligations thereunder appertaining shall
continue in full force and effect. (1975 Code §0-1.04)
   E.   When a limitation or period of time prescribed in any existing
ordinance or statute for acquiring a right or barring a remedy, or for any
other purpose, has begun to run before this Code goes into effect, the time
which has already run shall be deemed a part of the time prescribed as such
limitation. (1975 Code §0-3.12)
1-2-4: REFERENCE TO SPECIFIC ORDINANCES:
The provisions of this Code shall not in any manner affect deposits or other
matters of record which refer to, or are otherwise connected with ordinances
which are therein specifically designated by number or otherwise and which are
included within this Code, but such reference shall be construed to apply to
the corresponding provisions contained within this Code. (1975 Code §0-1.08)
1-2-5: SEVERABILITY CLAUSE:
If any section, subsection, subdivision, paragraph, sentence, clause or phrase
of this City Code or any part thereof is for any reason held to be
unconstitutional or invalid or ineffective by any court of competent
jurisdiction, such decision shall not affect the validity or effectiveness of
the remaining portions of this Code, or any part thereof. The City Council
hereby declares that it would have passed each section, subsection,
subdivision, paragraph, sentence, clause or phrase thereof irrespective of the
fact that any one or more sections, subsections, subdivisions, paragraphs,
sentences, clauses or phrases be declared unconstitutional, invalid or
ineffective. (1989 Code)
CHAPTER 3
RULES OF CONSTRUCTION
SECTION:
1-3-1: Scope
1-3-2: Interpretation And Application
1-3-3: Construction Of Words
1-3-4: Definitions, General
1-3-5: Headings
1-3-1: SCOPE:
Unless the provisions of the context otherwise specify, the general provisions,
rules of construction and definitions set forth in this chapter shall govern
the construction of this code. The provisions of this code and all proceedings
under it are to be construed with a view to effect its objects and to promote
justice. (1975 Code §0-3.01)
1-3-2: INTERPRETATION AND APPLICATION:
   A.   Jurisdiction: This code shall refer only to the omission or commission
of acts within the territorial limits of the city and to that territory outside
of the city over which the city has jurisdiction by virtue of the constitution
or any law, or by reason of ownership or control of property. (1975 Code §0-
3.06)
   B.   Tenure Of Existing Officers: All persons who, at the time this code
takes effect, hold office under any of the ordinances repealed by this code,
which offices are continued by this code, shall continue to hold them according
to their former tenure. (1975 Code §0-3.03)
   C.   Powers Of Deputies: Whenever a power is granted to, or a duty is
imposed upon a public officer or employee, the power may be exercised by a
deputy or the duty may be performed by a deputy of such officer or employee or
by a person otherwise duly authorized pursuant to law or ordinance, unless this
code expressly provides otherwise. (1975 Code §0-3.07)
   D.   Service Of Notices: Whenever a notice is required to be given under
this code, unless different provisions are otherwise specifically made in this
code, such notice may be given either by personal delivery thereof to the
person to be notified or by deposit in the United States mail in a sealed
envelope, postage prepaid, addressed to such person to be notified at his last
known business address or residence address as the same appears in the public
records of the city or other records pertaining to the matter to which such
notice is directed. Service by mail shall be deemed to have been completed at
the time of deposit in the post office. (1975 Code §0-3.10)
Proof of giving any notice may be made by the certificate of any officer or
employee of the city or by declaration under penalty of perjury over the age of
eighteen (18) years, which declaration shows service in conformity with this
code or other provisions of law applicable to the subject matter concerned.
(1975 Code §0-3.11)
1-3-3: CONSTRUCTION OF WORDS:
Whenever any word in any section of this code importing the plural number is
used in describing or referring to any matters, parties or persons, any single
matter, party or person shall be deemed to be included, although distributive
words may not have been used. When any subject matter, party or person is
referred to in this code by words importing the singular number only, or the
masculine gender, several matters, parties or persons and females as well as
males and bodies corporate shall be deemed to be included; provided, that these
rules of construction shall not be applied to any section of this code which
contains any express provision excluding such construction or where the subject
matter or context may be repugnant thereto. The present tense shall include the
past and future tenses and the future tense shall include the present tense.
The word "ordinance" contained in the ordinances of the city has been changed
in the content of this code to "title", "chapter", "section" and/or
"subsection" or words of like import for organizational and clarification
purposes only. Such change to the city's ordinances is not meant to amend
passage and effective dates of such original ordinances. (1989 Code)
Whenever any reference is made to an ordinance, the reference shall apply to
such ordinance of the city unless specifically provided otherwise. Whenever any
reference is made to any portion of this code or to any ordinances of the city,
the reference shall apply to all amendments and additions now or hereafter
made. (1975 Code §0-3.09)
1-3-4: DEFINITIONS, GENERAL:
Whenever the following words or terms are used in this code, they shall have
such meanings herein ascribed to them, unless the context makes such meaning
repugnant thereto:
AGENT: A person acting on behalf of another.
CALENDAR YEAR: From January 1 through December 31 of any given year.
CITY: The city of Lemoore.
CODE: The municipal code of Lemoore, California, and amendments thereto.
COMMUNITY DEVELOPMENT DEPARTMENT: The community and economic department.
COMMUNITY DEVELOPMENT DIRECTOR: The city manager or his/her designee.
COUNCIL: The city council of the city of Lemoore.
COUNTY: The county of Kings, state of California.
FISCAL YEAR: From July 1 of any given year through June 30 of the following
year.
LICENSE: The permission granted for the carrying on of a business, profession
or occupation.
MAY: Shall be permissive.
MISDEMEANOR: As defined in state law 1 .
MONTH: A calendar month unless otherwise expressed.
NUISANCE: Anything offensive or obnoxious to the health, welfare and enjoyment
of the inhabitants of the city; or any act or thing repugnant to, or creating a
hazard to, or having a detrimental effect on the property of another person or
to the community.
OATH: Shall include affirmation.
OCCUPANT: As applied to a building or land, shall include any person who
occupies the whole or any part of such building or land whether alone or with
others.
OFFICE, OFFICER, EMPLOYEE, ORDINANCE: The use of the title of any officer,
employee, office or ordinance shall mean such officer, employee, office or
ordinance of this city unless otherwise specified.
Whenever reference is made in this code to a city officer or employee by title
only, this shall be construed as though followed by the words "of the city of
Lemoore".
OPERATOR: The person who is in charge of any operation, business or profession.
OWNER: As applied to a building or land, shall include any part owner, joint
owner, tenant in common, joint tenant or lessee of the whole or of a part of
such building or land.
PERSON: Shall include any person, firm, company, corporation, partnership,
association, any public corporation, political subdivision or city (except the
city of Lemoore).
PERSONAL PROPERTY: Shall include money, goods, chattels, effects, rights in
action, evidence of rights in action and all written instruments by which any
pecuniary obligation, right or title to property is created, acknowledged,
transferred, increased, defeated, discharged or diminished and every right or
interest therein.
PROPERTY: Shall include both real and personal property.
REAL PROPERTY: Shall include lands, tenements and hereditaments.
RETAIL: Unless otherwise specifically defined, shall be understood to relate to
the sale of goods, merchandise, articles or things in small quantities directly
to the consumer.
SECTION, SUBSECTION: "Section" shall mean a section of this code, unless some
other source is specifically mentioned; "subsection" shall mean a subsection of
the section in which the term occurs, unless some other section is expressly
mentioned.
SHALL: Shall be mandatory.
STATE: The state of California.
STREET: Shall include all streets, highways, avenues, boulevards, alleys,
courts, places, squares or other public ways in the city which have been or may
hereafter be dedicated and open to public use, or such other public property so
designated in any law of this state.
TENANT OR OCCUPANT: Applied to a building or land, shall include any person who
occupies the whole or part of such building or land, whether alone or with
others.
WHOLESALE: The term "wholesale" as used in this code, unless otherwise
specifically defined, shall be understood to relate to the sale of goods,
merchandise, articles or things in quantity to persons who purchase for the
purpose of resale.
WRITTEN, IN WRITING: May include printing and any other mode of representing
words, numbers, symbols and letters, but when the written signature of any
person is required by law to any official or public writing or bond required by
law, it shall be in the proper handwriting of such person, or in case he is
unable to write, by his proper mark.
Writing includes any form of recorded message capable of comprehension by
ordinary visual means. Whenever any notice, report, statement or record is
required or authorized by this code, it shall be made in writing in the English
language unless it is expressly provided otherwise. (1975 Code §§0-3.05, 0-
3.08, 0-3.13; amd. 1989 Code; Ord. 2000-03, 3-7-2000; Ord. 2004-4, 9-21-2004)
 
Notes
1 1. West's Ann.Cal.Pen.C. § 17.
1-3-5: HEADINGS:
The headings of the several sections of this code are intended as mere
catchwords to indicate the content of the section and shall not be deemed or
taken to be titles of such sections, nor be deemed to govern, limit, modify or
in any manner affect the scope, meaning or intent of the provisions of any
division or section hereof, nor unless expressly so provided, shall they be so
deemed when any of such sections, including the headings, are amended or
reenacted. (1989 Code)
CHAPTER 4
PENALTY PROVISIONS
SECTION:
1-4-1: Violations; General Penalty
1-4-2: Application Of Provisions
1-4-3: Imposition And Determination Of Penalty
1-4-4: County Jail
1-4-5: Citations
1-4-6: Liability Of Officers
1-4-1: VIOLATIONS; GENERAL PENALTY:
It shall be unlawful for any person to violate any provision or to fail to
comply with any of the requirements of this code or the provisions of any code
adopted by reference by this code. Subject to the provisions of this section,
any person violating any such provision or failing to comply with any of the
mandatory requirements of this code shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. Any such
violation or failure to comply may be prosecuted either by the city attorney,
the deputy city attorney, or by the district attorney of the county of Kings,
and the city attorney, deputy city attorney, or district attorney shall have
and exercise discretion to prosecute such violation or failure to comply as an
infraction instead of as a misdemeanor when justice so requires. Any person
convicted of a misdemeanor under the provisions of this code shall be punished
as provided by law; any person convicted of an infraction under the provisions
of this code shall be punished as provided in subdivision (b) of section 36900
of the California Government Code, which provides that every violation
determined to be an infraction is punishable by a fine not exceeding one
hundred dollars ($100.00) for a first violation, a fine not exceeding two
hundred dollars ($200.00) for a second violation of the same ordinance within
one year, and a fine not exceeding five hundred dollars ($500.00) for each
additional violation of the same ordinance within one year. Each such person
shall be guilty of a separate offense for each and every day during any portion
of which any violation of any provision of this code or the provisions of any
code adopted by reference by this code is committed, continued or permitted by
such person and shall be punishable accordingly.
In addition to the penalties provided by this section, any condition caused or
permitted to exist in violation of any of the provisions of this code, or the
provisions of any code adopted by reference by this code, shall be deemed a
public nuisance and may be summarily abated by this city, and each day such
condition continues shall be regarded as a new and separate offense. (Ord.
2000-12, 12-5-2000)
1-4-2: APPLICATION OF PROVISIONS:
The penalty provided in this chapter shall be applicable to any violation of
any section or subsection of this code the same as though it were a part of
each and every separate section or subsection unless otherwise indicated.
In all cases where the same offense is made punishable or is created by
different clauses or sections of this code, the prosecuting officer may elect
under which to proceed, but not more than one recovery shall be had against and
not more than one punishment imposed on the same person for the same offense;
provided, that the revocation of a license or permit shall not be considered a
recovery or penalty so as to bar any other penalty being enforced.
Whenever the doing of any act or the omission to do any act constitutes a
breach of any section or provision of this code and there shall be no fine or
penalty specifically declared for such breach, the provisions of this chapter
shall apply. (1989 Code)
Whenever in this code any act or omission is made unlawful, it shall include
causing, permitting, aiding, abetting, suffering or concealing the fact of such
act or omission. (1975 Code §0-2.02)
1-4-3: IMPOSITION AND DETERMINATION OF PENALTY:
Whenever in this code the punishment for a crime is left undetermined between
certain limits, the punishment to be inflicted in a particular case shall be
determined by the court authorized to pass sentence within such limits as may
be prescribed by this code. (1975 Code §0-2.04)
1-4-4: COUNTY JAIL:
Every person found guilty of violating any of the provisions of this code and
sentenced to imprisonment shall be imprisoned in the Kings County jail. (1975
Code §0-2.05)
1-4-5: CITATIONS:
   A.   Citation Procedure: If any person arrested for a violation of any
municipal ordinance of the city is not immediately taken before a magistrate as
prescribed in the Penal Code, the arresting officer shall prepare in duplicate
a written notice to appear in court containing the name and address of such
person, the offense charged and the time and place where and when such person
shall appear in court. If such person signs the citation agreeing to appear in
court at the time and place stated, he shall be released from custody. (1975
Code §7-1.01)
   B.   Penalty For Failure To Appear: Any person wilfully violating his
written promise to appear in court at the time and place stated in the citation
is guilty of a misdemeanor regardless of the disposition of the charge upon
which he was originally arrested and shall be punished by a fine of not more
than five hundred dollars ($500.00) or imprisonment for not more than six (6)
months or by both such fine and imprisonment. (1975 Code §7-1.02)
   C.   Arrest Warrant: When a person signs a written promise to appear at the
time and place specified in the citation and has not posted bail as provided by
section 853.1 of the Penal Code, the magistrate shall issue and have delivered
for execution a warrant for his arrest within twenty (20) days after his
failure to appear as promised, or if such person promises to appear before an
officer authorized to accept bail, other than a magistrate, and fails to do so
on or before the date he has promised to appear, then within twenty (20) days
after the delivery of such written promise to appear by the officer to a
magistrate having jurisdiction over the offense. (1975 Code §7-1.03)
1-4-6: LIABILITY OF OFFICERS:
No provision of this code designating the duties of any officer or employee
shall be so construed as to make such officer or employee liable for any fine
or penalty provided for a failure to perform such duty, unless the intention of
the city council to impose such fine or penalty on such officer or employee is
specifically and clearly expressed in the section creating the duty. (1989
Code)
CHAPTER 5
MAYOR AND CITY COUNCIL
SECTION:
1-5-1: Meetings Of The Council
1-5-2: Salaries
1-5-3: Appeals
1-5-1: MEETINGS OF THE COUNCIL:
The time for regular meetings of the City Council shall be the first and third
Tuesdays of each month at the hour of five thirty o'clock (5:30) P.M. All
meetings of the City Council shall be held in the City Council chambers, 429 C
Street, Lemoore, California. (Ord. 2017-13, 10-17-2017)
1-5-2: SALARIES:
Each Council person shall receive the sum of three hundred dollars ($300.00)
per month as salary. The Mayor shall receive an additional one hundred dollars
($100.00) per month.
The salaries provided in this section are exclusive of any amounts payable to
members of the City Council as reimbursement of the actual and necessary
expenses of office and are also exclusive of benefits including, but not
limited to, retirement, health and welfare, Federal Social Security payments
and such other benefits as the City may pay on their behalf, so long as said
benefits are also available for other City employees.
The salaries authorized pursuant to this section shall be paid commencing
January 1, 2007, and shall be paid only during a fiscal year in which funds are
budgeted and appropriated for this purpose. (Ord. 2006-07, 9-19-2006)
1-5-3: APPEALS:
   A.   Appeals To Council: Except as otherwise specifically provided in this
Code, any person excepting to the denial, suspension or revocation of a permit
applied for or held by him pursuant to any provisions of this Code, or to any
administrative decision made by any official of the City pursuant to any of the
provisions of this Code, may appeal in writing to the Council by filing with
the City Clerk a written notice of such appeal, setting forth the specific
grounds thereof. (1975 Code §0-4.01)
   B.   Time For Filing Appeal: The written notice of appeal shall be filed
with the City Clerk within fourteen (14) days after receipt of written notice
of such action appealed from, but in no event later than thirty (30) days after
the date of such action. (1975 Code §0-4.02)
   C.   Hearing; Notice: The City Clerk shall forthwith set such matter for
hearing before the Council at a subsequent regular meeting and shall cause
notice thereof to be given to the applicant not less than five (5) days prior
to such hearing, unless such notice is waived in writing by the applicant. At
such hearing, the appellant shall show cause on the grounds specified in the
notice of appeal why the action excepted to should not be approved. The Council
may continue the hearing from time to time, and its findings on the appeal
shall be final and conclusive in the matter. (1975 Code §0-4.03)
ARTICLE A. ELECTIONS OF CITY COUNCILMEMBERS
SECTION:
1-5A-1: Purpose
1-5A-2: City Council Districts Established
1-5A-3: Election Of Members Of City Council By-District Elections
1-5A-4: Implementation Of The By-District Election System
1-5A-1: PURPOSE:
The purpose of this article is to further the purposes of the California Voting
Rights Act of 2001 1 . (Ord. 2018-01, 3-20-2018)
 
Notes
1 1. GOV §34886; ELEC §14025 et seq., as may be amended from time to time.
1-5A-2: CITY COUNCIL DISTRICTS ESTABLISHED:
   A.   Five (5) City Council districts are hereby established in the City. The
boundaries and identifying number for each of the five (5) City Council
districts and the sequence of elections referenced in section
1-5A-4 of this article shall be as described on the official "City Council
District Map" on file as exhibit A in the Office of the City Clerk, a true and
correct copy of which is incorporated by reference.
   B.   The City Council districts referenced in subsection A of this section
shall continue in effect until amended or repealed in accordance with law. The
boundaries of the City Council districts may be reapportioned from time to time
as required by applicable law. (Ord. 2018-01, 3-20-2018)
1-5A-3: ELECTION OF MEMBERS OF CITY COUNCIL BY-DISTRICT ELECTIONS:
   A.   Commencing with the November 2018 general Municipal election, all
members of the City Council shall be elected "by district", meaning election of
one member of the City Council solely by one of the five (5) City Council
districts referenced in section
1-5A-2 of this article, pursuant to Government Code section 34871(a), as may be
amended from time to time.
   B.   The City Councilmember elected to represent a district must reside in
that district and be a registered voter in that district pursuant to Government
Code section 34882, as may be amended from time to time.
   C.   Any candidate for City Council must reside in and be a registered voter
in the district in which the candidate seeks election at the time nomination
papers are issued, pursuant to Elections Code section 10227, as may be amended
from time to time. (Ord. 2018-01, 3-20-2018)
1-5A-4: IMPLEMENTATION OF THE BY-DISTRICT ELECTION SYSTEM:
   A.   Commencing with the November 2018 general Municipal election, a by-
district system of elections shall be implemented pursuant to Government Code
section 34871(a) as follows:
      1.   Members of the City Council in Districts A and C shall be elected
beginning in the November 2018 general Municipal election, and every four (4)
years thereafter.
      2.   Members of the City Council in Districts B, D, and E shall be
elected beginning in the November 2020 general Municipal election, and every
four (4) years thereafter.
   B.   The terms of any City Councilmember which commenced prior to the
November 2018 general Municipal election shall in no way be affected by the
addition of this article to this Code. (Ord. 2018-01, 3-20-2018)
CHAPTER 6
CITY OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES
SECTION:
1-6-1: Personnel System Rules And Regulations
1-6-2: Compensation Plan
1-6-3: Peace Officer Recruitment And Training Standards
1-6-4: Public Safety Dispatcher Recruitment And Training Standards
1-6-1: PERSONNEL SYSTEM RULES AND REGULATIONS:
The city council hereby adopts by reference a revised set of rules and
regulations superseding that of resolution 7811, but providing that all
memoranda of understanding approved by minute order of the city council since
March 6, 1972, remain in effect until superseded by a later order or budget
adoption resolution. (Res. 8125, 10-27-1981)
1-6-2: COMPENSATION PLAN:
The city council hereby adopts by reference a complete compensation plan; said
plan being attached to the resolution codified herein. (Res. 8521, 7-9-1985)
1-6-3: PEACE OFFICER RECRUITMENT AND TRAINING STANDARDS:
The city declares that it desires to qualify to receive aid from the state of
California under the provisions of chapter 1 of title 4, part 4 of the
California Penal Code. Pursuant to section 13522 of said chapter 1, the city,
while receiving aid from the state of California pursuant to said chapter 1,
will adhere to the standards for recruitment and training established by the
California commission on peace officer standards and training. (1975 Code §§1-
4.01, 1-4.02)
1-6-4: PUBLIC SAFETY DISPATCHER RECRUITMENT AND TRAINING STANDARDS:
   A.   Declaration of intent to qualify: The city declares that it desires to
qualify to receive aid from the State of California under the provision of
Section 13522, Chapter 1 of Title 4, Part 4 of the California Penal Code.
   B.   Adherence to established standards: The city declares that it accepts
the requirements of Section 13510(c), Chapter 1 of Title 4, Part 4, of the
California Penal Code, and will adhere to the standards for recruitment and
training established by the Commission on Peace Officer Standards and Training
(POST) for Public Safety Dispatchers.
   C.   Adherence to established standards – Commission Inquiry: The city will
adhere to the requirements of Section 13512, Chapter 1 of Title 4, Part 4, that
the Commission and its representatives may make such inquires as deemed
appropriate by the Commission to ascertain that the city’s public safety
dispatcher personnel adhere to standards for selection and training established
by the Commission on Peace Officer Standards and Training. (Ord. 2023-13, 11-7-
2023)
ARTICLE A. CITY MANAGER
SECTION:
1-6A-1: Office Created; Appointment; Qualifications
1-6A-2: Eligibility Of Council Members
1-6A-3: Bond And Compensation
1-6A-4: Power And Duties
1-6A-5: Internal Relations
1-6A-6: Removal From Office
1-6A-7: Temporary Absence Or Disability
1-6A-8: Agreements On Employment
1-6A-9: Authority To Sign Contracts, Conveyances, Warrants, And Other
Instruments
1-6A-1: OFFICE CREATED; APPOINTMENT; QUALIFICATIONS:
The office of city manager is hereby created and established and the city
manager form of government is hereby adopted for the city. The city manager
shall be appointed by the city council wholly on the basis of his/her
administrative and executive ability and qualifications and shall hold office
for and during the pleasure of the city council.
Residence in the city at the time of appointment of a city manager shall not be
required as a condition of the appointment, but within one hundred eighty (180)
days after reporting for work, the city manager must become a resident of the
city unless the city council approves his/her residency outside the city. (Ord.
2016-08, 7-5-2016)
1-6A-2: ELIGIBILITY OF COUNCIL MEMBERS:
No member of the city council shall be eligible for appointment as city manager
until one year has elapsed after such council member shall have ceased to be a
member of the city council. (Ord. 7709, 10-18-1977)
1-6A-3: BOND AND COMPENSATION:
   A.   Bond: The city manager and acting city manager shall furnish a
corporate surety bond to be approved by the city council in such sum as may be
determined by the said city council, and shall be conditioned upon his faithful
performance of the duties imposed upon the city manager and acting city manager
as herein prescribed. Any premium for such bond shall be a proper charge
against the city. (Ord. 7709, 10-18-1977)
   B.   Compensation: The city manager shall receive such compensation as the
city council shall from time to time determine. In addition, the city manager
shall be reimbursed for all actual and necessary expenses incurred by him/her
in the performance of his/her official duties. (Ord. 2016-08, 7-5-2016)
1-6A-4: POWERS AND DUTIES:
The city manager shall be the administrative head of the government of the city
under the direction and control of the city council except as otherwise
provided in this article. The city manager shall be responsible for the
efficient administration of all the affairs of the city which are under his/her
control. In addition to his/her general powers as administrative head, and not
as a limitation thereon, it shall be his/her duty and he/she shall have the
powers set forth in the following subsections. It shall be the duty of the city
manager:
   A.   Law Enforcement: To enforce all laws and ordinances of the city and to
see that all franchises, contracts, permits and privileges granted by the city
council are faithfully observed.
   B.   Authority Over Employees: To have the authority to control, order and
give directions to all heads of departments and to subordinate officers and
employees of the city under his/her jurisdiction through their department
heads.
   C.   Appointments And Removals: To appoint, remove, promote, transfer,
demote or combine the positions of any and all officers and employees of the
city with the exception of the city attorney. The city manager may make
recommendations pertaining to this position, subject to all applicable
personnel ordinances, rules and regulations.
   D.   Administrative Reorganization Of Offices: To conduct studies and effect
such administrative reorganization of offices, positions or units under his/her
direction as may be indicated in the interest of efficient, effective and
economical conduct of the city's business.
   E.   Ordinances: To recommend to the city council for adoption such measures
and ordinances as he/she deems necessary.
   F.   Attendance At Council Meetings: To attend all meetings of the city
council unless at his/her request he/she is excused therefrom by the mayor
individually or the city council, except when his/her removal is under
consideration.
   G.   Financial Reports: To keep the city council at all times fully advised
as to the financial condition and needs of the city.
   H.   Budget: To prepare and submit the proposed annual budget and the
proposed annual salary plan to the city council for its approval.
   I.   Expenditure Control And Purchasing: To see that no expenditures shall
be submitted or recommended to the city council except on approval of the city
manager or his/her authorized representative. The city manager or his/her
authorized representative shall be responsible for the purchase of all supplies
for all the departments or divisions of the city.
   J.   Investigations And Complaints: To make investigations into the affairs
of the city and any department or division thereof, and any contract or the
proper performance of any obligations of the city. Further, it shall be the
duty of the city manager to investigate all complaints in relation to matters
concerning the administration of the city government and in regard to the
service maintained by public utilities in said city.
   K.   Public Buildings: To exercise general supervision over all public
buildings, public parks and all other public property which are under the
control and jurisdiction of the city council.
   L.   Delegate Powers: To delegate to subordinate officers and employees of
the city any of the powers or duties set forth in this section or otherwise
granted to the city manager.
   M.   Additional Duties: To perform such other duties and exercise such other
powers as may be delegated to him/her from time to time by ordinance or
resolution or other official action of the city council. (Ord. 2016-08, 7-5-
2016)
1-6A-5: INTERNAL RELATIONS:
   A.   Council-Manager Relations: The city council and its members shall deal
with the administrative services of the city only through the city manager,
except for the purpose of inquiry, and neither the city council nor any member
thereof shall give orders or instructions to any subordinates of the city
manager. The city manager shall take his/her orders and instructions from the
city council only when sitting in a duly convened meeting of the city council
and no individual council member shall give any orders or instructions to the
city manager.
   B.   Departmental Cooperation: It shall be the duty of all subordinate
officers and the city clerk, city treasurer, city engineer, city attorney and
fire chief to assist the city manager in administering the affairs of the city
efficiently, economically and harmoniously.
   C.   Attendance At Commission Meetings: The city manager may attend any and
all meetings of the planning commission and any other commissions, boards or
committees created by the city council upon his/her own volition or upon
direction of the city council. At such meetings which the city manager attends,
he/she shall be heard by such commissions, boards or committees as to all
matters upon which he/she wishes to address the members thereof, and he/she
shall inform said members as to the status of any matter being considered by
the city council, and he/she shall cooperate to the fullest extent with the
members of all commissions, boards or committees appointed by the city council.
(Ord. 2016-08, 7-5-2016)
1-6A-6: REMOVAL FROM OFFICE:
The removal of the city manager shall be effected only by a majority vote of
the whole city council as then constituted, convened in a regular council
meeting, subject however, to the provisions of the following subsection:
   A.   Limitation On Removal: Notwithstanding the provision of this section
hereinabove set forth, the city manager shall not be removed from office, other
than for misconduct in office, during or within a period of ninety (90) days
next succeeding any general municipal election held in the city at which
election a member of the city council is elected or when a new city council
member is appointed. The purpose of this provision is to allow any newly
elected or appointed member of the city council or a reorganized city council
to observe the actions and ability of the city manager in the performance of
the powers and duties of his/her office. After the expiration of said ninety
(90) day period aforementioned, the provisions of this section as to the
removal of said city manager shall apply and be effective. (Ord. 2016-08, 7-5-
2016)
1-6A-7: TEMPORARY ABSENCE OR DISABILITY:
The city manager shall appoint, subject to the approval of the council, one of
the other officers or department heads of the city to serve as manager pro
tempore during any temporary absence or disability of the city manager. In case
of the absence or disability of the city manager and his/her failure to so
appoint a manager pro tempore, the council may designate some duly qualified
person to perform the duties of the city manager during the period of absence
or disability of the city manager, subject, however, to such person's
furnishing a corporate surety bond conditioned upon the faithful performance of
the duties required to be performed as set forth in subsection
1-6A-3A of this article. (Ord. 2016-08, 7-5-2016)
1-6A-8: AGREEMENTS ON EMPLOYMENT:
Nothing in this article shall be construed as a limitation on the power or
authority of the city council to enter into any supplemental agreement with the
city manager delineating additional terms and conditions of employment not
inconsistent with any provisions hereof. (1975 Code §1-5.10; amd. Ord. 7709,
10-18-1977)
1-6A-9: AUTHORITY TO SIGN CONTRACTS, CONVEYANCES, WARRANTS, AND OTHER
INSTRUMENTS:
   A.   City Manager: The city manager is authorized to sign routine contracts,
conveyances, warrants, and other instruments necessary for the day to day
operation of the city, including instruments requiring the city seal. The city
manager is also authorized to sign those contracts, conveyances, and other
instruments, including instruments requiring the city seal, which the council
has specifically delegated by ordinance, resolution, or other official action
that the city manager sign, including the following:
      1.   Purchases and contracts for equipment, supplies, services, and
public projects in accordance with the authorizations set forth in this code;
      2.   Secured agreements to provide improvements as a condition of a
subdivision or development project (subdivision agreements), the standard form
for which has been approved by council or is otherwise established by statute,
ordinance or resolution;
      3.   Approving and signing contract change orders. The city manager is
authorized to approve and sign contract change orders pursuant to a policy
adopted by the city council; provided, that the change order amount is within
budget authorization and the change is required to accomplish the scope of work
of the contract or project.
   B.   Other City Officials: Other city officials are authorized to sign those
contracts, conveyances, and other instruments, including instruments requiring
the city seal, which the council has specifically delegated by ordinance,
resolution, or other official action that the stated city official sign.
   C.   Approval Authority: Except for the approval authority specifically
delegated herein and elsewhere in this code, this section is not intended to
change any requirement for obtaining city council approval or ratification of
contracts, conveyances, warrants, and other instruments. (Ord. 2016-08, 7-5-
2016)
ARTICLE B.  DEPARTMENT HEAD POSITIONS
SECTION:
1-6B-1: Department Head Employees To Serve At Will
1-6B-2: Finance Director
1-6B-1: DEPARTMENT HEAD EMPLOYEES TO SERVE AT WILL:
   A.   Any employee hired or promoted to a department head position following
the effective date of this article shall serve at the sole pleasure of the city
manager, and may be terminated at any time, with or without cause. It is the
intent of this section to establish the policy that department head positions
are at will positions and, therefore, department heads may be terminated at any
time without notice subject only to such process as may be required by law.
   B.   For purposes of this article, department head positions shall include
those that presently exist as well as any department head positions that may be
created or retitled in the future. Department head positions currently include
the following: police chief; parks and recreation director; public works
director; finance director; and planning director.
   C.   The city manager shall have the authority to enter into written
contracts for at will positions which may include severance provisions and
compensation packages. (Ord. 2011-05, 11-1-2011)
1-6B-2: FINANCE DIRECTOR:
   A.   Office Established: Pursuant to Government Code section 40805.5, there
is hereby created and established the office of finance director of the city.
The finance director shall have charge of the administration of the financial
affairs of the city under the direction of the city manager, and shall have
such duties as assigned by the city manager. (Ord. 2011-05, 11-1-2011)
CHAPTER 7
MUNICIPAL FINANCES
SECTION:
1-7-1: Unpaid Fees, Charges and Taxes
1-7-2: Claim Procedure
1-7-2-1: Claims Procedures Generally
1-7-2-2: Claims Procedures for State and Local Claims
1-7-3: Warrants
1-7-4: County to Assess and Collect Property Taxes
1-7-5: Real Property Transfer Tax
1-7-5-1: Short Title; Authority
1-7-5-2: Tax Imposed
1-7-5-3: Responsibility for Tax
1-7-5-4: Exemptions from Tax
1-7-5-5: Administration of Provisions
1-7-5-6: Claims for Refunds
1-7-1: UNPAID FEES, CHARGES AND TAXES:
The amount of any fee, service charge, utility charge, license or tax of any
nature whatsoever imposed by any provision of this Code shall be deemed a civil
debt owing to the City. An action may be commenced in the name of the City in
any court of competent jurisdiction for the collection of the amount of any
such delinquent or unpaid fee, service charge, utility charge, license or tax,
together with any penalties applicable thereto as prescribed by this Code. The
remedy prescribed by this Section shall be accumulative, and the use of any
action to collect such an amount as a civil debt by any civil action shall not
bar the use of any other remedy provided by this Code or by law for the purpose
of enforcing the provisions thereof. (1975 Code §0-2.06)
1-7-2: CLAIM PROCEDURE:
Any person having a claim against the City, except a claim for salary fixed by
this Code, shall present a detailed statement in writing to the City Clerk,
signed by the claimant, setting forth the nature of the claim and the date and/
or dates upon which the obligation was incurred. (1975 Code §1-6.01)
Claims against the City shall be considered and allowed only at the second
regular meeting of every month 1 , and no claims or demands shall be paid until
they have been presented to and audited by the City Council. (1975 Code §§1-
6.02, 1-6.03)
 
Notes
1 1. For City Council meeting provisions, see Section
  1-5-1 of this Title.
1-7-2-1: CLAIMS PROCEDURES GENERALLY:
   A.   Any person having a claim against the City, except a claim for salary
fixed by this Code, shall present a detailed statement in writing to the City
Clerk, signed by the claimant, setting forth the nature of the claim and the
date or dates upon which the obligation was incurred.
   B.   No claims or demands shall be paid until they have been presented to
and audited by the City Council. (Ord. 9402, 3-1-94)
1-7-2-2: CLAIMS PROCEDURES FOR STATE AND LOCAL CLAIMS:
Claims against the City for money or damages which are excepted by section 905
from chapter 1 (commencing with section 900) and chapter 2 (commencing with
section 910) of part 3 of division 3.6 of title 1 of the California Government
Code, and which are not governed by any other statutes or regulations expressly
relating thereto, shall be presented within the time limitations and in the
manner prescribed by sections 910 through 915.2 of the Government Code and
shall be subject to the provisions of sections 945 through 946 of that Code,
relating to the prohibition of suits in the absence of the presentation of a
claim to and action thereon by the City Council. (Ord. 9402, 3-1-94)
1-7-3: WARRANTS:
All demands, when audited and allowed, and all salaries shall be paid by a
warrant drawn on the city. The following city officials shall have the
authority to sign warrants drawn on the city: mayor, city manager, and finance
director. All warrants and payroll checks shall require the signatures by two
(2) of these officials. (Ord. 2015-07, 10-20-2015)
1-7-4: COUNTY TO ASSESS AND COLLECT PROPERTY TAXES:
The city council does hereby elect to proceed under the provisions of article
1, chapter 2, division 1, title 5 of the Government Code of the state of
California relating to the transfer of property tax assessment and collection
functions from the city assessor and tax collector of the city of Lemoore to
the county assessor and county tax collector of the county of Kings to be
effective for property tax assessments and collections from and after the year
1956. (1975 Code §3-2.01)
1-7-5: REAL PROPERTY TRANSFER TAX:
1-7-5-1: SHORT TITLE; AUTHORITY:
This section
1-7-5 shall be known as the REAL PROPERTY TRANSFER TAX ORDINANCE OF THE CITY OF
LEMOORE. It is adopted pursuant to the authority contained in part 6.7
(commencing with section 11901) of division 2 of the Revenue And Taxation Code
of the state of California. (1975 Code §3-3.01)
1-7-5-2: TAX IMPOSED:
There is hereby imposed on each deed, instrument or writing by which any lands,
tenements or other realty sold within the city shall be granted, assigned,
transferred or otherwise conveyed to, or vested in, the purchaser or
purchasers, or any other person or persons, by property conveyed (exclusive of
the value of any lien or encumbrances remaining thereon at the time of sale)
exceeds one hundred dollars ($100.00), a tax at the rate of twenty seven and
one-half cents ($0.275) for each five hundred dollars ($500.00) or fractional
part thereof. (1975 Code §3-3.02)
1-7-5-3: RESPONSIBILITY FOR TAX:
Any tax imposed pursuant to section
1-7-5-2 of this chapter shall be paid by any person who makes, signs or issues
any document or instrument subject to the tax, or for whose use or benefit the
same is made, signed or issued. (1975 Code §3-3.03)
1-7-5-4: EXEMPTIONS FROM TAX:
   A.   Security Transactions: Any tax imposed pursuant to this section
1-7-5 shall not apply to any instrument in writing given to secure a debt.
(1975 Code §3-3.04)
   B.   United States: The United States or any agency or instrumentality
thereof, any state or territory, or political subdivision thereof, or the
District Of Columbia shall not be liable for any tax imposed pursuant to this
section
1-7-5 with respect to any deed, instrument or writing to which it is a party,
but the tax may be collected by assessment from any other party liable
therefor. (1975 Code §3-3.05)
   C.   Bankruptcy Transactions: Any tax imposed pursuant to this section
1-7-5 shall not apply to the making, delivering or filing of conveyances to
make effective any plan of reorganization or adjustment:
      1.   Confirmed under the federal bankruptcy act as amended;
      2.   Approved in an equity receivership proceeding in a court involving a
railroad corporation, as defined in subdivision (m) of section 205 of title 11
of the United States Code, as amended;
      3.   Approved in an equity receivership proceeding in a court involving a
corporation, as defined in subdivision (3) of section 506 of title 11 of the
United States Code, as amended; or
      4.   Whereby a mere change in identity, form or place of organization is
effected.
Subsections C1 to C4, inclusive, of this section shall only apply if the
making, delivery or filing of instruments of transfer or conveyances occurs
within five (5) years from the date of such confirmation, approval or change.
(1975 Code §3-3.06)
   D.   Securities And Exchange Commission: Any tax imposed pursuant to this
section
1-7-5 shall not apply to the making or delivery of conveyances to make
effective any order of the securities and exchange commission, as defined in
subdivision (a) of section 1083 of the internal revenue code of 1954; but only
if:
      1.   The order of the securities and exchange commission in obedience to
which such conveyance is made recites that such conveyance is necessary or
appropriate to effectuate the provisions of section 79k of title 15 of the
United States Code, relating to the public utility holding company act of 1935;
      2.   Such order specifies the property which is ordered to be conveyed;
      3.   Such conveyance is made in obedience to such order. (1975 Code §3-
3.07)
   E.   Partnership Transfers:
      1.   In the case of any realty held by a partnership, no levy shall be
imposed pursuant to this section
1-7-5 by reason of any transfer of an interest in a partnership or otherwise,
if:
         a.   Such partnership (or another partnership) is considered a
continuing partnership within the meaning of section 708 of the internal
revenue code of 1954; and
         b.   Such continuing partnership continues to hold the realty
concerned.
      2.   If there is a termination of any partnership within the meaning of
section 708 of the internal revenue code of 1954, for purposes of this section
1-7-5, such partnership shall be treated as having executed an instrument
whereby there was conveyed, for fair market value (exclusive of the value of
any lien or encumbrance remaining thereon), all realty held by such partnership
at the time of such termination.
      3.   Not more than one tax shall be imposed pursuant to this section
1-7-5 by reason of a termination described in subsection E2 of this section,
and any transfer pursuant thereto, with respect to the realty held by such
partnership at the time of such termination. (1975 Code §3-3.08)
1-7-5-5: ADMINISTRATION OF PROVISIONS:
The county recorder of the county of Kings shall administer this section
1-7-5 in conformity with the provisions of part 6.7 of division 2 of the
Revenue And Taxation Code and the provisions of any county ordinance adopted
pursuant thereto by the board of supervisors of the county of Kings. (1975 Code
§3-3.09)
1-7-5-6: CLAIMS FOR REFUNDS:
Claims for refund of taxes imposed pursuant to this section
1-7-5 shall be governed by the provisions of chapter 5 (commencing with section
5096) of part 9 of division 1 of the Revenue And Taxation Code of the state of
California. (1975 Code §3-3.10)
CHAPTER 8
PURCHASES AND CONTRACTS
ARTICLE A. PURCHASING
SECTION:
1-8A-1: Adoption Of Purchasing System; Purposes
1-8A-2: Requisitions
1-8A-3: Purchases Of Supplies, Equipment, And Vehicles
1-8A-4: Methods Of Purchase
1-8A-5: Formal Bidding Procedure
1-8A-6: Bidding Exceptions
1-8A-7: Inspection And Testing
1-8A-8: Preference For Local Vendors
1-8A-9: Severability
1-8A-1: ADOPTION OF PURCHASING SYSTEM; PURPOSES:
This purchasing system is adopted for the purposes of establishing efficient
and uniform procedures for the purchase of supplies and equipment; securing
supplies and equipment for the city at the lowest possible cost commensurate
with quality and quantity needed and the availability of the item(s);
exercising positive financial control over purchasing; and clearly defining the
authority for the purchasing function to assure the quality of purchases. (Ord.
2016-05, 6-21-2016)
1-8A-2: REQUISITIONS:
City departments shall submit requests for supplies, equipment, and vehicles to
the purchasing officer by standard requisition forms. (Ord. 2016-05, 6-21-2016)
1-8A-3: PURCHASES OF SUPPLIES, EQUIPMENT, AND VEHICLES:
Except as provided in section
1-8A-6, "Bidding Exceptions", of this article, the following approval levels
shall apply to purchases of supplies, equipment, and vehicles, provided that
such expenditures are within the budget limitations:
   A.   Single purchases in excess of fifty thousand dollars ($50,000.00) shall
be authorized by the city council and shall be made pursuant to the formal bid
procedure set forth in section
1-8A-5 of this article, unless expressly waived by the city council.
   B.   Any purchase of more than ten thousand dollars ($10,000.00) up to fifty
thousand dollars ($50,000.00) shall require at least three (3) written
quotations and shall be approved by the city manager or designee. However, if
there are fewer than three (3) available vendors, the city manager or designee
may authorize a purchase with fewer than three (3) quotations.
   C.   The city manager or designee is authorized to make any purchase not
exceeding ten thousand dollars ($10,000.00) in the open market with or without
solicitation of multiple quotations.
   D.   Separate purchases of components of equipment, or phasing of projects,
solely to avoid the provisions of this section shall not be permitted. (Ord.
2016-05, 6-21-2016)
1-8A-4: METHODS OF PURCHASE:
Purchases of supplies, equipment, and vehicles are to be made by purchase order
whenever possible; provided, however, that purchases made by credit card,
merchant account, or petty cash are permissible if appropriate authorization is
obtained. (Ord. 2016-05, 6-21-2016)
1-8A-5: FORMAL BIDDING PROCEDURE:
Except to the extent permitted by law, or as otherwise provided in section
1-8A-6, "Bidding Exceptions", of this article, purchases and contracts for
supplies and equipment of estimated value greater than fifty thousand dollars
($50,000.00) shall be by written contract with the lowest responsible bidder,
pursuant to the procedure prescribed herein.
   A.   Notice Inviting Bids: Notices inviting bids shall include a general
description of the articles to be purchased, shall state where bid forms and
specifications may be obtained, and the time and place for submitting bids and
the opening of bids.
      1.   Notices: Notices inviting bids may be published in a newspaper of
general circulation, or trade journal.
      2.   Bidder Solicitation: The purchasing officer may solicit sealed bids
from responsible prospective suppliers.
      3.   City Website: The purchasing officer shall also advertise pending
purchases by a notice posted on the city's public website.
   B.   Rejection Of Bids: In his or her discretion, the city manager, or
designee, may reject any and all bids presented and readvertise for bids.
   C.   Award Of Contracts: Contracts shall be awarded by the city council to
the lowest responsible bidder, except as otherwise provided in subsection D of
this section.
   D.   Bidder's Failure To Execute Contract: If the successful bidder fails or
refuses to execute the contract, the city manager or designee is authorized to
award the contract to the next lowest responsible bidder.
   E.   Tie Bids: If two (2) or more bids received are for the same total
amount or unit price, quality and service being equal, and if the public
interest will not permit the delay of readvertising for bids, the city manager
or designee may accept whichever one he or she chooses, and may accept the
lowest bid made after negotiation with the tie bidders at the bid opening.
   F.   Performance Bonds: The city manager or designee shall have authority to
require a performance bond or other appropriate security before entering a
contract in such amount as determined to be reasonably necessary to protect the
best interest of the city. If a performance bond or other security is required,
the form and amount of the bond or security shall be described in the notice
inviting bids. (Ord. 2016-05, 6-21-2016)
1-8A-6: BIDDING EXCEPTIONS:
   A.   Emergency Purchases: Purchases of an emergency nature may be made as
the need arises, and such purchases shall be exempt from the requirements of
this section; provided, however, such emergency purchases shall be authorized
by the city manager or designee.
   B.   Sole Source: Bidding shall be dispensed when the item(s) can be
obtained from only one vendor; provided, however, such sole source purchases
are authorized by the city manager or designee.
   C.   Cooperative Purchasing: The city manager or designee shall have the
authority, to the extent permitted by law, to join with other units of
government or other governmental agencies or authorities in cooperative
purchasing when beneficial to the city. Bidding may be dispensed when the
supplies, equipment or vehicles can be acquired under a valid purchasing
contract that has been previously bid by the city or other governmental agency.
   D.   Other Considerations: The city manager shall have the authority to
dispense with bidding if it can be shown that a project, usually complex in
nature, in which the design, installation or support of equipment and systems
from a vendor is of higher significance than the component costs of supplies or
equipment purchased as part of the overall project. (Ord. 2016-05, 6-21-2016)
1-8A-7: INSPECTION AND TESTING:
The purchasing officer shall inspect supplies and equipment delivered to
determine their conformance with the specifications set forth in the order or
contract. The purchasing officer shall have authority to require chemical and
physical tests of samples submitted with bids and samples of deliveries which
are necessary to determine their quality and conformance with specifications.
(Ord. 2016-05, 6-21-2016)
1-8A-8: PREFERENCE FOR LOCAL VENDORS:
   A.   The use of vendors who have a fixed business location within the city
limits provides certain benefits to the city and its citizens, including,
without limitation, the following:
      1.   Receipt of sales tax revenue from sales made within the city limits;
      2.   Cost savings resulting from local maintenance, repair, pick up and
delivery; and
      3.   Use of the local labor force.
Therefore, except in public works projects or other projects where the city is
required to award a bid or contract to the lowest bidder, and notwithstanding
anything to the contrary in this article, the city may allow the following
preferences to vendors having a fixed business location within the city limits.
In instances where a local vendor and a nonlocal vendor submit equivalent
lowest responsible bids, the city shall give preference to the local vendor
having a fixed business location and a valid business license within the city
limits. If the city receives two (2) or more bids/quotations with all factors
being equal except price, an allowance adjustment of up to five percent (5%) of
the quoted price may be afforded to the local vendor having a fixed business
location and a valid business license within the city limits and such local
vendor may be determined the lowest bidder and the city may award the contract
to such local vendor. (Ord. 2016-05, 6-21-2016)
1-8A-9: SEVERABILITY:
If any section, subsection, phrase, provision, or clause of this article is for
any reason held to be invalid, such decision shall not affect the validity of
the remaining portions of this article. The city council hereby declares that
it would have adopted this article and each section, subsection, phrase,
provision, or clause hereof irrespective of the fact that any one or more
sections, subsections, phrases, provisions, or clauses be declared invalid.
(Ord. 2016-05, 6-21-2016)
ARTICLE B. PROCUREMENT PROCEDURES FOR PUBLIC PROJECTS
SECTION:
1-8B-1: Authority And Purpose
1-8B-2: Definitions
1-8B-3: Contracting Procedures
1-8B-4: Severability
1-8B-1: AUTHORITY AND PURPOSE:
This article is adopted to implement the procedures for contracting for public
projects as authorized by the uniform public construction cost accounting act.
(Ord. 2016-05, 6-21-2016)
1-8B-2: DEFINITIONS:
For the purposes of this article, unless otherwise apparent from the context,
certain words and phrases used in this article are defined as follows:
CONTRACTORS LIST: A list of qualified contractors, identified according to
categories of work. The minimum criteria for the development and maintenance of
the list shall be determined by the California uniform construction cost
accounting commission.
FACILITY: As defined in section 22002 of the Public Contract Code, and means
any plant, building, structure, ground facility, real property, streets and
highways, or other public work improvement.
MAINTENANCE WORK: Includes all of the following:
   A.   Routine, recurring, and usual work for the preservation or protection
of any publicly owned or publicly operated facility.
   B.   Minor repainting.
   C.   Resurfacing of streets and highways at less than one inch (1").
   D.   Landscape maintenance, including mowing, watering, trimming, pruning,
planting, replacement of plants, and servicing of irrigation and sprinkler
systems.
   E.   Work performed to keep, operate, and maintain publicly owned water,
power, or waste disposal systems.
PUBLIC PROJECT: As defined in section 22002 of the Public Contract Code, and
means any of the following, but does not include "maintenance work":
   A.   Construction, reconstruction, erection, alteration, renovation,
improvement, demolition, and repair work involving any publicly owned, leased,
or operated facility.
   B.   Painting or repainting of any publicly owned, leased, or operated
facility. (Ord. 2016-05, 6-21-2016)
1-8B-3: CONTRACTING PROCEDURES:
The dollar amount thresholds provided in this section shall automatically
adjust upon the effectiveness of any adjustment notification by the state
controller in accordance with Public Contract Code section 22020, without the
necessity of amending this section or any subdivision herein to reflect any
such adjustment.
   A.   Forty Five Thousand Dollars Or Less: Public projects of forty five
thousand dollars ($45,000.00) or less may be performed by city employees by
force account, by negotiated contract, or by purchase order. Provided the
expenditure is within the budget limitation, the city manager or designee is
authorized to approve the use of city employees for public projects, approve
and sign any contract or purchase order for public projects not exceeding forty
five thousand dollars ($45,000.00), and accept the completed public project and
authorize the recording of a notice of completion.
   B.   One Hundred Seventy Five Thousand Dollars Or Less: Public projects of
one hundred seventy five thousand dollars ($175,000.00) or less may be let to
contract by informal bidding procedures as follows:
      1.   Informal Bid Procedures: Public projects, in accordance with the
limits listed in section 22032 of the Public Contract Code, may be let to
contract by informal procedures as set forth in section 22032 et seq., of the
Public Contract Code.
      2.   Contractors List: A list of qualified contractors shall be developed
and maintained in accordance with the provisions of section 22034 of the Public
Contract Code and criteria promulgated from time to time by the California
uniform construction cost accounting commission.
      3.   Notice Inviting Informal Bids: A notice inviting informal bids shall
be prepared, which notice shall describe the project in general terms, describe
how to obtain more detailed information about the project, and state the time
and place for the submission of bids. The notice shall be mailed, not less than
ten (10) calendar days before bids are due, to either all contractors on the
contractors list for the category of work to be bid, or to/and to all
construction trade journals as specified by the California uniform construction
cost accounting commission in accordance with section 22036 of the Public
Contract Code. Additional contractors and/or construction trade journals may be
notified at the discretion of the department soliciting bids, provided,
however:
         a.   If there is no contractors list maintained by the city for the
particular category of work to be performed, the notice shall be sent only to
the construction trade journals specified by the commission.
         b.   If the product or service is proprietary in nature such that it
can be obtained only from a certain contractor or contractors, the notice may
be sent exclusively to such contractor or contractors.
   C.   Award Of Contracts: Contracts for public projects in excess of forty
five thousand dollars ($45,000.00) shall be awarded by the city council. If all
bids received are in excess of one hundred seventy five thousand dollars
($175,000.00), the city council may, by adoption of a resolution by four-fifths
(4/5) vote, award the contract, at one hundred eighty seven thousand five
hundred dollars ($187,500.00) or less, to the lowest responsible bidder, if it
determines the project cost estimate was reasonable.
   D.   More Than One Hundred Seventy Five Thousand Dollars: Public projects
for more than one hundred seventy five thousand dollars ($175,000.00) shall,
except as otherwise provided in this section, be let to contract by formal
bidding procedure in accordance with applicable provisions of the Public
Contract Code. (Ord. 2016-05, 6-21-2016)
1-8B-4: SEVERABILITY:
If any section, subsection, phrase, or clause of this article is for any reason
held to be invalid, such decision shall not affect the validity of the
remaining portions of this article. The city council hereby declares that it
would have adopted this article and each section, subsection, phrase, or clause
thereof irrespective of the fact that any one or more sections, subsections,
phrases, or clauses be declared invalid. (Ord. 2016-05, 6-21-2016)
CHAPTER 9
PREVAILING WAGES FOR PUBLIC WORKS PROJECTS
SECTION:
1-9-1: Applicability Of State Law
1-9-2: Determination Of Prevailing Wages
1-9-3: Reference To Prevailing Wages And Notice Of Contract
1-9-4: Prevailing Wages Under State Labor Code
1-9-5: Exceptions
1-9-1: APPLICABILITY OF STATE LAW:
The construction by the city of its public works, being a municipal affair, the
provision of article 2, chapter 1, part 7, division 2 of the Labor Code of the
state of California shall apply to the city only to the extent that the city
council, in its sole discretion determines, provided that those sections of the
Labor Code are not in conflict with the provisions of this chapter. (Ord. 2000-
07, 3-21-2000)
1-9-2: DETERMINATION OF PREVAILING WAGES:
As often as it is deemed advisable, the city manager, or his designee, shall
prepare and submit to the council for its consideration, a resolution
determining the general prevailing rate of per diem wages and the general rate
for holiday and overtime work in the city for each craft or type of work that
are needed to execute contracts for construction, alteration, demolition, or
repair of public works for the city. The council in its discretion, may
determine and fix the general prevailing rate of per diem wages and the general
prevailing rate for holiday and overtime work and said determination shall be
final. (Ord. 2000-07, 3-21-2000)
1-9-3: REFERENCE TO PREVAILING WAGES AND NOTICE OF CONTRACT:
The notice calling for bids for construction, alteration, demolition and repair
of public works and the contracts for such work shall contain provisions
referring to the most recent council resolution determining the prevailing rate
of per diem wages and the prevailing rate for holiday and overtime work and
requiring payment of not less than the prevailing rate to all workers employed
on the project for those public works that the council, in its discretion,
under section
1-9-2 of this chapter has adopted, if any. (Ord. 2000-07, 3-21-2000)
1-9-4: PREVAILING WAGES UNDER STATE LABOR CODE:
Except for those contracts for which the council makes a determination under
section
1-9-2 of this chapter, all city public works, purchasing and acquisition
contracts shall make no provision for the payment of so-called prevailing
wages. City bid documents shall stipulate that whatever wage rate as may be
necessary for the bidder to submit a reasonable and responsible bid may be
utilized by the bidder in its submission. Sections 1770 through 1773.5 of the
Labor Code of the state of California shall not apply to the city. (Ord. 2000-
07, 3-21-2000)
1-9-5: EXCEPTIONS:
In such bids as the city shall by state or federal grant or contract be
obligated to require, as a precedent to the retention of said grant or
contract, that state and/or federal "prevailing wage" rates shall be utilized,
and in such bids as involve projects of "statewide concern" the provisions of
section
1-9-4 of this chapter shall not be applicable. (Ord. 2000-07, 3-21-2000)
CHAPTER 10
ADMINISTRATIVE HEARING PROCEDURES
SECTION:
1-10-1: Title
1-10-2: Applicability
1-10-3: Rules And Regulations
1-10-4: Hearing Officer Selection
1-10-5: Service Of Process
1-10-6: Filing A Notice Of Appeal
1-10-7: Conduct Of Hearing
1-10-8: Hearing Officer Authority
1-10-9: Decision
1-10-1: TITLE:
This chapter shall be known as the ADMINISTRATIVE HEARING PROCEDURES ORDINANCE.
(Ord. 2007-04, 5-15-2007)
1-10-2: APPLICABILITY:
Except where specifically provided otherwise in this code, this chapter shall
provide the procedures, rules and standards for all administrative hearings
provided under this code or administrative hearings provided under rules or
regulations promulgated pursuant to this code. (Ord. 2007-04, 5-15-2007)
1-10-3: RULES AND REGULATIONS:
The city manager may adopt rules, regulations, policies and procedures, that
are consistent with the intent or provisions of this chapter as may be
necessary or desirable to aid in the administration or enforcement of the
provisions of this chapter. (Ord. 2007-04, 5-15-2007)
1-10-4: HEARING OFFICER SELECTION:
Hearing officers may be selected as follows:
   A.   The city manager may appoint any person willing to serve without
compensation or valuable consideration or promise of future compensation or
valuable consideration, on a case by case basis.
   B.   The city manager may appoint a state administrative law judge under a
contract with the office of administrative hearings or a hearing officer or an
arbitrator employed by a private independent arbitration service, such as JAMS
or the American Arbitration Association, on a case by case basis.
   C.   The city may award a contract to a person to serve as a permanent
hearing officer. The permanent hearing officer shall be hired under a contract
with a minimum one year term. The hearing officer may not be terminated without
cause and the basis for termination shall not be related to the outcomes of
hearings. (Ord. 2007-04, 5-15-2007)
1-10-5: SERVICE OF PROCESS:
Service of any notice, hearing packet, or order under this chapter shall be by
personal service or first class mail. The date of service shall be considered
the date the notice, hearing packet or order was personally served or three (3)
days after the date of mailing. (Ord. 2007-04, 5-15-2007)
1-10-6: FILING A NOTICE OF APPEAL:
   A.   Standing: A person who has a legal existing interest in the property,
right or entitlement subject to the city order, citation, decision or
determination sought to be appealed from has standing and a right to appeal
under this chapter. A notice of appeal that fails to show standing may be
rejected as defective.
   B.   Notice Of Appeal: Unless otherwise provided in this code, a notice of
appeal shall be filed in writing with the city clerk within fifteen (15)
calendar days after the service of the order, citation, decision, or
determination appealed from. The appeal shall contain the following:
      1.   The name, address, and telephone number of the appellant;
      2.   A statement describing the appellant's legal existing interest in
the property, right or entitlement subject to the city order, citation,
decision or determination sought to be appealed from;
      3.   A brief description of the specific order, citation, decision, or
determination being appealed;
      4.   A statement of the relief sought;
      5.   The reasons why such relief should be granted.
   C.   Late Appeals: Upon a showing of good cause, the hearing officer may, in
his or her discretion, permit the filing of an appeal, or an amended appeal,
after fifteen (15) calendar days, in which case the appeal shall be considered
in the same manner as if it had been timely filed.
   D.   Defective Notice Of Appeals: If, in the opinion of the city clerk, the
appeal or an amended appeal fails to comply substantially with the requirements
of this section, the city clerk may give written notice of such insufficiency
to the appellant, stating with particularity the defects or omissions therein.
Failure of the appellant to file an amended appeal within seven (7) calendar
days of the date of service of such notice of insufficiency shall constitute a
waiver of the appeal. Failure of the city clerk to give notice of any
insufficiency within seven (7) calendar days shall result in the appeal being
heard on its merits, without regard to any insufficiency.
   E.   Notice Of Hearing: Upon receipt of an appeal, or if notice of
insufficiency is given in accordance with this section, upon receipt of an
amended appeal within the time specified, the city clerk shall cause one copy
to be stamped indicating the date of receipt. The city clerk shall set the
appeal for hearing and shall give to the appellant and to the officer or
employee whose order, citation, decision, or determination is being appealed
not less than fifteen (15) calendar days' written notice of the date, time, and
place of hearing. The appellant may waive the fifteen (15) calendar days'
written notice, so long as said waiver is in writing and filed with the city
clerk. The notice of the hearing to the appellant shall include a statement as
to the appellants' rights as provided in section
1-10-7 of this chapter.
   F.   Stay Of Proceedings: Unless otherwise provided by this code, the filing
of an appeal shall stay all proceedings in furtherance of the order, citation,
decision, or determination appealed from until the determination of the appeal
as provided herein. (Ord. 2007-04, 5-15-2007)
1-10-7: CONDUCT OF HEARING:
   A.   Continuance: At the hearing officer's discretion or upon good cause
shown, the hearing officer may continue the hearing by written notice before
the scheduled hearing or orally at or during the hearing.
   B.   Hearing: At the hearing, the officer or employee who issued the order,
citation, decision, or determination or his or her designee shall present
evidence in support of the findings or reasons upon which the order, citation,
decision, or determination was based. The appellant, or any individual
authorized in writing to represent the appellant, may then present evidence in
support of the contentions made in the notice of appeal. The hearing shall be
informally conducted.
   C.   Rights Of Parties: The parties and anyone who participates in a hearing
may be represented by an attorney or other person of the parties' choice. The
parties have a right to appear, testify, present evidence, examine and cross
examine witnesses, and present written or oral arguments. Additionally, the
parties may request and the hearing officer may allow the parties to submit
written briefs, either before, during or after the hearing.
   D.   Evidence: The rules of evidence provided by state statute in civil and
criminal actions shall not apply, except that irrelevant and unduly repetitious
evidence may be excluded in the hearing officer's discretion.
   E.   Scope: The scope of the hearing shall be limited to the order,
citation, decision, or determination being appealed, the grounds for relief
raised in the notice of appeal and any specific requirements of this code.
   F.   Burden Of Proof; Burden Of Evidence: Except where otherwise provided in
this code, the burden of proof and production of evidence shall be with the
city. Except where otherwise provided in this code, the burden of proof shall
be preponderance of the evidence.
   G.   Waiver Of Rights: The failure of the appellant or any interested party
to raise an objection to the hearing officer either before or during the
hearing of any defect in notice or procedure provided under this code or at law
or in equity shall be deemed a waiver of the defect. For purposes of a waiver
of objection in this subsection, defect in procedure shall include a claim that
the hearing officer is biased when facts regarding the claimed bias are known
or readily discoverable by the appellant or interested party or have been
published to the appellant or interested party by the city. An objection of
bias of the hearing officer shall be raised to the city manager.
   H.   Failure Of Appellant To Appear: Unless otherwise provided in this code,
if the appellant fails to appear for the hearing at the time and place noticed,
the hearing officer in his or her discretion may conduct the hearing to a
conclusion or may dismiss the appeal. If the appeal is dismissed, the order,
citation, decision, or determination appealed from shall become final and
effective on the date of the hearing. Within ten (10) days from the date of the
hearing and upon a showing of good cause, the hearing officer may set aside his
or her decision or dismissal upon the appellant's failure to appear and may
reschedule the appeal for hearing.
   I.   Recording: The proceedings at the hearing shall be recorded to a
cassette tape, a CD-ROM, a videotape, a DVD or similar media. In addition to
any one of the above, the proceedings may also be recorded by a certified
shorthand reporter. If an appellant requests a certified shorthand reporter,
the costs of the reporter shall be borne by the appellant.
   J.   Communication With Hearing Officer: Other than at the hearing, there
shall be no direct oral communication between the parties and the hearing
officer on any matter related to the hearing without both parties being
present. Any written communication to the hearing officer by a party shall be
copied and served to the other party.
   K.   Record Keeper: The city shall maintain the administrative record of the
hearing. (Ord. 2007-04, 5-15-2007)
1-10-8: HEARING OFFICER AUTHORITY:
   A.   Inspection Of Premises: The hearing officer may inspect the premises
involved in the hearing at any time prior to a decision, to investigate or
confirm the existence of the violation(s) or conditions which are on appeal,
provided that:
      1.   Consent is granted by a person with the lawful right to grant
consent or an inspection warrant is obtained;
      2.   Reasonable notice of such inspection is given to the owner before
the inspection is made;
      3.   The parties are given an opportunity to be present during the
inspection;
      4.   The hearing officer shall place in the record the material facts and
the conclusions drawn from the inspection either orally at the time of the
hearing or in writing after the hearing; and
      5.   Each party then shall have a right to rebut or explain the matters
so stated by the hearing officer for the record either at the hearing or by
filing a written statement within ten (10) calendar days after the hearing.
   B.   Oaths: The hearing officer shall have the power to administer oaths and
affirmations.
   C.   Procedures: The hearing officer shall have the authority to establish
procedures before or during a hearing consistent with this chapter and this
code for purposes of efficiency and order.
   D.   Review Authority: The hearing officer shall sit as the trier of fact
and shall rule on questions of law and admissibility of evidence. The hearing
officer may affirm, reverse, modify, or set aside the order, citation,
decision, or determination appealed from or may delete or impose conditions as
the facts and law warrant. The hearing officer may not increase a penalty or
impose a harsher remedy beyond the penalty or remedy imposed under the order,
citation, decision or determination being appealed.
   E.   Limitations: The hearing officer shall not have authority to waive any
requirements of this code or law. (Ord. 2007-04, 5-15-2007)
1-10-9: DECISION:
   A.   Time Limit; Contents: Unless otherwise provided in this code or agreed
by the parties, within fifteen (15) days of the conclusion of the hearing,
after the hearing officer has considered all evidence presented and the
relevant standard of review, the hearing officer shall issue a written
decision. The decision shall include a statement of the issues, findings of
fact, a summary of the relevant evidence, and the order.
   B.   Notice Of Code Of Civil Procedure Section 1094.6: All final decisions
shall include a notice that the appellant has ninety (90) days to pursue a
petition for a writ of administrative mandamus of the decision under Code of
Civil Procedure section 1094.6.
   C.   Effective: Unless otherwise provided in this code or the hearing
officer's decision, the decision shall be effective upon issuance.
   D.   Finality: Unless otherwise provided in this code or the hearing
officer's decision, the hearing officer's decision shall be a final agency
action for purposes of writ review. (Ord. 2007-04, 5-15-2007)
CHAPTER 11
CITY SEAL AND OTHER INSIGNIA
SECTION:
1-11-1: Purpose
1-11-2: Definitions
1-11-3: Custody And Use Of Official Seal And Other City Insignia
1-11-4: Severability
1-11-5: Unlawful Use Of City Seal Or City Logo
1-11-6: Enforcement
1-11-1: PURPOSE:
The purpose of this chapter is to specify the permissible uses for the use of
the Official Seal and other Official Insignia of the City of Lemoore. (Ord.
2017-04, 3-21-2017)
1-11-2: DEFINITIONS:
CITY LOGO: A logo of the City of Lemoore, means and includes, but is not
limited to, logotypes or identifying symbols, which are associated with, or
otherwise used to indicate the City of Lemoore or any City department.
CITY OF LEMOORE WEBSITE BANNER: The picture that appears across the top of the
City's Official Website.
OFFICIAL SEAL: The Seal of the City of Lemoore is as adopted by the Lemoore
City Council.
OTHER OFFICIAL CITY INSIGNIA: In addition to that listed in this section, other
Official City Insignia shall be any other intellectual property right owned by
the City, including the names of City facilities. (Ord. 2017-04, 3-21-2017)
1-11-3: CUSTODY AND USE OF OFFICIAL SEAL AND OTHER CITY INSIGNIA:
   A.   The City Clerk of the City of Lemoore shall have custody of the
Official Seal, the City of Lemoore website banner, emblems, and all other City
logos or insignia (hereinafter "City Insignia"). The use of City Insignia shall
be for the purposes directly connected with the official business of the City
of Lemoore, its City Council, officers or departments, and for those matters
expressly approved by the City Council.
   B.   With the exception of uses of City Insignia for purposes directly
connected with the official business of the City of Lemoore, it shall be
unlawful for any person to use or allow to be used any reproduction or
facsimile of City Insignia, including any design so closely resembling the City
Insignia as to be apparent to deceive.
   C.   The names of City facilities shall be used in accordance with their
official purposes and it shall be unlawful for any person to use or allow the
name to be used for private purposes without first receiving written approval
from the City. (Ord. 2017-04, 3-21-2017)
1-11-4: SEVERABILITY:
If any provision, clause, sentence or paragraph of this chapter or the
application thereof to any person or circumstance shall be held invalid, such
invalidity shall not affect the other provisions or applications of the
provisions of this chapter which can be given effect without the invalid
provisions or application and, to this end, the provisions of this chapter are
declared to be severable. (Ord. 2017-04, 3-21-2017)
1-11-5: UNLAWFUL USE OF CITY SEAL OR CITY LOGO:
It is unlawful for any person to knowingly or willfully use, or to cause the
use of, a copy or replica of the Seal of the City, a copy or replica of any
City logo, or any other official indicia of the City, any City department, or
office of the City, for any private or commercial purpose. (Ord. 2017-04, 3-21-
2017)
1-11-6: ENFORCEMENT:
A violation of this chapter shall be a misdemeanor punishable in accordance
with the laws of the State of California or as otherwise provided for in this
Code. (Ord. 2017-04, 3-21-2017)
CHAPTER 12
ADMINISTRATIVE CITATIONS
SECTION:
1-12-1: Title
1-12-2: Purpose
1-12-3: Authority
1-12-4: Definitions
1-12-5: Procedures; General
1-12-6: Procedures; Issuance Of Administrative Citation(s)
1-12-7: Procedure; Contents Of Citation
1-12-8: Procedure; Appeal Of Administrative Citation And Hearing
1-12-9: Fines Assessed
1-12-10: Collection Of Fines
1-12-11: Other Remedies
1-12-12: Administration
1-12-1: TITLE:
This chapter shall be known as the Administrative Citations ordinance of the
City of Lemoore. (Ord. 2024-08, 11-5-2024)
1-12-2: PURPOSE:
This chapter is adopted to protect the health, safety and welfare of the
citizens of the City of Lemoore and to provide a method to penalize responsible
parties who fail or refuse to comply with certain provisions of the City of
Lemoore Municipal Code; to minimize the expense and delay of enforcement of the
Municipal Code by criminal citation; and to allow the City to recover costs
associated with the enforcement process, while continuing to give persons who
have been issued citations due process. (Ord. 2024-08, 11-5-2024)
1-12-3: AUTHORITY:
Pursuant to Article XI, section 7, of the California Constitution, the City has
the authority to make and enforce within its jurisdictional limits all laws for
the public health, safety and welfare of the citizens of Lemoore which are not
in conflict with general state laws. In addition, California Government Code
section 53069.4 expressly authorizes the City to establish an administrative
citation program to govern the imposition, enforcement, collection, and
administrative review of administrative fines or penalties issued for violation
of a City ordinance. (Ord. 2024-08, 11-5-2024)
1-12-4: DEFINITIONS:
For the purposes of this chapter the following definitions shall apply:
AUTOMATIC VIOLATION: A violation for which immediate imposition of
administrative fines or penalties shall occur prior to and without any
opportunity to correct.
CITATION Or ADMINISTRATIVE CITATION: A civil citation issued pursuant to this
chapter stating that there has been a violation of one or more provisions of
the Code and setting the amount of the administrative penalty to be paid by the
responsible party.
DAYS: Calendar days.
HEARING OFFICER: Any person, persons or entity appointed to preside over the
administrative hearings provided for by this chapter.
OFFICIAL Or ENFORCEMENT OFFICER Or PUBLIC OFFICER: The City manager, building
official, building director, building inspector, public works director,
community development director, police chief, fire chief, health officer, or
designees, or any other individual or body appointed or designated by the City
council or the City manager to enforce violations of the Municipal Code.
ORDINANCE Or CODE: Any provision of the Lemoore Municipal Code.
PERSON: Any natural person, firm, association, business, trust, organization,
corporation, partnership, company or any other entity. (Ord. 2024-08, 11-5-
2024)
RESPONSIBLE PARTY: Any person who is responsible for violating the provisions
of the Municipal Code as described in this chapter, including but not limited
to, any owner, tenant, occupant lessee, licensee or other person having control
over a structure or parcel of land in the City who knows, or reasonably should
have known, of the conditions constituting a violation of this Code.
THE ADMINISTRATOR: The City Manager for the City of Lemoore or his or her
designated representative.
THE CITY: The City of Lemoore.
YEAR: Three hundred sixty-five (365) days.
1-12-5: PROCEDURES; GENERAL:
   A.   Any responsible party violating any provision of the Municipal Code may
be issued an administrative citation by an enforcement officer as provided for
by this chapter.
   B.   Each and every day a violation of any provision of the Municipal Code
exists will constitute a separate and distinct offense.
   C.   Each section of the Municipal Code violated on any day shall constitute
a separate and distinct violation.
   D.   A fine for violations of the Municipal Code may be assessed by means of
an administrative citation issued by the enforcement officer and shall be
payable directly to the City.
   E.   Administrative fines assessed by means of an administrative citation
shall be collected by the procedures specified in this chapter. (Ord. 2024-08,
11-5-2024)
1-12-6: PROCEDURES; ISSUANCE OF ADMINISTRATIVE CITATION(S):
   A.   Upon discovering or observing any violation of the Municipal Code, the
enforcement officer shall determine the party responsible for the violation. If
a business or other entity the responsible party shall be deemed to be the
person who is in immediate control of the business or site on that day. The
enforcement officer may also determine that the owner(s) or officer(s) of the
business or property or entity are the responsible party.
   B.   Determination Of An Automatic Violation:
      1.   Any violation defined by the Municipal Code or the schedule of
penalties as an automatic violation;
      2.   Violations that create an immediate danger to the public health,
safety, and welfare, as determined by the enforcement officer, and for which
immediate correction is required;
      3.   Repeat or chronic violations where either formal or informal notice
of the violation, and previous reasonable opportunities to correct, have been
provided;
      4.   Non-continuing violations for which it is not possible or practical
to provide prior notice and an opportunity to correct; or
      5.   As otherwise provided for by state law.
   C.   Issuance of notice to correct:
      1.   Except as provided in Title 4, Chapter 4 "Property Maintenance," or
subsection (B) of this section, upon discovering or observing any violation of
the Municipal Code, the enforcement officer will issue a written notice to the
responsible party of the violation. Said notice need not be in any particular
form, but shall, at a minimum:
         a.   Describe the nature of the Municipal Code violation, including
identifying the Municipal Code section(s) violated;
         b.   Identify what action is necessary to correct the violation;
         c.   Provide the responsible party with not less than ten (10)
calendar days to correct the violation, unless (i) a lesser time is specified
elsewhere in the Municipal Code for correcting the violation(s); or (ii) the
enforcement officer determines that a lesser time is necessary to protect the
public health, safety, or welfare of the citizens of the City; and
         d.   Explain the consequences of a failure to correct the violation.
   D.   Notice:
      1.   The notice required in subsection (C) of this section may be served
on the responsible party by personal service, first class mail, certified mail,
overnight mail, hand delivery, or by any other method reasonably likely to
provide notice to the responsible party. Notice may be sent to the responsible
party's business address, principal place of business address, residence
address as it appears on the last available equalized assessment roll,
supplemental roll of the County, or other address known to the enforcement
officer by reliable information. In the case of property-related violations, a
copy of the notice may also be posted on the subject property in a conspicuous
place. The time within which to correct the violation shall run from the date
the notice is sent or posted.
      2.   The notice required by subsection (C) of this section does not apply
if the enforcement officer determines the violation is an automatic violation
pursuant to subsection (B) of this section.
   E.   Except as provided for in subsection (B), if after the expiration of
the time period provided to the responsible party to correct the violation, the
responsible party has not corrected the violation, the enforcement officer may
issue an administrative citation to the responsible party by one or more of the
methods provided for in subsection (D). The failure of any person to receive an
administrative citation shall not affect the validity of any proceedings taken
under this chapter. Notice shall be effective on the date the citation is
received if personally served, or the date the citation is sent or posted.
   F.   The notice provided pursuant to subsection C of this section shall be
sufficient notice for subsequent violations of the same code occurring within
one (1) year of the notice even if the violation occurs at a different
location, and the enforcement officer may proceed directly to issuing an
administrative citation for future violations of the same code section
occurring within one (1) year of the notice even if the violation occurs at a
different location.
   G.   The lack of a responsible party's signature on an administrative
citation shall in no way affect the validity of the citation and subsequent
proceedings. (Ord. 2024-08, 11-5-2024)
1-12-7: PROCEDURE; CONTENTS OF CITATION:
The administrative citation shall be on a form approved by the City Manager and
should include, where applicable, the following:
   A.   The name and address of the responsible party;
   B.   Date and location of the violation(s) and the approximate time the
violation(s) were observed and/or discovered;
   C.   Section or sections of the Municipal Code violated and a description of
how the section(s) are violated;
   D.   A description of the action required to correct the violation(s), if
applicable;
   E.   Statements to require the responsible party to immediately correct the
violation(s) and to explain the consequences of failure to correct the
violation(s);
   F.   Amount of fine imposed for the violation(s);
   G.   Explanation of how the fine shall be paid and the time period by which
it shall be paid, and the consequences of failure to pay the fine;
   H.   Rights of appeal;
   I.   Signature of the enforcement officer, and the address where the
citation is served, posted, or mailed. (Ord. 2024-08, 11-5-2024)
1-12-8: PROCEDURE; APPEAL OF ADMINISTRATIVE CITATION AND HEARING:
See Chapter 10 of Title 1. (Ord. 2024-08, 11-5-2024)
1-12-9: FINES ASSESSED:
   A.   With the exception of violations that are automatically deemed
infractions under the Municipal Code, and unless otherwise specified within the
ordinance cited, the amount of the fine assessed for each administrative
citation issued for the same violation(s) within one (1) year of the last
administrative citation shall be as follows:
      1.   First administrative citation: one hundred dollars ($100.00);
      2.   Second administrative citation: five hundred dollars ($500.00); and
      3.   Each additional administrative citation: one thousand dollars
($1,000.00).
   B.   Unless otherwise specified within the ordinance cited, for violations
of the code that are automatically deemed infractions, the amount of the fine
assessed for each administrative citation issued for the same violation(s)
within one (1) year of the last administrative citation shall be as follows:
      1.   First administrative citation: one hundred dollars ($100.00);
      2.   Second administrative citation: two hundred dollars ($200.00);
      3.   Each additional administrative citation: five hundred dollars
($500.00).
   C.   For the purposes of this subsection, the "same violation" shall mean
violations of the same code section, even if they occur at a different
location.
   D.   The payment of a fine or fines shall not excuse the failure to correct
the violation, nor shall it bar any further enforcement action by the City.
(Ord. 2024-08, 11-5-2024)
1-12-10: COLLECTION OF FINES:
   A.   All fines assessed shall be payable to the City of Lemoore.
   B.   Interest shall accrue at a rate of ten percent (10%) per month on
unpaid fines until paid.
   C.   The failure of any person to timely pay a fine assessed by
administrative citation or final administrative decision shall constitute a
debt to the City, a violation of this code, and a public nuisance.
   D.   The City is entitled and hereby authorized to recover any debts or
outstanding fines owed to the City through any civil, criminal, or
administrative action, including, but not limited, to a nuisance abatement lien
or special assessment.
   A special assessment or lien imposed under this section shall have the
priority of a tax lien, unless prohibited by state law, in which case the
special assessment or lien shall have the priority of a judgment lien.
   E.   If the failure by any person to pay a fine assessed by administrative
citation results in the filing of an action in any court of proper
jurisdiction, to collect the fine, the City of Lemoore shall be entitled to
collect all costs, including reasonable attorney's fees, associated with the
filing of such actions.
   F.   The payment of a fine or fines shall not excuse the failure to correct
the violation nor shall it bar further enforcement action by the City. (Ord.
2024-08, 11-5-2024)
1-12-11: OTHER REMEDIES:
Nothing in this chapter precludes the City of Lemoore from using any other
available method to enforce the provisions of the Municipal Code. (Ord. 2024-
08, 11-5-2024)
1-12-12: ADMINISTRATION:
The City administrator may adopt any necessary guidelines, policies, or
procedures to aid in the interpretation and enforcement of this chapter. (Ord.
2024-08, 11-5-2024)
TITLE 2
BOARDS AND COMMISSIONS
CHAPTER 1
PLANNING COMMISSION
SECTION:
2-1-1: Commission Created; Members; Appointment
2-1-2: Terms; Removals From Office
2-1-3: Organization
2-1-4: Powers And Duties
2-1-5: Expenditures
2-1-1: COMMISSION CREATED; MEMBERS; APPOINTMENT:
There is hereby created a planning commission for the city. Said commission
shall consist of seven (7) members with applications to be approved by city
council by a majority vote. It is hereby reaffirmed that the mayor, with the
consent of at least two (2) other members of the council, is empowered to
designate at least one member of the council to attend the meetings of the
planning commission as an observer on behalf of the council. Said member shall
serve as such observer for such time as such member and at least two (2) other
members of the council desire. (Ord. 2016-03, 2-16-2016)
2-1-2: TERMS; REMOVALS FROM OFFICE:
The terms of appointed members of the planning commission shall be for four (4)
calendar years and terms of office shall expire at eleven fifty nine o'clock
(11:59) P.M. on December 31 of the last year of each member's term of office.
No more than two (2) appointed members' terms of office shall expire at the
same time. Members of the planning commission shall serve at the pleasure of
the city council, and may be removed by the: a) expiration of term, or b)
majority vote of the city council. Should no appointments be made by the
expiration of term, the member will remain in office until an appointment is
made. (Ord. 2016-03, 2-16-2016)
2-1-3: ORGANIZATION:
   A.   Officers: The commission shall elect the chairman from among the
appointed members for a term of one year and, subject to other provisions of
law, may elect such officers as it may determine.
   B.   Meetings: The commission shall hold at least one regular monthly
meeting each month.
   C.   Records Kept: The commission shall keep a record of its meetings,
resolutions, transactions, findings and determinations, which such records
shall be open to the public. (Ord. 8302, 4-5-1983)
2-1-4: POWERS AND DUTIES:
   A.   General Plan: It shall be the function and duty of the planning
commission to make and adopt, subject to the provisions of law, a general plan
for the physical development of the city and of any land outside the boundaries
thereof which, in the commission's judgment, bears relation to the planning
thereof.
   B.   Additional Powers And Duties: The planning commission shall have such
other powers and duties as are prescribed by law 1 and shall be governed by the
procedure provided by law.
   C.   Governing The Planning Commission: The powers, duties and procedures of
the planning commission may be so prescribed by ordinance or resolution of the
city council as well as by applicable state and federal law. (Ord. 8302, 4-5-
1983)
 
Notes
1 1. GOV §65103.
2-1-5: EXPENDITURES:
The commission may appoint officers and employees and contract for services,
subject to the provisions of law, provided that all expenditures of the
commission, exclusive of gifts, shall be within the amount appropriated for the
purpose by the city council. (Ord. 8302, 4-5-1983)
CHAPTER 2
BOARD OF ZONING ADJUSTMENT
(Rep. by Ord. 2012-01, 4-17-2012)
CHAPTER 3
REDEVELOPMENT AGENCY
SECTION:
2-3-1: Agency Established
2-3-2: City Council to Serve as
2-3-1: AGENCY ESTABLISHED:
It is hereby found, determined and declared that there is a need for a
Redevelopment Agency to function in the City in accordance with the provisions
of the Community Redevelopment Law 1 . Said Redevelopment Agency is hereby
established pursuant to section 33101 of the Community Redevelopment Law, to be
known as the Lemoore Redevelopment Agency. Said Redevelopment Agency is hereby
authorized to transact business and exercise its power under provisions of the
Community Redevelopment Law.
 
Notes
1 1. West's Ann. Cal. Health and Safety Code §§33000 et seq.
2-3-2: CITY COUNCIL TO SERVE AS:
Pursuant to the provisions of section 33200 of the Community Redevelopment Law,
the City Council hereby declares itself to be the Redevelopment Agency of the
City of Lemoore. The City Council hereby finds and determines that the
designation of the City Council as the Redevelopment Agency will serve the
public interest and promote the public health, safety and welfare in an
effective manner in that this public body is best able to serve the needs of
the community to implement the purpose of the Community Redevelopment Law.
(Ord. 8514, 9-3-85)
CHAPTER 4
EMERGENCY SERVICES ORGANIZATION
SECTION:
2-4-1: Purposes
2-4-2: Definitions
2-4-3: Disaster Council
2-4-4: Director and Assistant Director of Emergency Services
2-4-5: Emergency Organization
2-4-6: Emergency Plan
2-4-7: Expenditures
2-4-8: Prohibited Acts
2-4-1: PURPOSES:
The declared purposes of this Chapter are to provide for the preparation and
carrying out of plans for the protection of the persons and property within
this City in the event of an emergency; the direction of the emergency
organization; and the coordination of the emergency functions of this City with
all other public agencies, corporations, organizations and affected private
persons.
2-4-2: DEFINITIONS:
When used in this Chapter, the following words and terms shall have the
meanings ascribed to them in this Section:
EMERGENCY: The actual or threatened existence of conditions of disaster or of
extreme peril to the safety of persons and property within this City caused by
such conditions as air pollution, fire, flood, storm, epidemic, riot or
earthquake, or other conditions including conditions resulting from war or
imminent threat of war, but other than conditions resulting from a labor
controversy, which conditions are or are likely to be beyond the control of the
services, personnel, equipment and facilities of this City, requiring the
combined forces of other political subdivisions to combat.
KINGS AREA: Includes the City of Avenal, the City of Corcoran, the City of
Hanford, the City of Lemoore and the unincorporated area of the County of
Kings.
2-4-3: DISASTER COUNCIL:
   A.   Membership: The Council hereby adopts section 6-3 of chapter 6 of the
Code of Ordinances, County of Kings, providing for Disaster Council membership,
which reads as follows:
Sec. 6-3. Disaster Council Membership.
The Kings Area Disaster Council is hereby created and shall consist of the
following:
   A. One member of the board of supervisors of the county, to be appointed by
and to serve at the pleasure of the board of supervisors.
   B. The assistant director of emergency services (emergency services
coordinator) of the County of Kings.
   C. One member of the city council of the City of Avenal to be appointed by
and to serve at the pleasure of said city council.
   D. One member of the city council of the City of Corcoran to be appointed by
and to serve at the pleasure of said city council.
   E. One member of the city council of the City of Hanford to be appointed by
and to serve at the pleasure of said city council.
   F. One member of the city council of the City of Lemoore to be appointed by
and to serve at the pleasure of said city council.
   G. The county administrative officer.
   H. The director of emergency services of the City of Avenal; or if no
director has been appointed, the city manager of the City of Avenal in lieu
thereof.
   I. The director of emergency services of the City of Corcoran; or, if no
director has been appointed, the city manager of the City of Corcoran in lieu
thereof.
   J. The director of emergency services of the City of Hanford; or, if no
director has been appointed, the city manager of the City of Hanford in lieu
thereof.
   K. The director of emergency services of the City of Lemoore, or, if no
director has been appointed, the city administrator of the City of Lemoore in
lieu thereof.
   L. One member at large to be appointed by the other members of the Kings
Area Disaster Council.
   B.   Organization: The Council hereby adopts section 6-4 of chapter 6 of the
Code of Ordinances, County of Kings, providing for Disaster Council officers,
rules and meetings, which reads as follows:
Sec. 6-4. Disaster Council Officers, Rules and Meetings.
   The member of the board of supervisors selected to serve on the Kings Area
Disaster Council shall serve as chairman, and the members shall elect a vice
chairman and such other officers as they deem necessary. They shall prescribe
their own rules of procedure. The Disaster Council shall meet upon call of the
chairman or, in his absence from the County or inability to call such a
meeting, upon call of the vice chairman or a majority of the membership.
   C.   Powers and Duties: The Council hereby adopts section 6-5 of chapter 6
of the Code of Ordinances, County of Kings, providing for disaster council
powers and duties, which reads as follows:
Sec. 6-5. Disaster Council Powers and Duties.
   It shall be the duty of the Kings Area Disaster Council, and it is hereby
empowered, to develop and recommend for adoption by the board of supervisors of
the County of Kings and the city councils of the Cities of Avenal, Corcoran,
Hanford and Lemoore, emergency and mutual aid plans and agreements and such
ordinances and resolutions and rules and regulations as are necessary to
implement such plans and agreements.
2-4-4: DIRECTOR AND ASSISTANT DIRECTOR OF EMERGENCY SERVICES:
   A.   Offices Created:
      1.   Director: There is hereby created the office of Director of
Emergency Services. The City Administrator shall be the Director of Emergency
Services.
      2.   Assistant Director: There is hereby created the office of Assistant
Director of Emergency Services who shall be appointed by the Director.
   B.   Powers and Duties:
      1.   Director: The Director is hereby empowered to:
         a.   Request the City Council to proclaim the existence or threatened
existence of a "local emergency" if the City Council is in session, or to issue
such proclamation if the City Council is not in session. Whenever a local
emergency is proclaimed by the Director, the City Council shall take action to
ratify the proclamation within seven (7) days thereafter or the proclamation
shall have no further force or effect.
         b.   Request the Governor to proclaim a "state of emergency" when, in
the opinion of the Director, the locally available resources are inadequate to
cope with the emergency.
         c.   Control and direct the effort of the Emergency Organization of
this City for the accomplishment of the purposes of this Chapter.
         d.   Direct cooperation between the coordination of services and staff
of the Emergency Organization of this City; and resolve questions of authority
and responsibility that may arise between them.
         e.   Represent this City in all dealings with public or private
agencies on matters pertaining to emergencies as defined herein.
         f.   In the event of the proclamation of a "local emergency" as herein
provided, the proclamation of a "state of emergency" by the Governor or the
Director of the State Office of Emergency Services, or the existence of a
"state of war emergency", the Director is hereby empowered:
            (1)   To make and issue rules and regulations on matters reasonably
related to the protection of life and property as affected by such emergency;
provided, however, such rules and regulations must be confirmed at the earliest
practicable time by the City Council;
            (2)   To obtain vital supplies, equipment and such other properties
found lacking and needed for the protection of life and property and to bind
the City for the fair value thereof, and, if required immediately, to
commandeer the same for public use;
            (3)   To require emergency services of any City officer or employee
and, in the event of the proclamation of a "state of emergency" in the County
in which this City is located or the existence of a "state of war emergency",
to command the aid of as many citizens of this community as he deems necessary
in the execution of his duties; such persons shall be entitled to all
privileges, benefits and immunities as are provided by State law for registered
disaster service workers;
            (4)   To requisition necessary personnel or material of any City
department or agency; and
            (5)   To execute all of his ordinary powers as City Administrator,
all of the special powers conferred upon him by this Chapter or by resolution
or emergency plan pursuant hereto adopted by the City Council, all powers
conferred upon him by any statute, by any agreement approved by the City
Council and by any other lawful authority.
The Director of Emergency Services shall designate the order of succession to
that office, to take effect in the event the Director is unavailable to attend
meetings and otherwise perform his duties during an emergency. Such order of
succession shall be approved by the City Council.
      2.   Assistant Director: The Assistant Director shall, under the
supervision of the Director and with the assistance of Emergency Service
Chiefs, develop emergency plans and manage the emergency programs of this City,
and shall have such other powers and duties as may be assigned by the Director.
2-4-5: EMERGENCY ORGANIZATION:
All officers and employees of this City, together with those volunteer forces
enrolled to aid them during an emergency, and all groups, organizations and
persons who may by agreement or operation of law, including persons impressed
into service under the provisions of subsection
2-4-4B1f(3) of this Chapter, be charged with duties incident to the protection
of life and property in this City during such emergency, shall constitute the
Emergency Organization of the City.
2-4-6: EMERGENCY PLAN:
The Kings Area Disaster Council shall be responsible for the development of the
City Emergency Plan, which Plan shall provide for the effective mobilization of
all of the resources of this City, both public and private, to meet any
condition constituting a local emergency, state of emergency or state of war
emergency and shall provide for the organization, powers and duties, services
and staff of the Emergency Organization. Such Plan shall take effect upon
adoption by resolution of the City Council.
2-4-7: EXPENDITURES:
Any expenditures made in connection with emergency activities, including mutual
aid activities, shall be deemed conclusively to be for the direct protection
and benefit of the inhabitants and property of the City.
2-4-8: PROHIBITED ACTS:
It shall be a misdemeanor, punishable by a fine of not to exceed five hundred
dollars ($500.00) or by imprisonment for not to exceed six (6) months, or both,
for any person during an emergency to:
   A.   Wilfully obstruct, hinder or delay any member of the Emergency
Organization in the enforcement of any lawful rule or the regulation issued
pursuant to this Chapter, or in the performance of any duty imposed upon him by
virtue of this Chapter.
   B.   Do any act forbidden by any lawful rule or regulation issued pursuant
to this Chapter if such act is of such a nature as to give or be likely to give
assistance to the enemy or to imperil the lives or property of inhabitants of
this City, or to prevent, hinder or delay the defense or protection thereof.
   C.   Wear, carry or display, without authority, any means of identification
specified by the Emergency Agency of the State. (Ord. 8202, 6-1-82)
CHAPTER 5
PARKS AND RECREATION COMMISSION
ARTICLE A. RULES OF THE COMMISSION
SECTION:
2-5A-1: Purpose
2-5A-2: Appointment; Tenure
2-5A-3: Removal
2-5A-1: PURPOSE:
The “Lemoore parks and recreation commission” hereinafter referred to as the
commission, shall be composed of five (5) regular members. The duties of the
said commission shall be to advise and recommend to the city council on the
following matters:
   A.   Comprehensive park planning;
   B.   Acquisition of land and/or facilities;
   C.   Development, design and operation of parks and recreation programming
and facilities;
   D.   Facility use fees and procedures;
   E.   Park and facility design;
   F.   Capital implement planning;
   G.   Foster public awareness and public involvement in all aspects of parks
and recreation;
   H.   The commission shall perform such additional duties as may be
prescribed from time to time by the city council, city manager or recreation
manager.
   The actions of the commission are subject to review by the city council.
(Ord. 2016-15, 12-6-2016; amd. Ord. 2025-01, 3-4-2025)
2-5A-2: APPOINTMENT; TENURE:
   The regular members of such commission shall be appointed by the mayor, with
approval by the city council. Unless terminated as provided below, they shall
hold their office for a term of two (2) years, except at the first appointment,
two (2) members shall be appointed for a term of one year, three (3) members
shall be appointed for a term of two (2) years. All members must be residents
of the city of Lemoore.
   Terms shall be from January to December of each year. However, if a term
expires, the sitting commissioner will continue to serve until the position is
filled. Vacancies occurring other than through expiration of term, shall be
filled for the unexpired term in the same manner as stated in this chapter.
Members appointed to fill a vacancy with less than nine (9) months remaining in
the term are automatically reappointed to a two (2) year term without
additional council action.
   Commission members shall serve without compensation.
(Ord. 2016-15, 12-6-2016; amd. Ord. 2025-01, 3-4-2025)
2-5A-3: REMOVAL:
   Any appointed member of the commission who fails to attend three (3) regular
meetings in succession without notifying the chair in advance; or a member who
fails to complete the required volunteer hours of eight (8) hours per month for
three (3) months in succession; or a member who does not attend at least sixty
percent (60%) of the regularly scheduled commission meetings within a twelve
(12) month period, will be considered to have automatically resigned from the
commission. Members may be removed by a majority of the city council. The
decision shall be final and there shall be no appeal.
(Ord. 2016-15, 12-6-2016; amd. Ord. 2025-01, 3-4-2025)
ARTICLE B. MEETINGS
SECTION:
2-5B-1: Regular Meetings
2-5B-2: Notice Of Meetings
2-5B-3: Special Meetings
2-5B-4: Place Of Meeting
2-5B-5: Quorum
2-5B-6: Rules Of Order
2-5B-1: REGULAR MEETINGS:
   The parks and recreation commission shall meet at least twelve (12) times
per year, at the hour of five thirty o’clock (5:30) P.M. at Lemoore City Hall.
(Ord. 2016-15, 12-6-2016; amd. Ord. 2025-01, 3-4-2025)
2-5B-2: NOTICE OF MEETINGS:
   Notice of all regular commission meetings shall be e-mailed to each member
of the commission at least seventy two (72) hours prior to each meeting. Notice
of all meetings shall be posted at city hall and in compliance with other Brown
act requirements.
(Ord. 2016-15, 12-6-2016; amd. Ord. 2025-01, 3-4-2025)
2-5B-3: SPECIAL MEETINGS:
   Special meetings may be called at any time by city staff.
(Ord. 2016-15, 12-6-2016; amd. Ord. 2025-01, 3-4-2025)
2-5B-4: PLACE OF MEETING:
   The place of regular meetings shall be at Lemoore City Hall, unless
otherwise stated in the call and shall comply with the Brown act for recording
requirements.
(Ord. 2016-15, 12-6-2016; amd. Ord. 2025-01, 3-4-2025)
2-5B-5: QUORUM:
   A majority (3) of the currently appointed members of the commission shall
constitute a quorum.
(Ord. 2016-15, 12-6-2016; amd. Ord. 2025-01, 3-4-2025)
2-5B-6: RULES OF ORDER:
   General parliamentary rules shall be observed in conducting meetings of the
commission.
(Ord. 2016-15, 12-6-2016; amd. Ord. 2025-01, 3-4-2025)
ARTICLE C. OFFICERS
SECTION:
2-5C-1: Appointment Of Officers
2-5C-2: Duties Of Chair Of The Commission
2-5C-3: Duties Of The Vice Chair
2-5C-4: Duties Of The Community Services Director And City Staff
2-5C-1: APPOINTMENT OF OFFICERS:
   The commission shall elect from its members a chair and a vice chair from
among its membership at its first meeting of each calendar year, and each
officer shall hold office for one year or until replaced by a simple majority
vote of the commission.
(Ord. 2016-15, 12-6-2016; amd. Ord. 2025-01, 3-4-2025)
2-5C-2: DUTIES OF CHAIR OF THE COMMISSION:
   The chair of the commission shall preside at the meetings of the commission,
and shall perform the other duties ordinarily performed by that officer.
(Ord. 2016-15, 12-6-2016; amd. Ord. 2025-01, 3-4-2025)
2-5C-3: DUTIES OF THE VICE CHAIR:
   The vice chair of the commission, in the absence of the chair, shall perform
all duties of the chair of the commission. In the absence of both the chair and
the vice chair, the commission shall elect a chair pro tem who shall perform
the duties as chair during the absence and until such time as the chair or vice
chair return.
(Ord. 2016-15, 12-6-2016; amd. Ord. 2025-01, 3-4-2025)
2-5C-4: DUTIES OF THE COMMUNITY SERVICES DIRECTOR AND CITY STAFF:
   The recreation manager shall not be a member of the commission. The manager
and appropriate staff shall attend all regular meetings and will be responsible
for preparing the agenda for regular and special meetings. The recreation
manager will appoint a staff person to record the minutes for each parks and
recreation commission meeting.
(Ord. 2016-15, 12-6-2016; amd. Ord. 2025-01, 3-4-2025)
ARTICLE D. COMMITTEES OF THE COMMISSION
SECTION:
2-5D-1: Appointment Of Special Subcommittees
2-5D-1: APPOINTMENT OF SPECIAL SUBCOMMITTEES:
   Special subcommittees shall be appointed by the chair or the community
services director for consideration and study of any matter not covered by the
commission during regular or special meetings. The special subcommittee shall
report their findings to the commission.
(Ord. 2016-15, 12-6-2016; amd. Ord. 2025-01, 3-4-2025)
ARTICLE E. REQUIRED VOLUNTEER HOURS
SECTION:
2-5E-1: Required Volunteer Hours
2-5E-1: REQUIRED VOLUNTEER HOURS:
   Each parks and recreation member shall be required to volunteer a minimum of
eight (8) hours per month with the City of Lemoore Recreation Department.
Attendance at regular and special meetings of the parks and recreation
commission count toward the monthly volunteer hour requirement. The recreation
manager shall keep track of volunteer hours completed by each commission member
and report these hours monthly to the City Council.
(Ord. 2025-01, 3-4-2025)
TITLE 3
BUSINESS, LICENSE AND PERMIT REGULATIONS
CHAPTER 1
GENERAL BUSINESS LICENSE REVENUE
SECTION:
3-1-1: Purpose; Revenue Measure
3-1-2: Scope
3-1-3: Definitions
3-1-4: Licenses And Tax Payments Required
3-1-5: Applications For Licenses
3-1-6: Issuance Of License; Contents
3-1-7: License Tax Provisions
3-1-8: Transfer Of License
3-1-9: Duplicate Licenses; Collector's Error
3-1-10: Financial Statements
3-1-11: Branch Establishments; More Than One Business
3-1-12: New, Permanent Businesses
3-1-13: Confidentiality Of Information
3-1-14: Exemptions From License Tax
3-1-15: Administration And Enforcement
3-1-1: PURPOSE; REVENUE MEASURE:
This Chapter is enacted solely to raise revenue for Municipal purposes and is
not intended for regulation. (1975 Code §5-1.02)
3-1-2: SCOPE:
Any person required to pay a license tax for transacting and carrying on any
business under this Chapter shall be relieved from the payment of any license
tax for the privilege of doing such business which has been required under any
other regulation of the City, but shall remain subject to the regulatory
provisions of such other regulations. This Section shall not apply to
inspection or permit fees, nor shall it apply to franchise tax payments under
present or future franchises granted to public utilities. (1975 Code §5-1.03)
3-1-3: DEFINITIONS:
When used in this Chapter, the following words and terms shall have the
meanings ascribed to them in this Section:
BUSINESS: Professions, trades and occupations and all and every kind of calling
carried on for profit or livelihood.
CITY: The City of Lemoore. (1975 Code §5-1.01)
COLLECTOR: The Finance Director or designee, or other City official charged
with the administration of this Chapter. (Ord. 9116, 12-17-1991)
FIXED PLACE OF BUSINESS; REGULAR PLACE OF BUSINESS; TRANSIENT BUSINESS: The
premises in the City of Lemoore occupied for a particular purpose of conducting
the business thereat, and regularly kept open for the purpose of attending to
such business.
   The term "regular place of business" shall mean the same as the term "fixed
place of business" or at a "regular place of business" as said terms are herein
defined is, for the purpose of this Chapter, termed a "transient business",
whether the person conducting such transient business is, or is not, a resident
of the City.
   Every person engaging in business at a "fixed place of business" in the
City, as herein defined, and who has procured the proper license for said
business, shall have the right to deliver the goods, wares and merchandise
pertaining to said business in Lemoore without procuring any additional license
therefor. In the issuance of licenses, no discrimination or distinction shall
ever be made against nonresidents of the City in favor of residents of the
City, and residents and nonresidents shall be entitled to equal rights in all
matters relating to the issuance of licenses. (1975 Code §5-1.01)
   No business shall be conducted at any fixed place of business in the City at
any time where such business is prohibited by the zoning laws of the City 1 ,
and no license shall be issued for any place of business unless zoning laws of
the City permit or allow such business to be conducted at the location for
which application for such license is made at the time of application. (Ord.
9116, 12-17-91)
GROSS RECEIPTS: The total amount of the sale price of all sales and the total
amount charged or received for the performance of any act, service or
employment of whatever nature it may be, for which a charge is made or credit
allowed, whether or not the service, act or employment is done as a part of or
in connection with the sale of goods, wares or merchandise. Included in "gross
receipts" shall be all other receipts, cash, credits and property of any kind
or nature except as hereinafter excluded, and any amount for which credit is
allowed by the seller to the purchaser without any deduction therefor on
account of the cost of the property sold, the cost of the materials used, labor
or service costs, interest paid or payable, or losses or other expenses
whatsoever. Excluded from "gross receipts" shall be cash discounts allowed and
taken on sales, any taxes required by law to be included in or added to the
purchase price and collected from the consumer or purchaser, and such part of
the sale of property returned by purchasers upon recision of the contract of
sale as is refunded either in cash or by credit.
JOBBING BUSINESS: Every business conducted solely for the purpose of selling
goods, wares or merchandise in job lots to wholesale merchants for resale at
wholesale to the trade by said wholesale merchants.
MANUFACTURER: One engaged in making materials, raw or partly finished, into
wares suitable for use. (1975 Code §5-1.01)
PEDDLER: Includes every person, not having a fixed place of business in the
City, who travels from place to place, or has a stand upon any public street,
alley or other public place, doorway or any building, unenclosed or vacant lot
or parcel of land, who sells or offers for sale at retail any goods, wares or
merchandise in his possession. (1975 Code §5-1.45)
PERSON: All domestic and foreign corporations, associations, syndicates, joint
stock corporations, partnerships of every kind, clubs, Massachusetts business,
or common law trusts, societies and individuals transacting and carrying on any
business in the City, other than as an employee. (Ord. 8603, 2-18-86)
QUARTER: A period of three (3) calendar months. The quarter beginning on
January 1, April 1, July 1 and October 1 of each year. The quarter shall
include fractions thereof.
RETAIL BUSINESS: Every business conducted for the purpose of selling, or
offering to sell, any goods, wares or merchandise other than as a part of a
wholesale business and jobbing business, as herein defined.
VEHICLE: Includes every device in, upon or by which any person or property is
or may be transported or drawn upon a public street or highway, except devices
moved by human power or used exclusively upon stationary rails or tracks.
WHOLESALE BUSINESS: Every business conducted solely for the purpose of selling
goods, wares or merchandise in wholesale lots to retailers for resale at retail
to the trade by said retailers, in the same form or condition as the same were
in at the time of sale thereof to said retail merchant. (1975 Code §5-1.01)
 
Notes
1 1. See Title 9 of this Code.
3-1-4: LICENSES AND TAX PAYMENTS REQUIRED:
There are hereby imposed upon the businesses specified in this Chapter license
taxes in the amounts hereafter prescribed, and it shall be unlawful for any
person to transact and carry on any business in the City without first having
procured a license from the City so to do or without complying with any and all
applicable provisions of this Chapter, and each day such business is carried on
without a license shall constitute a separate violation of this Chapter. (1975
Code §5-1.04)
3-1-5: APPLICATIONS FOR LICENSES:
Every person required to have a license under the provisions of this Chapter
shall make application for the same to the Collector of the City, and upon
payment of the prescribed tax, the Collector shall issue to such person a
license. (1975 Code §5-1.09; amd. Ord. 8603, 2-18-86)
The applicant shall furnish all information required to enable the Collector to
properly classify the business of the applicant and determine the proper
license to be paid by such applicant. Each applicant for a license must
properly fill in one of such applications, sign it and certify, under penalties
of perjury, that the contents thereof are true and correct. The completed
applications must be submitted to the Collector, who shall compute the proper
amount of the license and on payment of said amount shall issue the appropriate
license. (Ord. 9116, 12-17-91)
3-1-6: ISSUANCE OF LICENSE; CONTENTS:
It shall be the Collector's duty to prepare and issue a license under this
Chapter for every person liable to pay a license hereunder, and to state in
each license the period of time covered thereby, the name of the person to whom
issued, the business licensed and the location or place where such business is
to be carried on. It shall further be the duty and responsibility of the
Collector to see that all new businesses are licensed and that all changes in
location and status are recorded. (1975 Code §5-1.07)
3-1-7: LICENSE TAX PROVISIONS:
   A.   Determination of Amount of Tax: Only one license tax shall be paid by
any one person engaged in a business covered by a gross receipts schedule;
provided, that if such person is also engaged in any other business, whether
covered by a gross receipts schedule or listed under a flat basis, then in such
a case, the gross receipts from all sources shall be included in one total and
the tax calculated thereon; and provided further, that no such person shall be
required to pay total license fees in excess of one hundred dollars ($100.00)
per year. (1975 Code §5-1.04)
   B.   Payment of Tax: All license taxes shall be paid in advance at the
office of the Collector. Any person carrying on, either as principal or agent,
any business in the City not herein specifically set forth shall pay the amount
of the license tax described herein provided for the business nearest
corresponding to the nature of the business sought to be licensed.
The annual license tax in this Chapter provided shall be due and payable to the
City on January 1 of each year. (1975 Code §5-1.08)
   C.   Failure to Pay License Tax:
      1.   For failure to pay a license tax when due, the Collector shall add a
penalty of fifty percent (50%) of said license tax on February 1 after the due
date thereof; an additional fifty percent (50%) will be added on March 1,
providing that the amount of such penalty to be added shall in no event exceed
one hundred percent (100%) of the total license due. (Ord. 9116, 12-17-91)
      2.   No license shall be issued to, or renewed for, any applicant who is
delinquent in the payment of such license tax or penalty until such license tax
and penalty are both paid in full. (1975 Code §5-1.20)
   D.   Refunds: In the event of sale or termination of a business, after
payment in advance of any license fee required under this Chapter, the licensee
may make written request to the City Council for a pro rata refund of said
license for the unexpired portion of said annual term, and the City Council
shall refund the amount of any overpayment of the license tax arising out of,
or by reason of, payment in advance having been made before such sale. (1975
Code §5-1.19)
3-1-8: TRANSFER OF LICENSE:
No license granted or issued under any provisions of this Chapter shall be in
any manner transferred or assigned or shall authorize any person other than is
therein mentioned or named to do business without approval of the Collector.
(1975 Code §5-1.07; amd. Ord. 8603, 2-18-86)
3-1-9: DUPLICATE LICENSES; COLLECTOR'S ERROR:
The Collector shall make a charge of two dollars fifty cents ($2.50) for each
duplicate license issued to replace any license issued under the provisions of
this Chapter. In no case shall any mistake made by the Collector in stating the
amount of the license prevent or prejudice the collection by the City of what
shall be actually due from anyone carrying on a business subject to a license
under this Chapter. (Ord. 9116, 12-17-91)
3-1-10: FINANCIAL STATEMENTS:
   A.   Renewal Licenses; Financial Statements Required: In all cases where the
amount of license tax to be paid is based upon gross receipts or is graduated
according to some other sliding scale, the applicant for a renewal of a license
shall submit to the Collector, for his guidance in ascertaining the amount of
license tax to be paid by the applicant, a written statement upon a form to be
provided by the Collector, sworn to before the Collector, his deputy or by any
person authorized to administer oaths, or certified under the penalties of
perjury to be true and correct, setting forth such information concerning the
applicant's business during the preceding period of license as may be required
by the Collector to enable him to ascertain the amount of license tax to be
paid by said applicant pursuant to the provisions of this Chapter, and such
statement shall be used as the basis for determining the amount of license tax
to be paid by the applicant for the renewal period.
   Where the license to be paid under any section hereof is based upon gross
receipts, only one such statement need be filed during any fiscal year (unless
the Collector requires a corrected statement to be filed); which statement
shall be filed at the time the first license is procured, as provided in
Section 3-1-12B of this Chapter, and thereafter on or before January 31 of each
year.
   Any person who prefers to make no disclosure of his gross receipts may, at
his option, pay the maximum license fee of one hundred dollars ($100.00), and
thereafter, the Collector shall have no right to audit the records of such
person and no statement shall be required. (1975 Code §5-1.12)
   B.   Audit of Statements: No statement shall be conclusive as to the matters
set forth therein, nor shall the filing of the same preclude the City from
collecting by appropriate action such sum as is actually due and payable
hereunder. Such statement, and each of the several items therein contained,
shall be subject to audit and verification by the Collector, his deputy or
authorized employees of the City, who are hereby authorized to examine and
inspect among other records, sales tax reports and copies of State and Federal
income tax records for such purpose.
   All licensees, applicants for licenses and persons engaged in business in
the City are hereby required to permit an examination of such records for the
purposes aforesaid. (1975 Code §5-1.13)
   C.   Failure to File Statement: If any person fails to file any required
statement within the time prescribed, or if after demand therefor is made by
the Collector, he fails to file a corrected statement, the Collector may
determine the amount of license tax due from such person by means of such
information as he may be able to obtain.
   In case such a determination is made, the Collector shall give a notice of
the amount so assessed by serving it personally or by depositing it in the
United States Post Office in Lemoore, California, postage prepaid, addressed to
the person so assessed at his last known address. Such person may, within ten
(10) days after the mailing or serving of such notice, make application in
writing to the Collector for hearing on the amount of license tax. If such
application is made, or if application is not made within the time prescribed,
the Collector must cause the matter to be set for hearing within fifteen (15)
days before the City Council. The Collector shall give at least ten (10) days'
notice to such person of the time and place of hearing in the manner prescribed
above for service of notice of assessment. The Council shall consider all
evidence produced, and shall make a written record of its findings thereon,
which findings shall be final and a copy thereof shall be served upon the
applicant in the manner prescribed above for the service of notice of
assessment. (1975 Code §5-5.14)
3-1-11: BRANCH ESTABLISHMENTS; MORE THAN ONE BUSINESS:
A separate license must be obtained by each branch establishment or location of
the business transacted and carried on and for each separate type of business
at the same location. Each license shall authorize the licensee to transact and
carry on only the business licensed thereby at the location or in the manner
designated in such license. Warehouse and distributing plants used in
connection with and incidental to a business licensed under the provisions of
this Chapter shall not be deemed to be a separate place of business or branch
establishment.
Any person conducting two (2) or more types of businesses at the same location
and under the same management, or at different locations, but which use a
single set or integrated set of books and records may, at his option, pay only
one tax calculated on all gross receipts of businesses under the schedule that
applies to the type of business of such person which requires the highest
payment of license fees. No such person shall be required to pay total license
fees on gross receipts in excess of one hundred dollars ($100.00) per year.
(Ord. 8603, 2-18-86)
3-1-12: NEW, PERMANENT BUSINESSES:
   A.   Deposit Required: Every person in the City who sells or offers to sell
or engages in the business of selling any kind of goods, wares or merchandise
whatever, who shall hereafter begin business in the City and who represents
that he is to be permanently located in the City in said business shall deposit
with the Collector of the City the sum of fifty dollars ($50.00) as a guarantee
that he will in good faith be permanently located in the City in such business
for the period of four (4) months, and in default of which condition will
forfeit to the City the said deposit. In case said person shall in good faith
permanently engage in such business for a period of four (4) months after the
giving of such deposit, said deposit shall be first applied against any license
fees found to be due, and the balance shall be refunded to the depositor. (1975
Code §5-1.10)
   B.   Financial Statement; Determination of License Tax:
      1.   Upon a person making application for the first license to be issued
for a newly established business, in all cases where the amount of license tax
to be paid is based upon gross receipts, or is graduated according to some
other sliding scale, such persons shall furnish to the Collector for his
guidance in ascertaining the amount of license tax to be paid by the applicant,
a written statement upon a form provided by the Collector, signed by the
applicant and certified under penalty of perjury to be true and correct,
setting forth such information as may be therein required and as may be
necessary to properly determine the amount of the license tax to be paid by the
applicant. (Ord. 9116, 12-17-91)
      2.   If the amount of the license tax to be paid by such applicant is
based upon the amount of his gross receipts, he shall estimate the amount of
his gross receipts for the period to be covered by the license for the purpose
of determining the license bracket which will be applicable to him for the
period to be covered by the license to be issued. Such estimate, if accepted by
the Collector as reasonable, shall be used in determining the amount of the
license tax to be paid by the applicant; provided, however, that the amount of
the license tax so determined shall be tentative only and such person shall,
within thirty one (31) days after the expiration of the period for which such
license was issued, furnish the Collector with a certified sworn statement upon
a form furnished by the Collector containing the data required to show the
licensing bracket properly applicable to such person during the period of such
license and the license tax for such period shall be finally ascertained and
paid in the manner provided by this Chapter, after deducting from the payment
found to be due the amount paid at the time such first license was issued. The
Collector shall not issue to any such person another license for the same or
any other business until such person shall have furnished to him the written
statement and paid the license tax as herein required.
      3.   If the amount of the license tax to be paid by such applicant is
graduated according to some sliding scale other than gross receipts, the
applicant shall furnish to the Collector for his guidance in ascertaining the
amount of license tax to be paid by the applicant, a certified or sworn
statement upon a form provided by the Collector, setting forth such information
as may be therein required and as may be necessary properly to determine the
amount of license tax to be paid by the applicant and which statement shall
show among other things, the number of vehicles or tonnage thereof, the number
of seats, chairs, rooms, tables or other units used or involved in such
person's business as of the time of filing such application. Such person shall
thereupon pay the required license tax in advance, computed in accordance with
the information contained in such statement.
      4.   In all cases the applicant shall, upon filing his application, pay
the prescribed license fee in advance; provided, that in the case of annual
licenses, only the initial fee shall be prorated as follows:
         a.   If application is made during the quarter beginning January 1,
one hundred percent (100%) of such fee shall be paid;
         b.   If application is made during the quarter beginning April 1,
seventy five percent (75%) of said fee shall be paid;
         c.   If application is made during the quarter beginning July 1, fifty
percent (50%) of said fee shall be paid;
         d.   If application is made during the quarter beginning October 1,
twenty five percent (25%) of said minimum shall be paid. (1975 Code §5-1.11)
3-1-13: CONFIDENTIALITY OF INFORMATION:
Information furnished or secured pursuant to this Chapter, the disclosure of
which would result in unfair competitive disadvantage to the person supplying
such information, shall be deemed confidential in character, and shall not be
subject to public inspection and shall be kept so that the contents thereof
shall not become known except to the persons charged with the administration
and enforcement of this Chapter. No officer or deputy officer or employee shall
in any manner reveal the contents of any part or portion of the contents of any
confidential information except in a legal action to enforce the provision of
this Chapter or pursuant to a court order. (Ord. 8603, 2-18-86)
3-1-14: EXEMPTIONS FROM LICENSE TAX:
   A.   Generally: Nothing in this Chapter shall be deemed or construed to
apply to any person transacting and carrying on any business exempt by virtue
of the Constitution or applicable statutes of the United States or of the State
of California from the payment to the Municipal corporations of such taxes as
are herein specified. Any person claiming an exemption pursuant to this
statement shall file a verified statement with the License Tax Collector
stating the facts upon which exemption is claimed. The Tax Collector shall,
upon a proper showing contained in the verified statement, issue a license to
such person claiming an exemption under this subsection without payment to the
City of the license tax required by this Chapter. The Tax Collector may revoke
any license granted, pursuant to the provisions hereof, upon information that
the licensee is not entitled to the exemption as provided herein. (1975 Code
§5-1.04)
   B.   Charitable Organizations: The provisions of this Chapter shall not be
deemed or construed to require the payment of a license fee to conduct, manage
or carry on any business, occupation or activity from any institution or
organization which is conducted, managed or carried on wholly for the benefit
of charitable purposes or from which profit is not derived, either directly or
indirectly, by any individual, firm or corporation; nor shall any license fee
be required for the conducting of any entertainment, concert, exhibition or
lecture on scientific, historical, literary, religious or moral subjects within
the City whenever the receipts of any such entertainment, concert, exhibition
or lecture are to be appropriated to any church or school or to any religious
or benevolent purpose; nor shall any license fee be required for the conducting
of any entertainment, dance, concert, exhibition or lecture by any religious,
charitable, fraternal, educational, military, State, County or Municipal
organization or association whenever the receipts of any such entertainment,
dance, concert, exhibition or lecture are to be appropriated for the purpose
and objects for which such organization or association was formed and from
which profit is not derived, either directly or indirectly, by any individual,
firm or corporation; provided, however that nothing in this subsection shall be
deemed to exempt any such organization or association from complying with the
provisions of any ordinance of the City requiring a permit from the City
Council or any commission or officer to conduct, manage or carry on any
profession, trade, calling or occupation. (1975 Code §5-1.43)
3-1-15: ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT:
   A.   Business License Tax Collector: The Finance Director is hereby
designated ex officio Business License Tax Collector of the City and shall
perform all of the duties prescribed for the Collector, pursuant to the
provisions of this Chapter. (Ord. 9116, 12-17-91)
   B.   Inspections; Powers of Police: All police officers are hereby appointed
inspectors of licenses and in addition to their several duties as police
officers are hereby required to examine all places of business and persons
liable to pay a license, and to see that such licenses are taken out, and shall
have and exercise the power:
      1.   To make arrests for the violation of any of the provisions of this
Chapter.
      2.   To enter free of charge, at any time, any place of business for
which a license is required by this Chapter, and to demand the exhibition of
such license for the current term by any person engaged or employed in the
transaction of such business, and if such persons shall then and there fail to
exhibit such license, such persons shall be liable for the penalty provided for
a violation of this Chapter. (1975 Code §5-1.16)
   C.   License Tax a Debt 1 : The amount of any license imposed by this
Chapter shall be deemed a debt to the City, and any person carrying on any
business mentioned in this Chapter without having a license from the City to do
so shall be liable to an action in the name of the City in any court of
competent jurisdiction for the amount of license by this Chapter imposed on
such business, together with all penalties due thereon in any such action.
(1975 Code §5-1.06)
   D.   Conviction Will Not Excuse Payment: The conviction and punishment of
any person for transacting business without a license shall not excuse or
exempt such person from the payment of any license fee due or unpaid at the
time of such conviction, together with all penalties due, as provided in this
Chapter, and nothing herein shall prevent a criminal prosecution for any
violation of the provisions of this Chapter. (1975 Code §5-1.18)
   E.   Appeals: Any person aggrieved by any decision of an administrative
officer or agency with respect to the issuance or refusal to issue such license
may appeal to the Council by filing a notice of appeal with the Clerk of the
City Council. The Council shall thereupon fix a time and place for hearing such
appeal. The Clerk of the City Council shall give notice to such person of the
time and place of hearing by serving it personally or by depositing it in the
United States Post Office at Lemoore, California, postage prepaid, addressed to
such person at his last known address. (1975 Code §5-1.15)
 
Notes
1 1. See also Section
  1-7-1 of this Code.
ARTICLE A. BUSINESS LICENSE TAX SCHEDULES;
ADDITIONAL LICENSING PROVISIONS
SECTION:
3-1A-1: License Taxes Based On Gross Receipts
3-1A-1-1:    Wholesale Businesses
3-1A-1-2:    Manufacturing Establishments
3-1A-1-3:    Contractors
3-1A-2: Flat Rate License Taxes
3-1A-2-1:    Amusements
3-1A-2-2:    Vending Machines; Coin Operated Music Devices
3-1A-2-3:    Auction Rooms And Auctioneers
3-1A-2-4:    Real Estate Brokers With No Fixed Place Of Business
3-1A-2-5:    Apartment Houses
3-1A-2-6:    Billposters
3-1A-2-7:    Bankrupt, Damaged Goods Sales
3-1A-2-8:    Peddlers And Solicitors
3-1A-2-9:    Fortune Tellers
3-1A-2-10:    License Taxes Per Vehicle
3-1A-3: Professions And Vocations; Optional Method Of Tax Payment
3-1A-1: LICENSE TAXES BASED ON GROSS RECEIPTS:
Every person carrying on one or more of the businesses enumerated in this
section shall pay an annual license tax on the total annual gross receipts of
said business or businesses based on the following bracket system:
Under $5,000.00          $20.00
5,000.00 to $10,000.00   30.00
10,000.00 to 25,000.00   40.00
25,000.00 to 50,000.00   50.00
50,000.00 to 75,000.00   60.00
75,000.00 to 100,000.00  70.00
100,000.00 to 150,000.00 80.00
150,000.00 to 200,000.00 90.00
200,000.00 and over      100.00
 
(1975 Code §5-1.21)
The following businesses shall pay a license tax on gross receipts as set forth
above:
Abstract company
Advertising - counsel
Agency - collection
Antique shop
Appliance store
Auto camp cabins
Auto court
Auto - repair, parts, trailer sales or wrecking
Auto sales - new and used
Awning - sales and repairs
Bakeries
Barbershops
Bath and massage
Batteries - recharging
Beauty parlor
Bicycle - sales, repairs or rental
Blacksmith
Boarding house (over 4 guests)
Bookstore
Business college
Campground
Candy store
Cigar store
Cleaning, dyeing and renovating (fixed place of business)
Computer sales and/or service
Concrete, transit mix
Dairy products (fixed place of business)
Dental laboratory
Designer or illustrator
Dressmaking or alterations (except in-home)
Drugstore
Electronic service or repair
Farm machinery and equipment
Feed and fuel
Fish market, retail
Florist
Funeral parlor
Furniture
Furs
Gift shop
Glazier
Grocer and meat market
Gunsmith
Gymnasium
Hardware
Horseshoer
Hot tub/spa
Hotel
Household appliances and furnishings
Ice cream parlor
Ice cream – retail stores
Ice manufacturer and distributor
Insurance adjuster
Jewelry
Junk dealer (fixed place of business)
Lapidary
Launderettes
Laundry
Lockers - frozen food
Locksmith
Lumberyard
Machine shop
Mail order
Merchant - general
Motel
Music store
Newspaper distributor
Newspaper publishing
Newsstand
Nursery
Office equipment
Paint store
Pest control (fixed place of business)
Pet shop
Pharmacy
Photographer (fixed place of business)
Physical culture
Picture gallery
Planing mill
Print shop
Record/tape store
Repair shop
Restaurant
Rooming house
Saddlery or leather shop
Sanatorium
Scooter or motor bike sales
Secondhand dealer
Service station
Shoe repairing
Shoes, sale of
Signs (fixed place of business)
Skating rink
Soft drink parlor
Sporting goods
Stationery store
Statuary
Storage
Tailor
Television sales
Theaters (except moving pictures)
Tires – retreading and vulcanizing
Towel supply
Trailer parks
Upholstery
Video arcade
Video sales/rental
Vulcanizing
Watchmaking (repairs)
(1975 Code §5-1.22; amd. Ord. 8603, 2-18-86)
Any business which is not specifically named herein, and which is not included
in any other section of this Chapter, shall also pay the license tax listed in
this Section. (1975 Code §5-1.22)
3-1A-1-1: WHOLESALE BUSINESSES:
Every person carrying on a wholesale business shall pay an annual license tax
based on the following bracket system:
 
Gross Receipts Per Anum               Tax
$ 50,000.00 or less                   $25.00
50,000.01 and less than $250,000.00   50.00
250,000.01, but less than $500,000.00 75.00
500,000.01 or more                    100.00
 
(1975 Code §5-1.23; 1989 Code)
3-1A-1-2: MANUFACTURING ESTABLISHMENTS:
Every person engaged in the business of manufacturing, operating any cannery
for fruits or vegetables, or any vegetable packing or processing plant, or any
gasoline or oil distributing plant, or any wholesale or jobbing business shall
pay an annual license tax based on gross receipts on the bracket system set
forth in Section
3-1A-1. In the event any person listed herein has obtained a license under
Section
3-1A-1, he shall not be responsible or required to obtain another license under
this Section
3-1A-1-2 if both businesses are conducted at the same location and in such
event, the gross receipts of all operations may be combined to determine the
amount of the tax. (1975 Code §5-1.26)
3-1A-1-3: CONTRACTORS:
Every person transacting and carrying on the business of general engineering,
building contractor or other general contractor, plumbing, electrical, roofing,
painting or plastering contractor or subcontractor in the City, whether such
contractor is located inside or outside the City, shall pay and be subject to
the payment of license tax based upon the following:
   A.   Gross receipts of $0.00 to $100,000.00 the sum of $60.00 per annum.
   B.   Gross receipts in excess of $100,000.00 per annum, the sum of $60.00
plus $1.00 for each $5,000.00 of gross receipts over $100,000.00, or fraction
thereof. (Ord. 9311, 12-14-93)
3-1A-2: FLAT RATE LICENSE TAXES:
Every person carrying on the businesses herein enumerated shall pay an annual
license tax as follows:
Advertising distributing                                               $ 25.00
Bail bond broker                                                       25.00
(1975 Code §5-1.28)
Bowling alley, public                                                  50.00
(1975 Code §5-1.31)
Dry cleaners, laundries and linen supply (no fixed place of business), 50.00
per truck
House cleaning                                                         25.00
(1975 Code §5-1.28)
Junk collector (no fixed place of business)                            25.00
(1975 Code §5-1.34)
Motion picture theater:
Indoor theater                                                         40.00
(1975 Code §5-1.41)
Outdoor theater, per day                                               10.00
(1975 Code §5-1.28; 1989 Code)
Outdoor or billboard advertising                                       60.00
Patrol service                                                         50.00
Pawnbroker                                                             50.00
Pest control (no fixed place of business)                              25.00
Photographers, travelling or transient (no fixed place of business)    100.00
(1975 Code §5-1.36)
Pool or billiard room, public                                          50.00
(1975 Code §5-1.31)
Premium stamp firm                                                     100.00
Private detective                                                      25.00
Public stenographer                                                    25.00
Shooting gallery                                                       100.00
Tire retreading (no fixed place of business)                           25.00
(1975 Code §5-1.28)
 
3-1A-2-1: AMUSEMENTS:
   A.   Circuses and Carnivals:
      1.   Circuses and Menageries: Every person carrying on the business of
conducting a menagerie, dog or pony show shall pay a license tax of fifty
dollars ($50.00) per day; a circus shall pay a license fee of one hundred
dollars ($100.00) per day, plus the sum of twenty five dollars ($25.00) for
each additional side show in connection therewith, and for each concession in
connection therewith, the license fee shall be ten dollars ($10.00) per day.
      2.   Acrobatic, Theatrical Performances: Every person carrying on the
business of conducting acrobatic or theatrical exhibitions under canvas shall
pay a license fee of fifty dollars ($50.00) per day.
      3.   Circus Procession or Parade: Every person conducting or managing a
circus procession or parade and not having a license for conducting, managing
or carrying on a circus within the City limits shall pay a license fee of
twenty five dollars ($25.00) per day or for each such procession or parade.
      4.   Street Fairs, Carnivals and Exhibitions: Every person engaged in the
business of conducting a fair, street carnival or exhibition in the City shall
pay a license fee of one hundred dollars ($100.00) for each and every day, or
portion thereof, during which such fair, street carnival or exhibition is
conducted. Subsection
3-1-14B of this Chapter pertaining to exemptions to charitable organizations
shall not apply to this paragraph, except where all profits inure to the
benefit of such charitable organizations.
      5.   Carnival And Amusement Rides: Every person carrying on a ferris
wheel, scenic railway, merry-go-round, swing, kiddy car, airplane or similar
amusement device shall pay a license fee of five dollars ($5.00) per day for
each such device. (1975 Code §5-1.33)
   B.   Wrestling Or Boxing Exhibitions: Every person carrying on the business
of conducting wrestling or boxing exhibitions shall pay a license tax of fifty
dollars ($50.00) per exhibition; provided, however, that any charitable or
fraternal organization or any organization of veterans of the United States
army, navy or marine corps operating on a national scale and having a local
post or branch of such national organization, and any active unit of the
national guard having local headquarters shall not be required to pay the
license tax set forth above where the net income from such boxing or sparring
match or wrestling match does not inure to the benefit of private individuals
or private members of such organizations, post or branch, and where such boxing
or wrestling match is conducted directly by, in the name of, and subject to,
the control of such organization, post or branch. Any such charitable or
fraternal organization of veterans complying with the provisions contained
herein shall pay a license tax of five dollars ($5.00) for each such
exhibition. (1975 Code §5-1.37)
   C.   Public Dances: Every person who shall conduct a public dance at which
an admission charge is made shall pay a license tax of ten dollars ($10.00) for
each such public dance. Before a license is granted under this subsection, the
applicant must obtain a permit from the chief of police of the city 1 ;
provided, however, that no license fee shall be required for charitable,
private social, religious, fraternal or school dances. (1975 Code §5-1.38)
 
Notes
1 1. See chapter 4, article C of this title.
3-1A-2-2: VENDING MACHINES; COIN OPERATED MUSIC DEVICES:
Every person engaged in the business of renting out or placing in various
locations within the city automatic merchandise vending machines and coin
operated phonographs or other musical devices delivering music shall pay a
license fee annually in advance as follows, for each such machine placed in the
city:
   A.   On automatic merchandise vending machines where the price per unit is
five cents ($0.05) or less, the sum of three dollars ($3.00) per year for each
such machine; and where the price per unit is over five cents ($0.05), the sum
of five dollars ($5.00) per year.
   B.   On coin operated phonographs or other mechanical devices delivering
music, the sum of twenty five dollars ($25.00) per year.
An application for such license shall be filed each year and such application
shall state the number of machines rented out or placed within the city and the
particular location of each machine. Additional machines placed after the
issuance of the license shall pay at the same annual rate for the remainder of
the year. (1975 Code §5-1.32)
3-1A-2-3: AUCTION ROOMS AND AUCTIONEERS:
   A.   Auction Rooms: Every person carrying on the business of conducting an
auction room or store where auctions are held regularly shall pay a license fee
of two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00) per year; provided, that nothing in this
subsection shall be deemed to apply to or prohibit any merchant who has been
engaged in business in the city for a period of one year or more from selling
or offering for sale at public auction any stock of goods that he may have on
hand at the time when he may in good faith desire to close out such business or
to reduce his stock; provided, further, that nothing in this subsection shall
be deemed to apply to the selling or offering for sale at public auction of
real estate or of livestock or household goods so sold or offered for sale at
the house or on the premises where the same have been in use by the owner
thereof. (1975 Code §5-1.39)
   B.   Auctioneers: Every person carrying on the business of an auctioneer
shall pay an annual license fee of forty dollars ($40.00). This subsection
shall not apply to an auctioneer conducting an auction room in the city. (Ord.
8603, 2-18-1986; amd. 1989 Code)
3-1A-2-4: REAL ESTATE BROKERS WITH NO FIXED PLACE OF BUSINESS:
Every real estate broker who for commissions, sells or offers to sell, or buys
or offers to buy, or who rents or leases or offers to rent or lease any real
estate within the city, or who collects or offers to collect rents or other
debts shall pay a license fee of twenty five dollars ($25.00) per annum. (Ord.
2006-03, 7-18-2006)
3-1A-2-5: APARTMENT HOUSES:
Every person engaged in the business of operating or maintaining an apartment
house shall pay an annual license fee of five dollars ($5.00) for each
apartment, excluding an owner occupied apartment or unit.
As used in this section, the term "apartment house" means:
   A.   Any building or portion thereof which is designed, built, rented,
leased, let or hired to be occupied, or which is occupied as the home or
residence of two (2) or more families living independently of each other and
containing facilities for cooking and preparation of meals; or
   B.   Two (2) or more residential units located on one parcel of land and
designed, built, rented, leased, let or hired to be occupied, or which are
occupied as the homes or residences of two (2) or more families living
independently of each other and containing facilities for cooking and
preparation of meals. (Ord. 8603, 2-18-1986)
3-1A-2-6: BILLPOSTERS:
Every person carrying on the business of advertising by posting, sticking,
tacking, affixing or painting bills or signs to or upon posts, fences,
buildings or other structures, except billboards or advertising signboards,
shall pay a license tax of fifty dollars ($50.00) per quarter. (Ord. 8603, 2-
18-1986)
3-1A-2-7: BANKRUPT, DAMAGED GOODS SALES:
Every person, including a trustee in bankruptcy, who sells in the city any
bankrupt, assigned or damaged goods, wares or merchandise shall pay a license
fee of one hundred dollars ($100.00) per month; provided, however, that this
section shall not apply to any stock of goods owned by any person actually
conducting a permanent place of business in this city, which stock has been
assigned in bankruptcy. (1975 Code §5-1.42)
3-1A-2-8: PEDDLERS AND SOLICITORS:
   A.   Peddlers:
      1.   License Taxes Established: Every person carrying on the business of
a peddler, except as hereinafter provided, shall pay a license tax of twenty
five dollars ($25.00) per month, and except as herein provided, every peddler
of goods, wares or merchandise using a wheeled vehicle shall pay a license fee
of thirty dollars ($30.00) per month.
      2.   Exemptions:
         a.   The provisions of this subsection shall not apply to any person
selling fruits, vegetables, meats, poultry, eggs or dairy products raised or
produced exclusively by himself. (1975 Code §5-1.45)
         b.   Any person who is unable to obtain a livelihood by manual labor
due to physical disability and who has been a resident of the city for six (6)
months or more may, at the discretion of the city council, obtain a license to
hawk or peddle any goods, wares or merchandise without payment of any license
tax or fee by applying to said council. (1975 Code §5-1.44)
   B.   Solicitors: Every person carrying on the business of soliciting or
canvassing or taking orders for retail sales for future delivery of any goods,
wares or merchandise from house to house or by telephone and not having a fixed
place of business in the city, or is not an agent of a principal having a fixed
place of business in the city, shall pay a license tax of thirty dollars
($30.00) per month. (1975 Code §5-1.46)
3-1A-2-9: FORTUNE TELLERS:
   A.   License Fee Established: The license fee for every person who carries
on the business or art of fortune telling as defined in subsection B of this
section or who entertains the public by giving demonstrations of said defined
practices shall be fifty dollars ($50.00) per quarter. (Ord. 8603, 2-18-1986)
   B.   Definition Of Fortune Telling: "Fortune telling" is defined in section
5-4-2 of this code.
      1.   The provisions of this section shall not apply to any person solely
by reason of the fact that he or she is engaged in the business of entertaining
the public by demonstrations of mind reading, mental telepathy, thought
conveyance or the giving of horoscopic readings at public places and within the
hearing of other persons, and at which no questions are answered as part of
such entertainment except in a manner to permit all persons present at such
public place to hear such answers, when not conducted in connection with the
business of telling fortunes. Nothing in this section, however, shall be
construed as exempting any person from the payment of the applicable license
fee, if any, required to be paid by the licensing provisions contained in title
5, chapter 4 of this code.
      2.   No person shall be required to pay any fee or take out any license
for carrying on the art of reading tea leaves in a bona fide, regularly
established restaurant for the purpose of amusement of the patrons of the
restaurant where no charge for such reading is made. (Ord. 2002-10, 8-6-2002)
   C.   Exceptions: The provisions of this section shall not be construed to
prohibit or interfere with the exercise of any religious or spiritual functions
of any priest, minister, rector or any accredited representative of any bona
fide church or religion where such priest, minister, rector or accredited
representative holds a certificate of credit, commission or ordination under
the ecclesiastical laws of a religious corporation incorporated under the laws
of any state or territory of the United States of America, or any voluntary
religious association, and who fully conforms to the rites and practices
prescribed by the supreme conferences, convocation, convention, assembly,
association or synod of the system or faith with which they are affiliated. Any
church or religious organization which is organized for the primary purpose of
conferring certificates of commission, credit or ordination for a price, and
not primarily for the purpose of teaching and practicing a religious doctrine
or belief, shall not be deemed to be a bona fide church or religious
organization.
   No person conducting the activities described in this subsection shall be
required to obtain a license or pay a fee. (Ord. 8603, 2-18-1986)
3-1A-2-10: LICENSE TAXES PER VEHICLE:
   A.   Generally; No Fixed Place Of Business: Unless otherwise provided in
this chapter, every person engaged in the business of transporting or
distributing goods, wares, services and merchandise in the city and not having
a fixed place of business in the city, shall pay a license tax of thirty
dollars ($30.00) per year per vehicle for each vehicle regularly used in the
city in such business; provided, however, that no such person shall be required
to pay more than a total of one hundred dollars ($100.00) per year, regardless
of the number of vehicles so used. (1975 Code §5-1.30)
   B.   Trucking: Every person having a fixed place of business within the city
and carrying on the business of operating any truck, trailer or other vehicle
for the transportation of baggage, freight, household goods, merchandise or
materials for hire which may or may not operate over a defined route within the
city shall pay an annual license tax of thirty dollars ($30.00) for the first
truck and thirty dollars ($30.00) for each additional truck. (1975 Code §5-
1.29)
   C.   Gasoline And Oil Distributors: Every person engaged in the business of
distributing crude oil, petroleum, distillate, kerosene, gasoline, refined oil
or any other product of an oil well must pay a license tax of thirty dollars
($30.00) per year for each vehicle regularly used in such distribution in or
from the city. (Ord. 8603, 2-18-1986)
      For the purpose of this subsection, occasional deliveries of pickup
trucks shall not be subject to payment of the tax specified in this subsection.
(1975 Code §5-1.27)
      For the purpose of this section, a truck-tractor, a semitrailer and a
truck-trailer shall be considered as one vehicle. (1975 Code §§5-1.27, 5-1.29,
5-1.30)
3-1A-3: PROFESSIONS AND VOCATIONS; OPTIONAL METHOD OF TAX PAYMENT:
Every person who, at a permanent place of business within the city, conducts or
carries on one or more of the professions or vocations herein enumerated shall
pay a license fee as follows:
For each separate person duly licensed to practice said profession in one
office, or connected suite of offices, whether a partner, employee or
associate, the sum of fifty dollars ($50.00) per annum, which sum shall also
include the first person assisting in conducting said office as a stenographer,
secretary, clerk, nurse or other assistant, and for each additional person
assisting, the additional sum of five dollars ($5.00) per annum. The license
fee for the current year shall be based upon the employment in said
professional office at the close of the preceding year.
Said license fees shall apply to the following:
   Accountant
   Appraiser
   Architect
   Assayer
   Attorney at law
   Bacteriologist
   Broker - stock, bond or real estate
   Chemist
   Chiropodist
   Chiropractor
   Dentist
   Engineer - civil, electrical, chemical, mechanical
   Geologist
   Optician
   Optometrist
   Osteopath or osteopathist
   Physician or surgeon
   Tax consultant
   Veterinarian
Anyone required to pay a license tax under this section may in lieu thereof pay
the tax imposed on his gross receipts generated from within the city imposed
pursuant to section
3-1A-1 of this article. (Ord. 2006-03, 7-18-2006)
CHAPTER 2
DOWNTOWN BUSINESS IMPROVEMENT AREA
SECTION:
3-2-1: Authority
3-2-2: Designation And Description Of Area
3-2-3: Assessment Imposed Within Area
3-2-4: Disposition And Use Of Assessment Revenue
3-2-5: Dissolution Of The Downtown Merchants Advisory Committee
3-2-6: Enforcement Of Provisions
3-2-1: AUTHORITY:
This Chapter is adopted pursuant to the authority of the "Parking and Business
Improvement Area Law of 1965", being sections 36000 et seq., of the Streets and
Highways Code of the State of California. (1975 Code §5-2.01)
3-2-2: DESIGNATION AND DESCRIPTION OF AREA:
   A.   Area Designated: There is hereby created and established a parking and
business improvement area designated as "Downtown Business Improvement Area of
the City of Lemoore," hereinafter for brevity and convenience referred to as
"Area".
   B.   Area Description: All of the property included within the boundaries
indicated below as shown by the Official Map of the City, recorded on April 4,
1901, in Volume 1 at page 52 of Licensed Surveyor Plats, County of Kings, State
of California:
      Beginning at the intersection of the centerline of "B" Street and the
centerline of Lemoore Avenue as shown on said Official Map;
      Thence Northerly along the centerline of Lemoore Avenue to the centerline
of the railroad right-of-way;
      Thence Southwesterly along the centerline of said railroad right-of-way
to the extension of the centerline of Hill Street;
      Thence Southeasterly along the alignment of the centerline of Hill Street
to the centerline of "B" Street;
      Thence Northeasterly along the centerline of "B" Street to the point of
beginning. (Ord. 9502, 2-21-1995; amd. Ord. 2020-01, 2-18-2020)
3-2-3: ASSESSMENT IMPOSED WITHIN AREA:
   A.   Assessment Imposed: Effective January 1, 1976, there is hereby imposed
a Business Improvement Area Assessment, to be known as the "assessment" upon
all permanent businesses located within the boundaries of the Downtown Business
Improvement Area of the City established by this Chapter.
   The initial rate of increase or additional levy of the assessment imposed by
this Chapter is an amount equal to one hundred percent (100%) of the business
license taxes imposed by Chapter 1 of this Title as the same apply to permanent
businesses located within the boundaries of the Downtown Business Improvement
Area of the City established by this Chapter and which are required to pay a
license tax upon an annual or quarterly basis under the provisions of said
Chapter 1 of this Title. As to those businesses subject to the assessment which
are exempt from the business license tax imposed by Chapter 1 of this Title,
the amount of the assessment shall be established in the manner provided in
Streets and Highways Code sections 36500 et seq.
   B.   Business Subject To Assessment: All businesses, including but not
limited to financial institutions, professions and retail stores, located
within the Area, are subject to and shall pay the assessment.
   C.   Collection Of Assessment: The collection of the initial rate of
increase or additional levy of assessments imposed by this Chapter shall be
made at the same time and in the same manner as the ordinary business license
tax of the City under the provisions of Chapter 1 of this Title as the same
apply to businesses which are required to pay a license upon an annual or
quarterly basis. Such assessments shall be computed in the manner provided for
in said Chapter 1 of this Title as the same applies to businesses paying a
regular business license tax on an annual or quarterly basis.
   D.   Exemption From Assessment; Voluntary Contribution: Any business, person
or institution located within said Area which is exempt from the payment of the
assessment imposed by this Chapter by reason of the provisions of the United
States or California Constitution is not to be assessed under this chapter but
may make a voluntary contribution to the City. Such contributions shall be used
for the purposes provided in subsection
3-2-4C of this chapter. (Ord. 9502, 2-21-1995)
3-2-4: DISPOSITION AND USE OF ASSESSMENT REVENUE:
   A.   Budget: The Council may annually approve a budget to include an
estimate of expenditures to be made to carry out the purposes of the downtown
business improvement area of the City.
   B.   Disposition Of Assessment Revenue: The revenues received from the levy
of business assessments imposed by this chapter and all voluntary contributions
shall be deposited in the Downtown Business Improvement Fund created by
subsection D of this section.
   C.   Use Of Assessment Revenue: The uses to which the revenues received by
the business assessments imposed by this chapter and all voluntary
contributions are to be put are as follows:
      1.   The acquisition, construction, installation or maintenance of
parking facilities, benches, trash receptacles, street lighting, decorations,
parks and fountains for the benefit of the area.
      2.   Decoration of any public place in the area.
      3.   Promotion of public events which are to take place on or in public
places in the area.
      4.   Furnishing of music in any public place in the area.
      5.   The general promotion of activities which benefit business located
in the area.
      6.   Promotion of tourism within the area.
   D.   Downtown Business Improvement Fund:
      1.   Fund Established: There is hereby established in the City, to be
designated as the Downtown Business Improvement Fund, a fund to be used for the
purposes enumerated herein.
      2.   Use Of Fund: All revenues deposited in the Downtown Business
Improvement Fund shall be used for the following purposes:
         a.   The acquisition, construction, installation or maintenance of
parking facilities, benches, trash receptacles, street lighting, decorations,
parks and fountains for the benefit of the area.
         b.   Decoration of any public place in the area.
         c.   Promotion of public events which are to take place on or in
public places in the area.
         d.   Furnishing of music in any public place in the area.
         e.   The general promotion of activities which benefit business
located in the area.
         f.   Promotion of tourism within the area. (Ord. 9502, 2-21-1995)
3-2-5: DISSOLUTION OF THE DOWNTOWN MERCHANTS ADVISORY COMMITTEE:
The Downtown Merchants Advisory Committee, created by this Title 3, Chapter 2,
is dissolved as of December 1, 2020 by operation of this ordinance. The terms
of all existing members shall end on December 1, 2020. All extant duties of the
Advisory Committee shall revert to the City Council. City Council shall
consider and make decisions regarding the operation and extent of the area, the
methods and ways in which the revenue derived from the assessment imposed by
this Chapter shall be used within the scope of the purposes set forth in this
Chapter, and perform any other duties deemed necessary to carry out the
provisions of this Chapter. The City Council retains the ability to work in
conjunction with downtown merchants in order to effectuate the provisions of
this section. (Ord. 2017-12, 9-19-2017; amd. Ord. 2020-09, 12-1-2020)
3-2-6: ENFORCEMENT OF PROVISIONS:
It shall be the duty of the license tax collector and his deputies to enforce
the provisions of this chapter. It shall be the duty of all police officers to
cause complaints to be filed against all persons violating any of the
provisions of this chapter. (Ord. 9502, 2-21-1995)
CHAPTER 3
OCCUPATION TAXES
ARTICLE A. SALES AND USE TAX
SECTION:
3-3A-1: Short Title
3-3A-2: Purpose
3-3A-3: Operative Date; Contract With State
3-3A-4: State Laws Adopted
3-3A-5: Rate Of Sales And Use Tax
3-3A-6: Sales Tax
3-3A-7: Use Tax
3-3A-8: Exclusions And Exemptions
3-3A-9: Enjoining Collection Prohibited
3-3A-10: Existing Sales And Use Tax Ordinances
3-3A-11: Violation And Penalties
3-3A-1: SHORT TITLE:
This Article shall be known as the UNIFORM LOCAL SALES AND USE TAX ORDINANCE.
(1975 Code §3-1.01)
3-3A-2: PURPOSE:
The City Council hereby declares that this Article is adopted to achieve the
following purposes, among others, and directs that the provisions hereof be
interpreted in order to accomplish those purposes:
   A.   To adopt a sales and use tax ordinance which complies with the
requirements and limitations contained in part 1.5 of division 2 of the Revenue
and Taxation Code of California;
   B.   To adopt a sales and use tax ordinance which incorporates provisions
identical to those of the Sales and Use Tax Law 1 of the State of California
insofar as those provisions are not inconsistent with the requirements and
limitations contained in part 1.5 of division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation
Code;
   C.   To adopt a sales and use tax ordinance which imposes a tax and provides
a measure therefor that can be administered and collected by the State Board of
Equalization in a manner that adapts itself as fully as practicable to, and
requires the least possible deviation from the existing statutory and
administrative procedures followed by the State Board of Equalization in
administering and collecting the California State sales and use taxes;
   D.   To adopt a sales and use tax ordinance which can be administered in a
manner that will, to the degree possible consistent with the provisions of part
1.5 of division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code, minimize the cost of
collecting City sales and use taxes and at the same time minimize the burden of
record keeping upon persons subject to taxation under the provisions of this
Article. (1975 Code §3-1.04)
 
Notes
1 1. West's Ann. Cal. Rev. and Tax. Code §§7200 et seq. 
3-3A-3: OPERATIVE DATE; CONTRACT WITH STATE:
This Chapter shall be operative on January 1, 1974, and prior thereto, the City
shall contract with the State Board of Equalization to perform all functions
incident to the administration and operation of this sales and use tax Article;
provided, that if the City shall not have contracted with the State Board of
Equalization prior to said operative date, it shall nevertheless so contract
and in such a case the operative date shall be the first day of the first
calendar quarter following the execution of such a contract rather than the
first day of the first calendar quarter following the adoption of this Article.
(1975 Code §§3-1.03, 3-1.05)
3-3A-4: STATE LAWS ADOPTED:
Except as otherwise provided in this Article and except insofar as they are
inconsistent with the provisions of part 1.5 of division 2 of the Revenue and
Taxation Code, all of the provisions of part 1 of division 2 of the Revenue and
Taxation Code are hereby adopted and made a part of this Article as though
fully set forth herein. (1975 Code §3-1.09)
All subsequent amendments of the Revenue and Taxation Code which relate to the
sales and use tax and which are not inconsistent with part 1.5 of division 2 of
the Revenue and Taxation Code shall automatically become a part of this
Article. (1975 Code §3-1.15)
In adopting the provisions of part 1 of division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation
Code, wherever the State of California is named or referred to as the taxing
agency, the name of this City shall be substituted therefor. The substitution,
however, shall not be made when the word "State" is used as part of the title
of the State Controller, the State Treasurer, the State Board of Control, the
State Board of Equalization, the State Treasury or the Constitution of the
State of California; the substitution shall not be made when the result of that
substitution would require action to be taken by or against the City or any
agency thereof rather than by or against the State Board of Equalization in
performing the functions incident to the administration or operation of this
Article; the substitution shall not be made in those sections including, but
not necessarily limited to, sections referring to the exterior boundaries of
the State of California where the result of the substitution would be to
provide an exemption from this tax with respect to certain sales, storage, use
or other consumption of tangible personal property which would not otherwise be
exempt from this tax while such sales, storage, use or other consumption remain
subject to tax by the State under the provisions of part 1 of division 2 of the
Revenue and Taxation Code, or to impose this tax with respect to certain sales,
storage, use or other consumption of tangible personal property which would not
be subject to tax by the State under the said provisions of that Code; the
substitution shall not be made in sections 6701, 6702 (except in the last
sentence thereof), 6711, 6715, 6737, 6797 or 6828 of the Revenue and Taxation
Code; and the substitution shall not be made for the word "State" in the phrase
"retailer engaged in business in this State" in section 6203 or in the
definition of that phrase in section 6203. (1975 Code §3-1.10)
3-3A-5: RATE OF SALES AND USE TAX:
The rate of sales tax and use tax imposed by this Article shall be ninety
eight-hundredths of one percent (.98%). (1975 Code §3-1.02)
3-3A-6: SALES TAX:
   A.   Tax Imposed: For the privilege of selling tangible personal property at
retail, a tax is hereby imposed upon all retailers in the City at the rate
stated in Section 3-2A-5 of the gross receipts of the retailer from the sale of
all tangible personal property sold at retail in this City on and after the
operative date hereof. (1975 Code §3-1.06)
   B.   Place of Sale:
      1.   For the purposes of this Article, all retail sales are consummated
at the place of business of the retailer unless the tangible personal property
sold is delivered by the retailer or his agent to an out-of-State destination
or to a common carrier for delivery to an out-of-State destination. The gross
receipts from such sales shall include delivery charges when such charges are
subject to the State sales and use tax, regardless of the place to which
delivery is made.
      2.   In the event a retailer has no permanent place of business in the
State or has more than one place of business, the place or places at which the
retail sales are consummated shall be determined under rules and regulations to
be prescribed and adopted by the State Board of Equalization. (1975 Code 83-
1.07)
   C.   Seller's Permit: If a seller's permit has been issued to a retailer
under section 6067 of the Revenue and Taxation Code, an additional seller's
permit shall not be required by this Article. (1975 Code §3-1.11)
3-3A-7: USE TAX:
An excise tax is hereby imposed on the storage, use or other consumption in
this City of tangible personal property purchased from any retailer on and
after the operative date for storage, use or other consumption in this City at
the rate stated in Section
3-3A-5 of the sales price of the property. The sales price shall include
delivery charges when such charges are subject to State sales or use tax
regardless of the place to which delivery is made. (1975 Code §3-1.08)
3-3A-8: EXCLUSIONS AND EXEMPTIONS:
   A.   Exclusions and Exemptions Specified:
      1.   There shall be excluded from the measure of tax:
         a.   The amount of any sales or use tax imposed by the State of
California upon a retailer or consumer.
         b.   The storage, use or other consumption of tangible personal
property, the gross receipts from the sale of which have been subject to sales
tax under a sales and use tax ordinance enacted in accordance with part 1.5 of
division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code by any city and county, county, or
city in this State.
         c.   The gross receipts from sales to, and the storage, use or other
consumption of property purchased by operators of common carriers and
waterborne vessels to be used or consumed in the operation of such common
carriers or waterborne vessels principally outside this City.
         d.   The storage or use of tangible personal property in the
transportation or transmission of persons, property or communications, or in
the generation, transmission or distribution of electricity, or in the
manufacture, transmission or distribution of gas in intrastate, interstate or
foreign commerce by public utilities which are regulated by the Public
Utilities Commission of the State of California. (1975 Code §3-1.12)
      2.   Additionally:
         a.   The amount subject to tax shall not include any sales or use tax
imposed by the State of California upon a retailer or consumer.
         b.   The storage, use or other consumption of tangible personal
property, the gross receipts from the sale of which have been subject to tax
under a sales and use tax ordinance enacted in accordance with part 1.5 of
division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code by any city and county, county, or
city in this State shall be exempt from the tax due under this Article.
         c.   There are exempted from the computation of the amount of the
sales tax the gross receipts from the sale of tangible personal property to
operators of waterborne vessels to be used or consumed principally outside the
City in which the sale is made and directly and exclusively in the carriage of
persons or property in such vessels for commercial purposes.
         d.   The storage, use or other consumption of tangible personal
property purchased by operators of waterborne vessels and used or consumed by
such operators directly and exclusively in the carriage of persons or property
of such vessels for commercial purposes is exempted from the use tax.
         e.   There are exempted from the computation of the amount of the
sales tax the gross receipts from the sale of tangible personal property to
operators of aircraft to be used or consumed principally outside the City in
which the sale is made and directly and exclusively in the use of such aircraft
as common carriers of persons or property under the authority of the laws of
this State, the United States or any foreign government.
         f.   In addition to the exemptions provided in sections 6366 and
6366.1 of the Revenue and Taxation Code, the storage, use or other consumption
of tangible personal property purchased by operators of aircraft and used or
consumed by such operators directly and exclusively in the use of such aircraft
as common carriers of persons or property for hire or compensation under a
certificate of public convenience and necessity issued pursuant to the laws of
this State, the United States or any foreign government is exempted from the
use tax. (1975 Code §3-1.13)
   B.   Application of Provisions Relating to Exclusions and Exemptions:
      1.   Subsection A2 of this Section shall become operative on January 1 of
the year following the year in which the State Board of Equalization adopts an
assessment ratio for State-assessed property which is identical to the ratio
which is required for local assessments by section 401 of the Revenue and
Taxation Code, at which time subsection A1 of this Section shall become
inoperative.
      2.   In the event that subsection A2 of this Section becomes operative
and the State Board of Equalization subsequently adopts an assessment ratio for
the State-assessed property which is higher than the ratio which is required
for local assessments by section 401 of the Revenue and Taxation Code,
subsection A1 of this Section shall become operative on the first day of the
month next following the month in which such higher ratio is adopted, at which
time subsection A2 hereof shall be inoperative until the first day of the month
following the month in which the Board again adopts an assessment ratio for
State-assessed property which is identical to the ratio required for local
assessments by section 401 of the Revenue and Taxation Code, at which time
subsection A2 shall again become operative and subsection A1 shall become
inoperative. (1975 Code §3-1.14)
3-3A-9: ENJOINING COLLECTION PROHIBITED:
No injunction or writ of mandate or other legal or equitable process shall
issue in any suit, action or proceeding in any court against the State or this
City, or against any officer of the State or this City, to prevent or enjoin
the collection under this Article, or part 1.5 of division 2 of the Revenue and
Taxation Code, of any tax or any amount of tax required to be collected. (1975
Code §3-1.16)
3-3A-10: EXISTING SALES AND USE TAX ORDINANCES:
At the time this Article goes into operation, the provisions of Ordinances 228,
271, 280 and 327 shall be suspended and shall not again be of any force or
effect until and unless for any reason the State Board of Equalization ceases
to perform the functions incident to the administration and operation of the
sales and use tax hereby imposed; provided, however, that if for any reason it
is determined that the City is without power to adopt this Article, or that the
State Board of Equalization is without power to perform the functions incident
to the administration and operation of the taxes imposed by this Article, the
provisions of Ordinances 271, 228, 280 and 327 shall not be deemed to have been
suspended, but shall be deemed to have been in full force and effect at the
rate of one percent (1%) continuously from and after July 1, 1957. Upon the
ceasing of the state board of equalization to perform the functions incident to
the administration and operation of the taxes imposed by this article, the
provisions of ordinances 228, 271, 280 and 327 shall again be in full force and
effect at the rate of one percent (1%). Nothing in this article shall be
construed as relieving any person of the obligation to pay to the city any
sales and use tax accrued and owing by the reason of the provisions of
ordinances 228, 271, 280 and 327 in force and effect prior to and including
June 30, 1957. (1975 Code §3-1.19)
3-3A-11: VIOLATION AND PENALTIES:
Any person violating any of the provisions of this article shall be deemed
guilty of a misdemeanor, and upon conviction thereof shall be punishable by a
fine of not more than five hundred dollars ($500.00) or by imprisonment for a
period of not more than six (6) months, or by both such fine and imprisonment.
(1975 Code §3-1.17)
ARTICLE B. TRANSIENT OCCUPANCY TAX
SECTION:
3-3B-1: Title
3-3B-2: Definitions
3-3B-3: Tax Imposed
3-3B-4: Exemptions From Tax
3-3B-5: Registration Of Operator
3-3B-6: Collection, Reporting And Remittance Of Tax
3-3B-7: Deficiency Determinations
3-3B-8: Appeals
3-3B-9: Tax Refunds
3-3B-10: Records Kept
3-3B-11: Disposition Of Revenue
3-3B-12: Unpaid Taxes A Debt To City
3-3B-13: Violations
3-3B-14: Successor Of Operator's Duties
3-3B-1: TITLE:
This article shall be known as the TRANSIENT OCCUPANCY TAX ORDINANCE OF THE
CITY OF LEMOORE. (Ord. 8404, 6-19-1984)
3-3B-2: DEFINITIONS:
Except where the context otherwise requires, the definitions given in this
section shall govern the construction of this article.
HOTEL: Any recreational vehicle park, any structure, or any portion of any
structure which is occupied, or intended or designed for occupancy, by
transients for dwelling, lodging or sleeping purposes and shall include any
hotel, inn, tourist home or house, motel, studio hotel, bachelor hotel, lodging
house, rooming house, apartment house, dormitory, public or private club,
mobilehome or house trailer at a fixed location, or other similar structure, or
portion thereof.
OCCUPANCY: The use or possession, or the right to the use or possession of any
room, or portion thereof, in any hotel for dwelling, lodging or sleeping
purposes.
OPERATOR: The person who is the proprietor of the hotel, whether in the
capacity of owner, lessee, sublessee, mortgagee in possession, licensee or any
other capacity. Where the operator performs his functions through a managing
agent of any type or character other than an employee, the managing agent shall
also be deemed an operator for the purposes of this article and shall have the
same duties and liabilities as his principal. Compliance with the provisions of
this article by either the principal or the managing agent shall, however, be
considered to be compliance by both.
PERSON: Any individual, firm, partnership, joint venture, association, social
club, fraternal organization, joint stock company, corporation, estate, trust,
business trust, receiver, trustee, syndicate or any other group or combination
acting as a unit.
RENT: The consideration charged, whether or not received, for the occupancy of
space in a hotel valued in money, whether to be received in money, goods, labor
or otherwise, including all receipts, cash, credits, property and services of
any kind or nature, without any deduction therefrom whatsoever.
TAX ADMINISTRATOR: The finance director of the city, to be charged with the
administration of the transient occupancy tax.
TRANSIENT: Any person who exercises occupancy or is entitled to occupancy by
reason of concession, permit, right of access, license or other agreement for a
period of thirty (30) consecutive calendar days or less, counting portions of
calendar days as full days. Any such person so occupying space in a hotel shall
be deemed to be a transient until the period of thirty (30) days has expired
unless there is an agreement in writing between the operator and the occupant
providing for a longer period of occupancy. In determining whether a person is
a transient, uninterrupted periods of time extending both prior and subsequent
to the effective date hereof may be considered. (Ord. 8404, 6-19-1984; amd. per
letter dated 12-1-1997; Ord. 2004-2, 7-20-2004)
3-3B-3: TAX IMPOSED:
For the privilege of occupancy in any hotel, each transient shall be subject to
and shall pay a tax in the amount of a percentage of the rent charged by the
operator. Such tax shall constitute a debt owed by the transient to the city,
which debt shall be extinguished only by payment to the operator or to the
city. The transient shall pay the tax to the operator of the hotel at the time
the rent is paid. If the rent is paid in installments, a proportionate share of
the tax shall be paid with each installment. The unpaid tax shall be due upon
the transient's ceasing to occupy space in the hotel. If for any reason the tax
is not paid to the operator of the hotel, the finance director may require that
such tax shall be paid directly to the finance director.
The rate to be charged by the city for transient occupancy within the city
shall be established by resolution of the city council after a duly noticed
public hearing regarding the establishment of said rate. (Ord. 8404, 6-19-1984)
3-3B-4: EXEMPTIONS FROM TAX:
No tax shall be imposed under this article upon:
   A.   Any person as to whom, or any occupancy as to which, it is beyond the
power of the city to impose the tax herein provided for;
   B.   Any federal or state officer or employee when on official business;
   C.   Any officer or employee of a foreign government, which officer or
employee is exempt by reason of express provision of federal law or
international treaty;
   D.   Any occupant whose rent is of a value of less than two dollars ($2.00)
per day; or
   E.   Any occupant for more than thirty (30) successive calendar days.
No exemption shall be granted pursuant to subsections A, B and C of this
section except upon a claim therefor made at the time the rent is collected and
under penalty of perjury upon a form prescribed by the finance director. (Ord.
8404, 6-19-1984)
3-3B-5: REGISTRATION OF OPERATOR:
On or before September 1, 1984, or within thirty (30) days after commencing
business, whichever is later, each operator of any hotel renting an occupancy
to transients shall register such hotel with the finance director and obtain
from him/her a transient occupancy registration certificate which shall at all
times be posted in a conspicuous place on the premises. Such certificate shall,
among other things, set forth the following information:
   A.   The name of the operator;
   B.   The address of the hotel;
   C.   The date upon which the certificate was issued;
   D.   A statement as follows:
   This transient occupancy registration certificate signifies that the person
named on the face hereof has fulfilled the requirements of the Transient
Occupancy Tax Ordinance registering with the Finance Director for the purpose
of collecting from transients the transient occupancy tax and remitting such
tax to the Finance Director. This certificate shall not authorize any person to
conduct any unlawful business or to conduct any lawful business in an unlawful
manner, nor to operate a hotel without strictly complying with all local
applicable laws, including, but not limited to, those requiring a permit from
any board, commission, department or office of this City. This certificate does
not constitute a permit;
and
   E.   Such additional information as may be required by the finance director.
   Such privilege of registration after September 1, 1984, shall not relieve
any person from the obligation of the collection and payment of the tax after
September 1, 1984, regardless of registration. (Ord. 8404, 6-19-1984)
3-3B-6: COLLECTION, REPORTING AND REMITTANCE OF TAX:
   A.   Collection Of Tax: Each operator shall collect the tax imposed by the
provisions of this article to the same extent and at the same time as the rent
is collected from every transient. The amount of tax shall be separately stated
from the amount of the rent charged, and each transient shall receive a receipt
for payment from the operator. No operator of a hotel shall advertise or state
in any manner, whether directly or indirectly, that the tax, or any part
thereof, will be assumed or absorbed by the operator, or that it will not be
added to the rent, or that, if added, any part will be refunded except in the
manner provided in this article.
   B.   Reporting And Remitting: Each operator shall, on or before the last day
of the month following the close of each calendar quarter, or at the close of
any shorter reporting period which may be established by the finance director,
make a return to the finance director on forms provided by him/her of the total
rents charged and received and the amount of tax collected for transient
occupancies. At the time the return is filed, the full amount of the tax
collected shall be remitted to the finance director. The finance director may
establish shorter reporting periods for any certificate holder if he deems it
necessary in order to ensure collection of the tax, and he may require further
information in the return. Returns and payments shall be due immediately upon
cessation of business for any reason. All taxes collected by operators pursuant
to the provisions of this article shall be held in trust for the account of the
city until payment thereof is made to the finance director.
   If a remittance to cover a payment required by the provisions of this
article to be made to the finance director on or before a specified date is
sent through the United States mail, properly addressed, with postage prepaid,
it shall be deemed to have been received by the finance director on the date
shown by the post office cancellation mark stamped upon the envelope containing
the remittance or on the date it was mailed if proof satisfactory to the
finance director established that the mailing occurred on an earlier date.
Nothing in this paragraph shall be construed as constituting payment of any
remittance required unless such remittance is actually received by the finance
director.
   C.   Failure To Collect And Report Tax; Estimates: If the operator shall
fail or refuse to collect such tax, or any portion thereof, required by the
provisions of this article, the finance director shall proceed in such manner
as he/she may deem best to obtain the facts and information on which to base
his estimate of the tax due. As soon as the finance director shall procure such
facts and information as he is able to obtain upon which to base the assessment
of any such tax imposed by the provisions of this article and payable by any
operator who has failed or refused to collect the same and to make such report
and remittance, the finance director shall proceed to determine and assess
against such operator the tax, interest and penalties provided for by the
provisions of this article. In the event such determination is made, the
finance director shall give notice of the amount so assessed by serving it
personally or by depositing it in the United States mail, postage prepaid,
addressed to the operator so assessed at his last known place of address. Such
operator may, within ten (10) days after the service or mailing of such notice,
make an application in writing to the finance director for a hearing on the
amount assessed. If an application by the operator for a hearing is not made
within the time prescribed, the tax, interest and penalties, if any, determined
by the finance director shall become final and conclusive and immediately due
and payable. If such an application is made, the finance director shall give
not less than five (5) days' written notice in the manner prescribed in this
subsection to the operator to show cause at a time and place fixed in such
notice why the amount specified therein should not be fixed for such tax,
interest and penalties. At such hearing, the operator may appear and offer
evidence why such specified tax, interest and penalties shall not be so fixed.
After such hearing, the finance director shall determine the proper tax to be
remitted and shall thereafter give written notice to the operator in the manner
prescribed in this subsection of such determination and the amount of such tax,
interest and penalties. The amount determined to be due shall be payable
fifteen (15) days after the service or mailing of such notice unless an appeal
is filed as provided in section
3-3B-8 of this article.
   D.   Failure To Remit Tax; Penalties And Interest:
      1.   Original Delinquency: Any operator who shall fail to remit any tax
imposed by the provisions of this article within the time required shall pay a
penalty in the amount of ten percent (10%) of the tax in addition to the amount
of the tax.
      2.   Continued Delinquency: Any operator who shall fail to remit any
delinquent remittance on or before a period of thirty (30) days following the
date on which the remittance first became delinquent shall pay a second
delinquency penalty in the amount of ten percent (10%) of the tax in addition
to the amount of the tax and the ten percent (10%) penalty first imposed.
      3.   Fraud: If the finance director shall determine that the nonpayment
of any remittance due pursuant to the provisions of this article is due to
fraud, a penalty in the amount of twenty five percent (25%) of the amount of
the tax shall be added thereto in addition to the penalties set forth in
subsections D1 and D2 of this section.
      4.   Interest: In addition to the penalties imposed, any operator who
shall fail to remit any tax imposed by the provisions of this article shall pay
interest at the rate of one-half of one percent (0.5%) per month or fraction
thereof, on the amount of the tax, exclusive of penalties, from the date on
which the remittance first became delinquent until paid.
      5.   Penalties And Interest Merged With Tax: Every penalty imposed, and
such interest as accrues pursuant to the provisions of this subsection, shall
become a part of the tax required to be paid by the provisions of this article.
(Ord. 8404, 6-19-1984)
3-3B-7: DEFICIENCY DETERMINATIONS:
If the finance director is not satisfied with a return filed by an operator or
the amount of the tax required to be paid to the city pursuant to a return, he
may compute and determine the amount required to be paid upon the basis of the
facts contained in the return or upon the basis of any information within his
possession, or that may come into his possession. One or more deficiency
determinations may be made of the amount due for any period. The finance
director shall give to the operator written notice of his determination in the
same manner as provided in subsection
3-3B-6C of this article. The operator shall be entitled to apply for a hearing
on the amount assessed to him pursuant to the procedure set forth in said
subsection
3-3B-6C of this article and shall thereafter be entitled to appeal to the
council in accordance with the provisions of section
3-3B-8 of this article. The penalties and interest provided in subsection
3-3B-6D of this article shall be applicable to the amount of deficiency
established pursuant to the provisions of this section. (Ord. 8404, 6-19-1984)
3-3B-8: APPEALS:
Any operator aggrieved by any decision of the finance director with respect to
the amount of such tax, interest and penalties, if any, may appeal to the
council by filing a notice of appeal with the city clerk within fifteen (15)
days after the service or mailing of the determination of the tax due. The
council shall fix a time and place for hearing such appeal, and the city clerk
shall give notice in writing to such operator at his last known place of
address. The decision of the council shall be final and conclusive and shall be
served upon the appellant in the manner prescribed in this article for the
service of a notice of hearing. Any amount found to be due shall be immediately
due and payable upon the service of notice. (Ord. 8404, 6-19-1984)
3-3B-9: TAX REFUNDS:
   A.   Whenever the amount of any tax, interest or penalty has been overpaid,
or paid more than once, or erroneously or illegally collected or received by
the city pursuant to the provisions of this article, such amount may be
refunded as provided in subsections B and C of this section, provided a claim
in writing therefor, stating under penalty of perjury the specific grounds upon
which the claim is found, is filed with the finance director within three (3)
years after the date of payment. The claim shall be on forms furnished by the
finance director.
   B.   Any operator may claim a refund or take as a credit against taxes
collected and remitted the amount overpaid, paid more than once or erroneously
or illegally collected or received when it is established in a manner
prescribed by the finance director that the person from whom the tax has been
collected was not a transient; provided, however, neither a refund nor a credit
shall be allowed unless the amount of the tax so collected has either been
refunded to the transient or credited to rent subsequently payable by the
transient to the operator.
   C.   A transient may obtain a refund of taxes overpaid, paid more than once
or erroneously or illegally collected or received by the city by filing a claim
in the manner provided in subsection A of this section but only when the tax
was paid by the transient directly to the finance director, or when the
transient having paid the tax to the operator, establishes to the satisfaction
of the finance director that the transient has been unable to obtain a refund
from the operator who collected the tax.
   D.   No refund shall be paid pursuant to the provisions of this section
unless the claimant establishes his right thereto by written records showing
entitlement thereto. (Ord. 8404, 6-19-1984)
3-3B-10: RECORDS KEPT:
It shall be the duty of every operator liable for the collection and payment to
the city of any tax imposed by the provisions of this article to keep and
reserve, for a period of three (3) years and six (6) months, all records as may
be necessary to determine the amount of such tax as he may have been liable for
the collection of and payment to the city, which records the finance director
shall have the right to inspect at all reasonable times. (Ord. 8404, 6-19-1984)
3-3B-11: DISPOSITION OF REVENUE:
All funds collected pursuant to the provisions of this article, including
interest and penalties collected for delinquencies, shall be deposited in the
general fund and shall be used for the purposes for which such funds may be
used. Any refunds paid pursuant to the provisions of this article shall be out
of such fund. (Ord. 8404, 6-19-1984)
3-3B-12: UNPAID TAXES A DEBT TO CITY:
Any tax required to be paid by any transient pursuant to the provisions of this
article shall be deemed a debt owed by the transient to the city. Any such tax
collected by an operator which has not been paid to the city shall be deemed a
debt owed by the operator to the city. Any person owing money to the city
pursuant to the provisions of this article shall be liable to an action brought
in the name of the city for the recovery of such amount 1 . (Ord. 8404, 6-19-
1984)
 
Notes
1 1. See section
  1-7-1 of this code.
3-3B-13: VIOLATIONS:
Any operator or other person who fails or refuses to register as required, or
to furnish any return required to be made, or who fails or refuses to furnish a
supplemental return or other data required by the finance director, or who
renders a false or fraudulent return or claim shall be guilty of an infraction.
Any person required to make, render, sign or verify any report or claim and who
makes any false or fraudulent report or claim with intent to defeat or evade
the determination of any amount due required by the provisions of this article
to be made shall be guilty of an infraction. (Ord. 8404, 6-19-1984)
3-3B-14: SUCCESSOR OF OPERATOR'S DUTIES:
If an operator who is liable for any taxes or penalties under this article
sells his/her hotel, the successor shall withhold a sufficient portion of the
purchase price to equal the amount of such tax or penalty, for payment to the
city, until the selling operator produces a receipt from the city showing that
the tax or penalty has been paid or a tax clearance certificate from the city
stating that no tax or penalty is due. If the selling operator does not present
a receipt or tax clearance certificate within thirty (30) days after such
successor commences to conduct business, the successor shall deposit the
withheld amount with the city as payment, pending any settlement of the account
of the selling operator. (Ord. 2004-2, 7-20-2004)
ARTICLE C. TRANSACTIONS AND USE TAX
SECTION:
3-3C-1: Title
3-3C-2: Operative Date
3-3C-3: Purpose
3-3C-4: Contract With State
3-3C-5: Transactions Tax Rate
3-3C-6: Place Of Sale
3-3C-7: Use Tax Rate
3-3C-8: Adoption Of Provisions Of State Law
3-3C-9: Limitation On Adaptation Of State Law And Collection Of Use Taxes
3-3C-10: Permit Not Required
3-3C-11: Exemptions And Exclusions
3-3C-12: Amendments
3-3C-13: Enjoining Collection Forbidden
3-3C-14: Independent Annual Audit
3-3C-15: Citizens Oversight Committee
3-3C-16: Termination Date
3-3C-1: TITLE:
This article shall be known as the City of Lemoore Transactions and Use Tax
(Sales Tax) Ordinance. (Ord. 2024-05, 11-5-2024)
3-3C-2: OPERATIVE DATE:
"Operative Date" means the first day of the first calendar quarter commencing
more than one hundred ten (110) days after the adoption of this article, the
date of such adoption being as set forth below. (Ord. 2024-05, 11-5-2024)
3-3C-3: PURPOSE:
This article is adopted to achieve the following, among other purposes, and
directs that the provisions of this article be interpreted in order to
accomplish those purposes:
   A.   To impose a retail transactions and use tax to be applied throughout
the entire territory of the City to the fullest extent permitted by law and in
accordance with the provisions of Part 1.6 (commencing with Section 7251) of
Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code and Section 7285.9 of Part 1.7 of
Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code, which authorizes the City to adopt
this article which shall be operative if a majority of the electors voting on
the measure vote to approve the imposition of the tax at an election called for
that purpose.
   B.   To adopt a retail transactions and use tax ordinance that incorporates
provisions identical to those of the Sales and Use Tax Law of the State of
California insofar as those provisions are not inconsistent with the
requirements and limitations contained in Part 1.6 of Division 2 of the Revenue
and Taxation Code.
   C.   To adopt a retail transactions and use tax ordinance that imposes a tax
and provides a measure therefor that can be administered and collected by the
California Department of Tax and Fee Administration in a manner that adapts
itself as fully as practicable to, and requires the least possible deviation
from, the existing statutory and administrative procedures followed by the
California Department of Tax and Fee Administration in administering and
collecting the California State Sales and Use Taxes.
   D.   To adopt a retail transactions and use tax ordinance that can be
administered in a manner that will be, to the greatest degree possible,
consistent with the provisions of Part 1.6 of Division 2 of the Revenue and
Taxation Code, minimize the cost of collecting the transactions and use taxes,
and at the same time, minimize the burden of record keeping upon persons
subject to taxation under the provisions of this article. (Ord. 2024-05, 11-5-
2024)
3-3C-4: CONTRACT WITH STATE:
Prior to the operative date, the City shall contract with the California
Department of Tax and Fee Administration to perform all functions incident to
the administration and operation of this transactions and use tax ordinance;
provided, that if the City shall not have contracted with the California
Department of Tax and Fee Administration prior to the operative date, it shall
nevertheless so contract and in such a case the operative date shall be the
first day of the first calendar quarter following the execution of such
contract. (Ord. 2024-05, 11-5-2024)
3-3C-5: TRANSACTIONS TAX RATE:
For the privilege of selling tangible personal property at retail, a tax is
hereby imposed upon all retailers in the incorporated territory of the City at
the rate of up to one percent (1%) of the gross receipts of any retailer for
the sale of all tangible personal property sold at retail in said territory on
and after the operative date of this article. (Ord. 2024-05, 11-5-2024)
3-3C-6: PLACE OF SALE:
For the purposes of this article, all retail sales are consummated at the place
of business of the retailer unless the tangible personal property sold is
delivered by the retailer or his or her agent to an out-of-state destination or
to a common carrier for delivery to an out-of-state destination. The gross
receipts from such sales shall include delivery charges, when such charges are
subject to the State sales and use tax, regardless of the place to which
delivery is made. In the event a retailer has no permanent place of business in
the State or has more than one place of business, the place or places at which
the retail sales are consummated shall be determined under rules and
regulations to be prescribed and adopted by the California Department of Tax
and Fee Administration. (Ord. 2024-05, 11-5-2024)
3-3C-7: USE TAX RATE:
An excise tax is hereby imposed on the storage, use, or other consumption in
the City of tangible personal property purchased from any retailer on and after
the operative date of this Article for storage, use, or other consumption in
said territory at the rate of up to one percent (1%) of the sales price of the
property. The sales price shall include delivery charges when such charges are
subject to State sales or use tax regardless of the place to which delivery is
made. (Ord. 2024-05, 11-5-2024)
3-3C-8: ADOPTION OF PROVISIONS OF STATE LAW:
Except as otherwise provided in this article and except insofar as they are
inconsistent with the provisions of Part 1.6 of Division 2 of the Revenue and
Taxation Code, all of the provisions of Part 1 (commencing with Section 6001)
of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code are hereby adopted and made a
part of this Article as though fully set forth herein. (Ord. 2024-05, 11-5-
2024)
3-3C-9: LIMITATION ON ADOPTION OF STATE LAW AND COLLECTION OF USE TAXES:
In adopting the provisions of Part 1 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation
Code:
   A.   Wherever the State of California is named or referred to as the taxing
agency, the name of this City shall be substituted. The substitution, however,
shall not be made when:
      1.   The word "State" is used as a part of the title of the State
Controller, State Treasurer, State Treasury, or the Constitution of the State
of California.
      2.   The result of that substitution would require action to be taken by
or against this City or any agency, officer, or employee thereof rather than by
or against the California Department of Tax and Fee Administration, in
performing the functions incident to the administration or operation of this
article.
      3.   In those sections, including, but not necessarily limited to,
sections referring to the exterior boundaries of the State of California, where
the result of the substitution would be to:
         a.   Provide an exemption from this tax with respect to certain sales,
storage, use or other consumption of tangible personal property which would not
otherwise be exempt from this tax while such sales, storage, use or other
consumption remain subject to tax by the State under the provisions of Part 1
of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code; or
         b.   Impose this tax with respect to certain sales, storage, use or
other consumption of tangible personal property which would not be subject to
tax by the State under the said provision of that code.
      4.   In Sections 6701, 6702 (except in the last sentence thereof), 6711,
6715, 6737, 6797 or 6828 of the Revenue and Taxation Code.
   B.   The word "City" shall be substituted for the word "State" in the phrase
"retailer engaged in business in this State" in Section 6203 and in the
definition of that phrase in Section 6203.
      1.   "A retailer engaged in business in the City" shall also include any
retailer that, in the preceding calendar year or the current calendar year, has
total combined sales of tangible personal property in this state or for
delivery in the state by the retailer and all persons related to the retailer
that exceeds five hundred thousand dollars ($500,000). For purposes of this
section, a person is related to another person if both persons are related to
each other pursuant to Section 267(b) of the Internal Revenue Code and the
regulations thereunder. (Ord. 2024-05, 11-5-2024)
3-3C-10: PERMIT NOT REQUIRED:
If a seller's permit has been issued to a retailer under Section 6067 of the
Revenue and Taxation Code, an additional transactor's permit shall not be
required by this article. (Ord. 2024-05, 11-5-2024)
3-3C-11: EXEMPTIONS AND EXCLUSIONS:
   A.   There shall be excluded from the measure of the transactions tax and
the use tax the amount of any sales tax or use tax imposed by the State of
California or by any city, city and county, or county pursuant to the Bradley-
Burns Uniform Local Sales and Use Tax Law or the amount of any State-
administered transactions or use tax.
   B.   There are exempted from the computation of the amount of transactions
tax the gross receipts from:
      1.   Sales of tangible personal property, other than fuel or petroleum
products, to operators of aircraft to be used or consumed principally outside
the county in which the sale is made and directly and exclusively in the use of
such aircraft as common carriers of persons or property under the authority of
the laws of this State, the United States, or any foreign government.
      2.   Sales of property to be used outside the City which is shipped to a
point outside the City, pursuant to the contract of sale, by delivery to such
point by the retailer or his or her agent, or by delivery by the retailer to a
carrier for shipment to a consignee at such point. For the purposes of this
paragraph, delivery to a point outside the city shall be satisfied:
         a.   With respect to vehicles (other than commercial vehicles) subject
to registration pursuant to Chapter 1 (commencing with Section 4000) of
Division 3 of the Vehicle Code, aircraft licensed in compliance with Section
21411 of the Public Utilities Code, and undocumented vessels registered under
Division 3.5 (commencing with Section 9840) of the Vehicle Code by registration
to an out-of-City address and by a declaration under penalty of perjury, signed
by the buyer, stating that such address is, in fact, his or her principal place
of residence; and
         b.   With respect to commercial vehicles, by registration to a place
of business out-of-City and declaration under penalty of perjury, signed by the
buyer, that the vehicle will be operated from that address.
      3.   The sale of tangible personal property if the seller is obligated to
furnish the property for a fixed price pursuant to a contract entered into
prior to the operative date of the ordinance codified in this article.
      4.   A lease of tangible personal property which is a continuing sale of
such property, for any period of time for which the lessor is obligated to
lease the property for an amount fixed by the lease prior to the operative date
of the ordinance codified in this article.
      5.   For the purposes of subsections (B)(3) and (B)(4) of this section,
the sale or lease of tangible personal property shall be deemed not to be
obligated pursuant to a contract or lease for any period of time for which any
party to the contract or lease has the unconditional right to terminate the
contract or lease upon notice, whether or not such right is exercised.
   C.   There are exempted from the use tax imposed by this article, the
storage, use or other consumption in this city of tangible personal property:
      1.   The gross receipts from the sale of which have been subject to a
transactions tax under any State-administered transactions and use tax
ordinance.
      2.   Other than fuel or petroleum products purchased by operators of
aircraft and used or consumed by such operators directly and exclusively in the
use of such aircraft as common carriers of persons or property for hire or
compensation under a certificate of public convenience and necessity issued
pursuant to the laws of this State, the United States, or any foreign
government. This exemption is in addition to the exemptions provided in
Sections 6366 and 6366.1 of the Revenue and Taxation Code of the State of
California.
      3.   If the purchaser is obligated to purchase the property for a fixed
price pursuant to a contract entered into prior to the operative date of this
article.
      4.   If the possession of, or the exercise of any right or power over,
the tangible personal property arises under a lease which is a continuing
purchase of such property for any period of time for which the lessee is
obligated to lease the property for an amount fixed by a lease prior to the
operative date of this article.
      5.   For the purposes of subsections (C)(3) and (C)(4) of this section,
storage, use, or other consumption, or possession of, or exercise of any right
or power over, tangible personal property shall be deemed not to be obligated
pursuant to a contract or lease for any period of time for which any party to
the contract or lease has the unconditional right to terminate the contract or
lease upon notice, whether or not such right is exercised.
      6.   Except as provided in subsection (C)(7) of this section, a retailer
engaged in business in the City shall not be required to collect use tax from
the purchaser of tangible personal property, unless the retailer ships or
delivers the property into the city or participates within the city in making
the sale of the property, including, but not limited to, soliciting or
receiving the order, either directly or indirectly, at a place of business of
the retailer in the City or through any representative, agent, canvasser,
solicitor, subsidiary, or person in the City under the authority of the
retailer.
      7.   "A retailer engaged in business in the city" shall also include any
retailer of any of the following: vehicles subject to registration pursuant to
Chapter 1 (commencing with Section 4000) of Division 3 of the Vehicle Code,
aircraft licensed in compliance with Section 21411 of the Public Utilities
Code, or undocumented vessels registered under Division 3.5 (commencing with
Section 9840) of the Vehicle Code. That retailer shall be required to collect
use tax from any purchaser who registers or licenses the vehicle, vessel, or
aircraft at an address in the city.
   D.   Any person subject to use tax under this article may credit against
that tax any transactions tax or reimbursement for transactions tax paid to a
district imposing, or retailer liable for a transactions tax pursuant to Part
1.6 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code with respect to the sale to
the person of the property the storage, use or other consumption of which is
subject to the use tax.
   E.   Nothing in this article shall be construed as imposing a tax upon any
person or service when the imposition of such tax upon such person or service
would be in violation of a federal or state statute, the Constitution of the
United States, or the Constitution of the State of California. (Ord. 2024-05,
11-5-2024)
3-3C-12: AMENDMENTS:
All amendments subsequent to the effective date of this article to Part 1 of
Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code relating to sales and use taxes and
which are not inconsistent with Part 1.6 and Part 1.7 of Division 2 of the
Revenue and Taxation Code, and all amendments to Part 1.6 and Part 1.7 of
Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code, shall automatically become a part
of this article, provided however, that no such amendment shall operate so as
to affect the rate of tax imposed by this article. (Ord. 2024-05, 11-5-2024)
3-3C-13: ENJOINING COLLECTION FORBIDDEN:
No injunction or writ of mandate or other legal or equitable process shall
issue in any suit, action, or proceeding in any court against the State or the
City, or against any officer of the State or the City, to prevent or enjoin the
collection under this article, or Part 1.6 of Division 2 of the Revenue and
Taxation Code, of any tax or any amount of tax required to be collected. (Ord.
2024-05, 11-5-2024)
3-3C-14: INDEPENDENT ANNUAL AUDIT:
The proceeds resulting from this transactions and use tax shall be deposited
into the City's general fund and become subject to the same independent annual
audit requirements as other general fund revenue. The independent auditor's
report, which shall include an accounting of the revenues received and
expenditures made from the transactions and use tax, will be presented annually
to the City Council and made available for public review. (Ord. 2024-05, 11-5-
2024)
3-3C-15: CITIZENS OVERSIGHT COMMITTEE:
Although not otherwise required by law, the City Council shall, by resolution
adopted before the operative date of this article, establish a citizen's
oversight committee to review the revenue and expenditure of funds from the tax
adopted by this article. The members' terms and qualifications, and duties and
scope of the committee, shall be as established by the resolution. (Ord. 2024-
05, 11-5-2024)
3-3C-16: TERMINATION DATE:
The authority to levy the tax imposed by this article shall continue until
repealed by the voters of the City in the manner provided by law. (Ord. 2024-
05, 11-5-2024)
CHAPTER 4
AMUSEMENTS
ARTICLE A. AMUSEMENT MACHINES
SECTION:
3-4A-1: Definitions
3-4A-2: Amusement Machines Prohibited; Confiscation
3-4A-3: Interpretation and Application
3-4A-4: Violation and Penalties
3-4A-1: DEFINITIONS:
As used in this Article, the following words shall have the following meanings:
MARBLE GAME: Includes any pinball machine and any game or device in which
marbles, balls, pellets or other moving objects are propelled, released or
rolled either by hand or with the aid of a mechanical plunger or other affixed
mechanical device, in such manner as to result in a score, tally, points or
other indications of relative success in the operation and playing of such
marble games, whether the same be indicated by, or may be computed by, means of
numbers, letters, lights, colors or in any manner whatsoever, and where five
(5) or more balls are used in its operation, and where all of such balls count
in the total score of said machine.
RAY-O-LITE DEVICE or MULTI-RAY-O-LITE DEVICE: A pinball machine, excepting that
a "ray-o-lite" device or "multi-ray-o-lite" device is operated by an electric
beam or light. (1975 Code §6-2.01)
3-4A-2: AMUSEMENT MACHINES PROHIBITED; CONFISCATION:
No person shall keep, maintain, possess or have under control in any place of
business, or in any other place of public resort, either as owner, lessee,
agent, employee, mortgagee or otherwise, any table game or device commonly
known as a marble game, any machine operating with three (3) or more reels,
horse race machines, claw, scoop or grab machine, pinball machine or any
automatic payoff machine, the operation, use or play of which is controlled by
placing therein any coin, plate, disk, plug, key or other device, or by the
payment of any fee; or any automatic machine where odds can fluctuate or can be
activated by placing therein of more than one coin.
Upon arrest and conviction of any owner or operator of any illegal machine, as
hereinabove defined, such machine or machines shall be confiscated and
destroyed by a duly authorized representative of the City. (1975 Code §6-2.02)
3-4A-3: INTERPRETATION AND APPLICATION:
   A.   Conflicts With State Laws: Nothing herein contained is intended nor is
to be construed as permitting the licensing or keeping of any mechanical games
within this City, the possession of which is illegal as a gambling device under
and by virtue of the laws of the State of California. (1975 Code §6-2.03)
   B.   Application to Vending Machines: This Article shall not apply to any
vending machine so designed and so operated as to sell and deliver merchandise
only, equivalent in market value to the value of the coin or coins deposited,
without the payment or delivery or the promise of payment or delivery of
anything except the merchandise therein kept for sale. (1975 Code §6-2.04)
3-4A-4: VIOLATION AND PENALTIES:
Any person violating any of the provisions of this Article shall be deemed
guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof, shall be punished by a
fine not to exceed three hundred dollars ($300.00) or by imprisonment in the
Kings County jail for a period not to exceed ninety (90) days or both such fine
and imprisonment. (1975 Code §6-2.05)
ARTICLE B. GAMBLING ESTABLISHMENTS
SECTION:
3-4B-1: License Required
3-4B-2: Definitions
3-4B-3: License Application
3-4B-4: License Revocation
3-4B-5: Hours Of Operation
3-4B-6: Alcoholic Beverage Possession; Prohibited
3-4B-7: Intoxicated Persons; Prohibited
3-4B-8: Loitering; Prohibited
3-4B-9: Location
3-4B-10: Wagering Limits
3-4B-11: Controlled Game Regulations
3-4B-12: Posting Requirements
3-4B-13: Maximum Number Of Gambling Tables
3-4B-14: Maximum Number Of Gambling Establishments
3-4B-15: Sale, Transfer, Or Assignment Of Establishment
3-4B-16: Personal Checks; Prohibition Of Checks Without Written Amount
3-4B-17: Gamblers Anonymous Literature
3-4B-18: Security Provisions
3-4B-19: Employee Registration; Work Permit
3-4B-20: License Fees
3-4B-21: Fees; When Payable
3-4B-22: Misdemeanor; Penalty
3-4B-1: LICENSE REQUIRED:
It shall be unlawful to own, conduct, operate, or maintain any gambling
establishment within the city of Lemoore without a license being first obtained
as provided herein. Any person or entity who owns, conducts, operates, or
maintains any gambling establishment within the city of Lemoore must have first
received a license from the Attorney General of the State of California prior
to owning, conducting, operating, or maintaining a gambling establishment
within the city of Lemoore. In addition, a person or entity seeking to own,
conduct, operate, or maintain a gambling establishment within the city of
Lemoore must first also obtain issuance from the city council of a city-issued
license to own, conduct, operate, or maintain a gambling establishment within
the city, which license may continue in effect only as herein provided and for
a period not to exceed twelve (12) months and which license may be renewed
annually as herein provided. The applicant for a license shall file with the
city license collector an application setting forth the name and address of all
parties interested in the operation or maintenance of the gambling
establishment, the place where the gambling establishment is to be conducted,
and all necessary facts indicating that the place in which the gambling
establishment is to be conducted and the persons conducting the gambling
establishment satisfy the provisions of this article. The city license
collector shall review each application, conduct any investigation deemed
reasonable in assessing each application, and maintain a record of all persons
and entities who have applied for and either received or been denied such a
license, including, but not limited to, a record of each applicant's
fingerprints and photographs. Thereupon, the city license collector shall
endorse on the application his or her recommendation suggesting approval or
disapproval of the application and deliver the same to the city clerk for
presentation to the city council for its approval or disapproval. (Ord. 9911,
11-16-1999)
3-4B-2: DEFINITIONS:
For the purposes of this article, unless otherwise apparent from context,
certain words and phrases used in this article are defined as follows:
CITY: The city of Lemoore.
CONTROLLED GAMBLING: To deal, operate, carry on, conduct, maintain, or expose
for play any controlled game.
CONTROLLED GAME: A controlled game as defined by subdivision (e) of section
337j of the California Penal Code.
GAMBLING ESTABLISHMENT: One or more rooms where any controlled gambling occurs.
(Ord. 9911, 11-16-1999)
3-4B-3: LICENSE APPLICATION:
The city license collector may deny an application for a gambling establishment
license for any of the following reasons:
   A.   The applicant has been convicted of a felony, convicted of any crime
involving gambling, or convicted of a violation of the gambling control act,
codified at Business And Professions Code section 19800 et seq.
   B.   The applicant is under twenty one (21) years of age.
   C.   The applicant has made a false statement in the application for a
license.
   D.   The applicant does not possess a current license in good standing from
the attorney general of the state of California to operate a gambling
establishment. (Ord. 9911, 11-16-1999)
3-4B-4: LICENSE REVOCATION:
A license to own or operate a gambling establishment may be revoked for any of
the following reasons:
   A.   The owner or operator of the gambling establishment allows house
players, shills, or dummies to engage in controlled games.
   B.   The attorney general revokes the owner's or the operator's state
license.
   C.   The owner or operator of the gambling establishment violates any of the
gambling establishment regulations of the city, including sections
3-4B-5 through
3-4B-20 of this article.
   D.   The owner or operator of the gambling establishment is convicted of a
felony, convicted of any crime involving gambling, or convicted of a violation
of the gambling control act, codified at Business And Professions Code section
19800 et seq.
   E.   The owner or operator fails to inform the city license collector of any
change in employment status of a registered employee within ten (10) days of
the change in employment status. "Change in employment status" shall include
termination of employment, leave of absence, promotion or other change in job
title. (Ord. 9911, 11-16-1999)
3-4B-5: HOURS OF OPERATION:
A licensee may set hours of operation up to and including sixteen (16) hours
per day, exclusive of the hours from two o'clock (2:00) A.M. of any day and
nine o'clock (9:00) A.M. of the same day, excepting Fridays, Saturdays, Sundays
and Mondays. No licensee shall operate for more or fewer hours per day than as
stated on the licensee's application for a license made pursuant to section
3-4B-3 of this article. The hours of operation must be posted by the licensee
in a place on the licensed premises sufficiently conspicuous that all patrons
of the gambling establishment are thereby given notice of the hours during
which the licensed gambling establishment may remain open for business. (Ord.
2001-01, 2-20-2001)
3-4B-6: ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGE POSSESSION; PROHIBITED:
No person shall possess alcoholic beverages within any gambling establishment
between the hours of two o'clock (2:00) A.M. of any day and nine o'clock (9:00)
A.M. of the same day. No gambling establishment owner or operator, and no
employee, representative or agent of the owner or operator shall allow
alcoholic beverages to be stored, sold, served, or consumed within any gambling
establishment during those hours. (Ord. 9911, 11-16-1999)
3-4B-7: INTOXICATED PERSONS; PROHIBITED:
No gambling establishment owner or operator, and no employee, representative or
agent of the owner or operator shall allow any person to play any controlled
game while such person is noticeably under the influence of an intoxicating
beverage or drug. (Ord. 9911, 11-16-1999)
3-4B-8: LOITERING; PROHIBITED:
No gambling establishment owner or operator, and no employee, representative or
agent of the owner or operator shall allow any person not participating in a
controlled game to loiter within a gambling establishment while controlled
games are in progress. (Ord. 9911, 11-16-1999)
3-4B-9: LOCATION:
In the interest of promoting the public peace, safety, and general welfare,
gambling establishments shall only be allowed pursuant to the allowed use
requirements of section
9-4B-2,
table 9-4B-2 of this code. (Ord. 9911, 11-16-1999; amd. Ord. 2012-01, 4-17-
2012)
3-4B-10: WAGERING LIMITS:
Limits on a wager shall be on a per-hand basis and not on a per- person basis
and the maximum value of any wager on any one hand shall be three hundred
dollars ($300.00). (Ord. 9911, 11-16-1999)
3-4B-11: CONTROLLED GAME REGULATIONS:
No gambling establishment owner or operator, and no employee, representative or
agent of the owner or operator shall allow any of the following:
   A.   Wagering in excess of posted limits.
   B.   Simultaneous hands or betting squares by the same player.
   C.   Bets made by any owner or operator, or by any employee, representative
or agent of the owner or operator, while either the owner or operator or
employee or representative or agent is performing any duties or work for or
employment responsibilities connected with the operation, maintenance,
ownership, or supervision of the gambling establishment.
   D.   Bets made by any shill or dummy player. (Ord. 9911, 11-16-1999)
3-4B-12: POSTING REQUIREMENTS:
The following information must be posted in a place on the licensed premises
sufficiently conspicuous that all patrons of the gambling establishment are
thereby given notice thereof:
   A.   The wagering limits established from time to time by the state of
California or the city, or both.
   B.   A set of detailed house rules applicable to the controlled games
played, which shall also be available in the form of a printed rule book.
   C.   A true and complete copy of the currently valid license issued by the
city license collector.
   D.   A true and complete copy of the currently valid license issued by the
city license collector or the attorney general pursuant to the Gambling Control
Act. (Ord. 9911, 11-16-1999)
3-4B-13: MAXIMUM NUMBER OF GAMBLING TABLES:
A maximum of four (4) gambling tables, with a maximum of nine (9) players and
one dealer per table, shall be allowed to operate in the city. (Ord. 9911, 11-
16-1999)
3-4B-14: MAXIMUM NUMBER OF GAMBLING ESTABLISHMENTS:
A maximum of one gambling establishment shall be allowed to operate in the
city. (Ord. 9911, 11-16-1999)
3-4B-15: SALE, TRANSFER, OR ASSIGNMENT OF ESTABLISHMENT:
Any time a gambling establishment changes ownership, the new owner must apply
and qualify for a gambling establishment license as provided in this article.
No license may be sold, transferred, or assigned by the licensee or by
operation of law. Any sale, transfer, or assignment, or attempted sale,
transfer or assignment, of the license by the licensee or by any other person
shall void the license and shall be deemed to constitute a voluntary surrender
of the license by the licensee. This section shall not be construed to limit
any right of any gambling establishment owner to sell, transfer, or assign or
otherwise encumber an ownership interest in the gambling establishment
property. (Ord. 9911, 11-16-1999)
3-4B-16: PERSONAL CHECKS; PROHIBITION OF CHECKS WITHOUT WRITTEN AMOUNT:
No gambling establishment owner or operator, and no employee, representative or
agent of the owner or operator shall accept or negotiate any personal check
which does not bear a dollar amount written in numbers and words on the face of
the check. (Ord. 9911, 11-16-1999)
3-4B-17: GAMBLERS ANONYMOUS LITERATURE:
Any gambling establishment in the city shall display in a place on the licensed
premises that is sufficiently conspicuous that all patrons of the gambling
establishment are thereby able, for free and effortlessly, to see, take and
keep literature published by Gamblers Anonymous. (Ord. 9911, 11-16-1999)
3-4B-18: SECURITY PROVISIONS:
Any gambling establishment in the city shall provide the following security:
   A.   Upon reasonable notice by the city license collector, current and
accurate business records, papers, reports, audits, and books of account of the
gambling establishment business shall be made available for inspection and
copying by the director of finance of the city.
   B.   All owners and operators, and all employees, representatives, and
agents of the owner (or owners) or operator (or operators), shall have an
affirmative duty to immediately report to the police department of the city any
and all crimes occurring in or about the gambling establishment premises,
including any violation of the provisions of this article.
   C.   Each licensee shall present on an annual basis a plan for security and
safety of patrons of the licensee in and around the gambling establishment. The
plan shall set forth such provisions as are necessary to ensure the safety and
security of all patrons; shall include measures to be taken by the owners and
operators, and the employees, representatives, and agents of the owner (or
owners) or operator (or operators), to avoid "follow- home robberies"; and
shall include a detailed summary of all known incidents involving or affecting
patron security and safety in and around the licensed premises for the
preceding two (2) years. Licensees shall be liable for the safety and security
of patrons of the gambling establishment to the fullest extent allowed under
all applicable law. Any attempt by a licensee to limit the extent of liability
of the licensee shall be posted in a place on the licensed premises
sufficiently conspicuous that all patrons of the gambling establishment are
thereby given notice of the attempted limitation of liability. (Ord. 9911, 11-
16-1999)
3-4B-19: EMPLOYEE REGISTRATION; WORK PERMIT:
No gambling establishment shall employ any person who lacks current
registration with the city license collector. Registration and issuance of a
work permit shall be accomplished as follows:
   A.   At least ten (10) days prior to commencing work at a gambling
establishment in the city, a prospective gambling establishment employee must
present himself or herself in person, by prior appointment, at the office of
the city license collector during normal business hours.
   B.   Such prospective gambling establishment employee shall complete an
application form provided by the city license collector or his or her designee,
certify under penalty of perjury to the truthfulness of the information
provided by the applicant on the application form; supply fingerprints which
shall be taken by the city license collector or his or her designee, allow
himself or herself to be photographed by the city license collector or his or
her designee, and consent in writing to any and all further investigation
deemed reasonable by the city license collector, including, but not limited to,
a criminal background check.
   C.   Each applicant shall pay in advance a registration fee of two hundred
dollars ($200.00) per year for each card table in any gambling establishment
not exceeding four (4) card tables per establishment.
   D.   In addition to any other restrictions provided by law, no work permit
shall be issued to anyone who is disqualified from holding a state gambling
license, for any of the reasons specified in Business and Professions Code
section 19850. If the city license collector approves an application for
registration, he or she shall, within ten (10) days of submission of the
information required by subsection B of this section, mail to the applicant a
statement of determination whether the application for registration has been
granted or denied.
   E.   Upon such approval, the city license collector shall issue a work
permit by giving to an applicant whose application for registration has
successfully been granted a temporary work permit, which shall remain property
of the city and shall allow the prospective gambling establishment employee to
be employed by the gambling establishment owner or owners or operator or
operators pending receipt by the city license collector from the California
State Department of Justice of a report on that department's analysis of the
fingerprints of the applicant. If that report is favorable to the applicant and
if further it is found by the city license collector that the applicant: 1) is
twenty one (21) years of age or more; 2) has not been convicted of a felony,
has not been convicted of any crime involving gambling, and has not been
convicted of a violation of the Gambling Control Act, codified at Business and
Professions Code section 19800 et seq.; and 3) has not made any false statement
in the application, the city license collector shall give to the applicant
whose application for registration has thus been successfully granted a
permanent work permit, which shall remain property of the city and shall expire
two (2) years after issuance.
   F.   A gambling establishment employee who desires to renew his or her work
permit shall, within one month prior to expiration of the employee's
registration, present himself or herself in person, by prior appointment, at
the office of the city license collector during normal business hours and
complete a registration renewal form provided by the city license collector or
his or her designee, and certify it and submit to all other requirements as set
forth in subsections B through E of this section.
   G.   A registered employee of a gambling establishment shall inform the city
license collector of any change in the employment status of the registered
employee within ten (10) days of the change in employment status. "Change in
employment status" shall include termination of employment, leave of absence,
promotion or other change in job title.
   H.   The city shall not issue a work permit to any applicant if the division
of gambling control of the Department of Justice of the State of California
objects to the issuance of such work permit. Such denial may be reviewed in
accordance with the Gambling Control Act, Business and Professions Code section
19801 et seq. (Ord. 9911, 11-16-1999)
3-4B-20: LICENSE FEES:
No gambling establishment license shall be issued or renewed without the
payment of a license fee in the amount of twenty five dollars ($25.00) per
gambling table per quarter, which fee serves to defray all administrative costs
of implementing and enforcing the provisions of this article. (Ord. 9911, 11-
16-1999)
3-4B-21: FEES; WHEN PAYABLE:
All license fees shall be payable quarterly in advance. (Ord. 9911, 11-16-1999)
3-4B-22: MISDEMEANOR; PENALTY:
   A.   Any person or entity violating or causing or knowingly licensing the
violation of any of the provisions of this article shall be guilty of a
misdemeanor.
   B.   Prior to issuing a citation to any person for a violation of any
provision of this article, the issuing officer may serve written notice upon
such person or entity stating the nature of the violation and providing a
reasonable period of time, not to exceed seven (7) days, for the violator to
comply with all provisions of this article. (Ord. 9911, 11-16-1999)
ARTICLE C. PUBLIC DANCES
SECTION:
3-4C-1: Definitions
3-4C-2: License or Permit Required; Compliance With Provisions
3-4C-3: Application for Permit
3-4C-4: Investigation of Applicant; Issuance of Permit
3-4C-5: License Fee; Permit Renewals
3-4C-6: Deposit for Special Officers
3-4C-7: Dance Rules and Regulations
3-4C-8: Minors
3-4C-9: Revocation of Permit
3-4C-10: Exemptions From Provisions
3-4C-11: Violation and Penalties
3-4C-1: DEFINITIONS:
When used in this Article, the following words and terms shall have the
meanings ascribed to them in this Section:
PUBLIC DANCE: Any dance to which the public generally may gain admission with
or without the payment of a fee therefor.
PUBLIC DANCE HALL: Includes any hall, room, platform, pavilion, building,
restaurant, cafe or refreshment place or other place of business which is
resorted to by the public at large for the purpose of engaging in or carrying
on the pastime of dancing; provided, that nothing herein contained shall be
construed to require any permit for the maintenance of a bona fide school of
instruction in the pastime of dancing. (1975 Code §7-2.01)
3-4C-2: LICENSE OR PERMIT REQUIRED; COMPLIANCE WITH PROVISIONS:
It shall be unlawful for any person to open, conduct or carry on or to
participate in the opening, conducting or carrying on of a public dance room or
public ballroom in the City without having a valid and existing license or
permit so to do, granted as hereinafter specified; and it shall be unlawful for
the holder of any such permit or any officer, agent or employee to violate or
permit a violation of all or any of the rules and regulations or any part
thereof at and in connection with any dance under such permit, which rules and
regulations are set forth and contained in Section
3-4C-7 of this Article. (1975 Code §7-2.02)
It shall be unlawful for any person to give or hold, conduct or manage or
operate a public dance within the City except at a place or premises for which
a license or permit has been issued and is in force and effect as specified in
this Article. (1975 Code §7-2.03)
3-4C-3: APPLICATION FOR PERMIT:
No permit shall be issued to any person, firm, corporation or association
unless such person, firm, corporation or association and all and singular the
officers thereof be of a good moral character, nor unless a written verified
application therefor is presented to the City Clerk showing the following
facts:
   A.   The name and residence of the applicant or applicants; and if any
applicant be a firm, the names and residences of the partners thereof; and if
the applicant be an association, the names and residences of the officers
thereof; and if the applicant be a corporation, the names and residences of the
officers and directors thereof.
   B.   The particular place for which the permit is desired or at which any
dance is to be or dances are to be held.
   C.   The name of the owner of the place or premises in or at which said
dance is to be or dances are to be held.
   D.   Such persons as from time to time will be in charge and who will be
responsible for the order and due observance of the provisions of this Article.
   E.   The number and date of dances to be held under the permit, or the
length of time for which the permit is desired which shall not in any event be
for a longer period than three (3) months.
   F.   A statement that the applicant is the sole party, or the applicants are
the sole parties, either directly or indirectly interested in the dance or
dance hall premises for which a permit is sought, and that no other person is
or will be in any manner interested therein, directly or indirectly, during the
continuance of the permit.
   G.   A covenant and promise by the applicant to comply with the terms of
this Article and in particular the provisions of Section
3-4C-7 hereof, and to consent to the entry by police officers upon the premises
at which the dance is held, and permission to cause the dance hall to be
vacated in event said Section
3-4C-7 is violated. (1975 Code §7-2.05)
3-4C-4: INVESTIGATION OF APPLICANT; ISSUANCE OF PERMIT:
Upon the receipt of such application by the City Clerk, the same shall be
referred to the Chief of Police for investigation and report, and if the Chief
of Police, after investigation, determines and so reports that the applicants
therefor are of good moral character, that the premises for which a permit is
sought complies with and conforms to this Article and any other law, ordinance,
health or fire regulation applicable thereto, and is properly ventilated and
supplied with separate and sufficient toilet conveniences for each sex within
the building in which the dance hall is located, with no entrance thereto or
exit therefrom except through the dance hall, and is a safe and proper place
for the purpose for which it shall be used, the City Clerk shall, upon the
payment of the fee hereinafter specified, issue such permit; provided, however,
that in the event of a refusal by the City Clerk to issue such permit, the
applicant therefor may appeal in writing to the City Council, which shall hear
the matter, including the application and the reason for refusing it at its
next meeting, regular or special, and may either grant said permit or refuse
the same if it finds that the applicant or the premises at which it is proposed
to hold said dances does not comply with this Article. (1975 Code §7-2.06)
3-4C-5: LICENSE FEE; PERMIT RENEWALS:
The license fee for such permit shall be the sum of ten dollars ($10.00) per
quarter 1 . At the expiration of any permit by the lapse of time, it may be
renewed by the filing of an application therefor with the City Clerk, without
any investigation by the Chief of Police, and upon the payment of the license
fee in advance. (1975 Code §7-2.07)
 
Notes
1 1. See also subsection
  3-1A-2-1C of this Title.
3-4C-6: DEPOSIT FOR SPECIAL OFFICERS:
In addition to the quarterly license fee, the applicant for a permit or the
holder thereof shall deposit with the City Clerk each week a sufficient sum of
money to pay the compensation of the special officer for one week at the rate
and in the manner specified in subsection
3-4C-7C2 of this Article. Failure to make such deposit and to keep the same
intact shall, without notice or action by any department of the City, operate
to suspend the permit and to make the holding of dances thereunder illegal
until it shall have been made or restored. (1975 Code §7-2.08)
3-4C-7: DANCE RULES AND REGULATIONS:
It shall be unlawful to open, conduct, carry on, manage or operate a public
dance or to dance in a public dance hall or ballroom in violation of the
following rules and regulations:
   A.   Prohibited Acts and Conditions:
      1.   Obscene Dancing: No immoral or obscene dancing shall be permitted.
      2.   Intoxicated Persons: No person under the influence of intoxicating
liquor shall be allowed to remain at any public dance.
      3.   Jitney Dances: No jitney dance shall be allowed or permitted. The
term "jitney dance" is defined to be a dance where a separate charge or fee is
imposed for single or individual dances.
      4.   Furnishing Partners: No owner or manager of a dance hall shall
undertake to furnish females for dancing partners.
   B.   Closing Hours: No dancing shall be permitted between the hours of two
o'clock (2: 00) A.M. and ten o'clock (10:00) A.M. of the same day.
   C.   Police Officers:
      1.   Free Admittance; Enforcement Duties: Any member of the Police
Department of the City shall be admitted free of charge to any public dance
hall, and shall have the power and duty to enforce the terms of this Article.
      2.   Special Police Officer: The Chief of Police may require at any
public dance held within the City, the presence of a special police officer
appointed by the Chief of Police and serving at a compensation to be fixed by
the City Council which shall be paid by the owner or manager 1 . (1975 Code §7-
2.04)
 
Notes
1 1. See Section
  3-4C-6 of this Chapter.
3-4C-8: MINORS:
No person under the age of sixteen (16) years, unaccompanied by parent or
guardian, shall attend any public dance or dance hall or loiter at or near the
doors of any public dance within the City while a public dance is being
conducted therein, and it shall be unlawful for any person or persons in charge
of or conducting such public dance or dance hall to permit any person under the
age of sixteen (16) years, unaccompanied by parent or guardian, to enter any
public dance hall, or engage in dancing in such place where a public dance is
being conducted, or to loiter at or near the doors of any public dance hall
while a public dance is being conducted therein; and provided further, that no
person under the age of twenty one (21) years shall attend any public dance
where alcoholic beverages are sold or consumed and it shall be unlawful for any
person conducting such a dance to permit any person under the age of twenty one
(21) years to enter such place. (1975 Code §7-2.10)
3-4C-9: REVOCATION OF PERMIT:
A permit issued to any person to hold a public dance may be revoked by the
Council upon five (5) days' notice to the holder thereof for violation of any
of the provisions of this Article, or any other ordinance or law relating to
such place, or the rules or regulations promulgated hereunder. If at any time
the permit of any person shall be so revoked, no new permit shall be granted to
such person or any person who was an agent or employee of such ... (might be
material missing, see section 7-2.09 of 1975 Code) ... violation, or at the
time of the application for a new permit. (1975 Code §7-2.09)
3-4C-10: EXEMPTIONS FROM PROVISIONS:
Nothing in this Article shall be deemed to apply to any dance, the income of
which over and above a sufficient sum is pro rated among the persons present to
pay the actual expenses of conducting the dance. (1975 Code §7-2.01)
3-4C-11: VIOLATION AND PENALTIES:
Any person violating any of the provisions of this Article shall be deemed
guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction thereof shall be punished by a fine
of not more than three hundred dollars ($300.00) or by imprisonment in the
County jail not to exceed three (3) months or both such fine and imprisonment.
The penal provisions of this Article shall not be construed to abridge the
right of the City Council or any of the citizens of the City to invoke and
pursue any other proper remedy including injunction or abatement proceedings.
(1975 Code §7-2.11)
ARTICLE D. BINGO GAMES
SECTION:
3-4D-1: Definitions
3-4D-2: Authority
3-4D-3: License Required; Compliance With Provisions
3-4D-4: Eligibility for License
3-4D-5: Application for License
3-4D-6: Investigation of Applicant; License Approval or Denial
3-4D-7: Contents of License; Term
3-4D-8: License to be Posted
3-4D-9: Operation and Conduct of Bingo Games
3-4D-10: Revenue
3-4D-11: Inspections
3-4D-12: Revocation of License
3-4D-13: Violation and Penalties
3-4D-14: Severability
3-4D-1: DEFINITIONS:
As used in this Article, the following words and terms shall have the meanings
ascribed to them in this Section:
BINGO: A game of chance in which prizes are awarded on the basis of designated
numbers or symbols on a card which conforms to numbers or symbols selected at
random.
NONPROFIT CHARITABLE ORGANIZATION: Any organization exempted from the payment
of the bank and corporation tax and listed in the California Penal Code section
326.5 and mobilehome park associations and senior citizens' organizations, and
to which a contribution or gift would be a charitable contribution under
section 170(c)2 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1954.
3-4D-2: AUTHORITY:
Bingo games for charitable purposes are hereby authorized, pursuant to section
19, article IV of the California Constitution, and section 326.5 of the Penal
Code, and in accordance with the provisions of this Article.
3-4D-3: LICENSE REQUIRED; COMPLIANCE WITH PROVISIONS:
No organization shall engage in, carry on, maintain, conduct or cause to be
engaged in, carried on, maintained or conducted a bingo game in the
incorporated area of the City without first having secured a license in
accordance with the requirements of this Article, nor without complying with
the regulations contained herein pertaining to the operation of bingo games.
3-4D-4: ELIGIBILITY FOR LICENSE:
All organizations listed and authorized by California Penal Code section 326.5,
as the same now reads or as said section may be hereafter amended, are eligible
to apply to the City for a license to conduct bingo games in the incorporated
limits of the City under the provisions of said California Penal Code section
326.5 and the provisions of this Article; provided, that the proceeds of such
games are used only for charitable purposes.
3-4D-5: APPLICATION FOR LICENSE:
The application procedure provided for in this Article shall be followed with
regard to the license sought pursuant hereto.
Every person desiring a license pursuant to this Article shall pay the fee
therefor set by resolution of the City Council and file an application with the
Finance Director upon a form to be provided by the Finance Director. The
application shall be filed at least fifteen (15) days prior to the conduct of
any bingo games, and shall specify:
   A.   The name, address and telephone number of the local applicant
organization and a statement that applicant is an eligible organization under
section 326.5 of the Penal Code of the State of California.
   B.   The name and signature of at least two (2) officers, including the
presiding officer, of the corporation or community chest, and the trustee of
any trust.
   C.   A list of the names of members of the applicant organization who will
operate and staff bingo games.
   D.   A detailed schedule of the date(s), hours, location and occupancy
capacity of such location of each bingo game to be held.
   E.   A detailed description of the record system to account for the
receipts, prizes, expenses and profits of each bingo game.
   F.   A statement that the applicant agrees to conduct bingo games in strict
accordance with the provisions of section 326.5 of the Penal Code and this
Article, as they may be amended from time to time, and agrees that the license
to conduct bingo games may be summarily suspended by the City upon violation of
any such provisions, notwithstanding anything to the contrary.
   G.   The applicant shall also submit with its application a letter or other
evidence from the State Franchise Board showing that the applicant is exempted
from the payment of the bank and corporation tax by applicable sections of the
Revenue and Taxation Code as listed in Penal Code section 326.5 or is a
mobilehome park association or senior citizens' organization.
   H.   The application shall be verified as provided in the Code of Civil
Procedure for the verification of pleadings.
   I.   The address to which notice, when required, is to be sent or mailed,
and the names of any individual or individuals, in addition to those set forth
elsewhere in the application, who are authorized to accept service of process
on behalf of the licensee.
   J.   Whether the application is for a new license or a renewal of an
existing license.
   K.   Certification by the applicant that the organization or group applying
currently operates and is based in the City; otherwise, a license will be
denied.
3-4D-6: INVESTIGATION OF APPLICANT; LICENSE APPROVAL OR DENIAL:
Upon receipt of an application for a license, the Finance Director shall
transmit copies of the application to the Police Chief (for background
investigation), the Fire Chief to determine if fire regulations 1 have been or
will be complied with and to the Planning Department to determine if the
appropriate zoning ordinances and regulations 2 and Building Code ordinances 3
have been or will be complied with.
Every officer and department to which an application is referred shall, within
thirty (30) days, in writing, advise the Finance Director of all material facts
necessary to determine whether the license should be granted, granted subject
to conditions or denied, and their approval or disapproval of the application.
If any officer or department to which an application is referred advises the
Finance Director that the license should be denied, the applicant shall be
notified in writing by the Finance Director.
Every officer and department to which an application for a license is referred
may require such additional information and the filing of such additional forms
as he deems necessary.
 
Notes
1 1. See Title 8, Chapter 1, Article E of this Code.
2 2. See Title 9 of this Code.
3 3. See Title 8, Chapter 1 of this Code.
3-4D-7: CONTENTS OF LICENSE; TERM:
In addition to any other requirement of this Article, any license issued for
bingo games for charitable purposes shall contain the following information:
   A.   The name and nature of the organization to whom the license is issued.
   B.   The address where bingo games are authorized to be conducted.
   C.   The occupancy of the room in which bingo games are to be conducted.
   D.   The date of the expiration of such license; which license shall expire
one year after date of issuance unless a sooner date of expiration is set forth
in said license.
   E.   Such other information as may be necessary or desirable for the
enforcement of the provisions of this Section.
3-4D-8: LICENSE TO BE POSTED:
Said license shall be posted in a prominent place during the conduct of any
bingo game. The licensee shall produce and exhibit the same when applying for
renewal thereof and wherever requested to do so by any law enforcement officer
or other officer authorized to issue, inspect or collect licenses and permits.
(Ord. 8107, 8-18-81)
3-4D-9: OPERATION AND CONDUCT OF BINGO GAMES:
   A.   Exclusive Operation and Interest by Licensee: A bingo game shall be
operated and staffed only by members and the manager of the licensee
organization. Such members or manager shall not receive a profit, wage or
salary or any other direct or indirect consideration from any bingo game, nor
shall they receive payments from the organization for such purpose. Only the
licensee shall operate such game or participate in the promotion, supervision
or any other phase of such game. This subsection does not preclude the
employment of security personnel (who are not members of the licensed
organization) at such bingo game by the licensed organization conducting the
game. (Ord. 8606, 6-17-86)
   No individual, corporation, partnership or other legal entity, except the
licensee organization, shall hold a financial interest in the conduct of such
bingo game. (Ord. 8107, 8-18-81)
   B.   Eligible Premises: A licensee shall conduct a bingo game only on
property owned, leased or rented by it, or which use is donated to the
licensee, and which property is used by such organization for an office or for
performance of the purposes for which the organization is organized. The
license issued under this Article shall authorize the holder thereof to conduct
bingo games only on such property, the address of which is stated in the
application. In the event the described property ceases to be used as an office
and as a place for performance of the purposes for which the licensee is
organized, the license shall have no further force or effect. A new license may
be obtained by an eligible organization, upon application, when it again owns
or leases property used by it for an office or for performance of the purposes
for which the organization is organized.
   C.   Compensation or Profit: It is a misdemeanor under section 326.5(b) of
the State of California and this subsection for any person to receive a profit,
wage or salary from any bingo game authorized pursuant to this Code, and all
persons are hereby prohibited from violating the same. A violation of section
326.5(b) and this subsection is punishable by a fine not to exceed ten thousand
dollars ($10,000.00) which fine shall be deposited in the General Fund of the
City. Security personnel employed by the organization conducting the bingo game
may be paid from the revenues of bingo games as provided in Section
3-4D-10 of this Article. (Ord. 8606, 6-17-86)
   D.   Bingo Games Open to Public; Occupancy Capacity: All bingo games shall
be open to the public, not just members of the licensee organization.
Notwithstanding that bingo games are open to the public, attendance at any
bingo game shall be limited to the occupancy capacity of the room in which such
game is conducted as determined by the Fire Department in accordance with
applicable laws and regulations. Licensee shall not reserve seats or space for
any person.
   E.   Closing Hours: No bingo game shall be conducted between the hours of
twelve o'clock (12:00) midnight and ten o'clock (10:00) A.M. except where
authorized by the license.
   F.   Participant Must be Present: No person shall be allowed to participate
in a bingo game unless the person is physically present at the time and place
in which the bingo game is being conducted. (Ord. 8107, 8-18-81)
   G.   Prizes:
      1.   Maximum Amount of Prizes: The total value of prizes awarded during
the conduct of any bingo game shall not exceed two hundred fifty dollars
($250.00) total in cash or kind, or both, for each separate game which is held.
(Ord. 8606, 6-17-86)
      2.   Record of Prizes: A record shall be kept by the licensee, on forms
approved by the Finance Director, showing the name and written signature, the
address, the telephone number of the winner and the consecutive serial number
on the receipt for the prize.
   H.   Rules and Information Posted: The licensee shall post the costs, prizes
and rules of each game to be played. Such signs shall be posted during the
conduct of the bingo game in a conspicuous place on the outside and inside of
the premises to be used for the conducting of a bingo game.
   I.   Prohibited Acts and Conditions:
      1.   Minors: No person under the age of eighteen (18) years shall be
allowed to participate in any bingo games.
      2.   Intoxicated Persons: No person who is intoxicated shall be allowed
to participate in a bingo game.
      3.   Use of Credit: No licensee shall issue chips, checks, tokens,
markers or money to a patron on credit or loan (including but not limited to
IOU's and checks to be held), or allow any patron to play on credit.
      4.   Admission Charge: No fee, donation, dues or other charge shall be
imposed as a requirement for admission or entry onto any licensed bingo
premises. (Ord. 8107, 8-18-81)
3-4D-10: REVENUE:
   A.   Records Kept: The licensee shall keep full and accurate records of the
income and expenses received and disbursed in connection with its operation,
conduct, promotion, supervision and any other phase of bingo games which are
authorized by this Article. The City, by and through its authorized officers,
shall have the right to examine and audit such record at any reasonable time,
without prior notice, and licensee shall fully cooperate with the City by
making such record available.
   B.   Profits:
      1.   With respect to organizations exempt from payment of the bank and
corporation tax by section 23701d of the Revenue and Taxation Code, all profits
derived from a bingo game shall be kept in a special fund or account and shall
not be commingled with any other fund or account. Such profits shall be used
only for charitable purposes.
      2.   With respect to other organizations authorized to conduct bingo
games pursuant to this Section, all proceeds derived from a bingo game shall be
kept in a special fund or account and shall not be commingled with any other
fund or account. Such proceeds shall be used only for charitable purposes,
except as follows:
         a.   Such proceeds may be used for prizes.
         b.   A portion of such proceeds, not to exceed twenty percent (20%) of
the proceeds before the deduction for prizes, or one thousand dollars
($1,000.00) per month, whichever is less, may be used for rental of property,
overhead, including the purchase of bingo equipment, administrative expenses,
security equipment and security personnel. (Ord. 8606, 6-17-86)
3-4D-11: INSPECTIONS:
No person shall interfere with, prevent or refuse to permit a member of the law
enforcement agency, any peace officer, the Finance Director or his authorized
deputy, to make an examination or inspection, without notice, of any premises
licensed for bingo games for charitable purposes, or of any records kept by the
licensee organization, or any agent or employee thereof, for the purpose of
determining whether the licensee organization and/or manager are complying with
all the provisions of this Article and applicable statutes.
3-4D-12: REVOCATION OF LICENSE:
Any license issued to any person may be revoked by the City Council at any time
whenever the holder thereof has violated any of the provisions of this Article
or is conducting a bingo game in such a manner that the same is detrimental to
the good order of the City.
3-4D-13: VIOLATION AND PENALTIES:
Any person violating any provision of this Article other than subsection
3-4D-9C shall be guilty of an infraction as provided for in section 36900 of
the Government Code. Every violation determined to be an infraction is
punishable by (1) a fine not exceeding fifty dollars ($50.00) for a first
violation; (2) a fine not exceeding one hundred dollars ($100.00) for a second
violation of the same ordinance within one year; (3) a fine not exceeding two
hundred fifty dollars ($250.00) for each additional violation of the same
ordinance within one year. A person shall be deemed guilty of a separate
offense for each day during any portion of which a violation of this Article is
committed, continued or permitted by the person and shall be punishable as
herein provided. (Ord. 8107, 8-18-81)
3-4D-14: SEVERABILITY:
The City Council hereby declares that it would have passed this Chapter
sentence by sentence, paragraph by paragraph, and section by section, and does
hereby declare that the provisions of this Chapter are severable and, if for
any reason any sentence, paragraph or section of this Chapter shall be held
invalid, such decision shall not affect the validity of the remaining parts of
this Chapter. (1989 Code)
CHAPTER 5
FOOD HANDLING
SECTION:
3-5-1: Definitions
3-5-2: Permit Required
3-5-3: Application for Permit
3-5-4: Restrictions on Issuance of Permit
3-5-5: Permit Fee
3-5-6: Term of Permit; Posting
3-5-7: Building, Premises and Vehicle Requirements
3-5-8: Food Handlers
3-5-9: Interference With Inspectors
3-5-10: Notice of Violation; Hearing
3-5-11: Suspension or Revocation of Permit
3-5-12: Supervision of Closing Down Premises
3-5-13: Rules and Regulations
3-5-14: Exemptions From Provisions
3-5-1: DEFINITIONS:
The following terms used in this Chapter shall have the meanings indicated
below:
HEALTH DEPARTMENT or DEPARTMENT: The Kings County Health Department, which acts
as the Health Department of the incorporated cities in Kings County pursuant to
resolutions made under the provisions of sections 476 and 477 of the Health and
Safety Code of the State of California.
HEALTH OFFICER: The County Health Officer or his deputy or assistant duly
authorized to act in his behalf in case of his absence or incapacity.
INSPECTOR: A sanitarian, as defined in Health and Safety Code section 517,
employed by the Health Department, or the Health Officer or any deputy health
officer authorized to inspect premises or equipment for the enforcement of this
Chapter.
PREMISES: Includes land, buildings and vehicles wherein food is handled,
stored, distributed, prepared, processed, served or sold, and also equipment
installed or used in food establishments or on such premises. (1975 Code §8-
2.01)
3-5-2: PERMIT REQUIRED:
It shall be unlawful for any person or other legal entity to operate, within
the incorporated area of the City, any business in which food is prepared, sold
or served for public consumption upon the premises or elsewhere, or any food
processing or manufacturing plant, or any store, vehicle or facility for the
sale, storage or retail or wholesale distribution of foods or beverages without
first applying for and receiving a food vending permit for such operation
issued by the Health Department under the provisions of this Chapter.
The places of business for which such permits are required shall include, but
shall not be limited to, any restaurant, cafe, lunch counter, cafeteria, soda
fountain, ice cream parlor, soft drink stand, fruit and vegetable stand,
grocery, meat market, baker, popcorn or peanut stand, bottling plant, wholesale
warehouse, food vending vehicle and business which service vending machines
located in the City, regardless of the location of the facilities from which
such vending machines are serviced.
3-5-3: APPLICATION FOR PERMIT:
Every applicant for a food vending permit shall file with the Health Department
a written application which shall state the name and address of the applicant,
the location of the food handling business, the character of the business which
is proposed to be conducted and such other information as the Health Department
may require.
3-5-4: RESTRICTIONS ON ISSUANCE OF PERMIT:
No permit shall be granted, renewed or reinstated unless the Health Department
determines, upon making an investigation, that the place of business for which
the application is made is equipped, operated and maintained in a safe,
sanitary and healthful manner, and that no conditions exist on the premises
which are, or which may be, unsafe, unsanitary, unwholesome or detrimental to
the health of the patrons, consumers, employees or the general public, nor
shall a permit be granted, renewed or reinstated unless the Health Department
determines that the condition of the premises is in accordance with the
requirements of all applicable provisions of the California Health and Safety
Code, of this Chapter and of all rules and regulations promulgated under
Section
3-5-13 of this Chapter and that said premises are capable of being operated in
accordance with such laws and regulations.
3-5-5: PERMIT FEE:
The fee for the permit under this Chapter shall be ten dollars ($10.00) per
year for businesses employing five (5) employees or less, plus one dollar
($1.00) for each employee in excess of five (5).
3-5-6: TERM OF PERMIT; POSTING:
Permits may be granted at any time during the year and shall expire one year
from date of issuance. Each permit shall be posted in a conspicuous place on
the premises or vehicle for which it is issued. (1975 Code §8-2.02)
3-5-7: BUILDING, PREMISES AND VEHICLE REQUIREMENTS:
   A.   Plans and Specifications: Prior to the construction, conversion or
alteration of a building for use as a food establishment, or construction or
purchase of a model of vehicle not previously under permit to any person in the
City, two (2) copies of the plans and specifications therefor shall be
submitted to the Health Department. The Health Officer or his authorized deputy
shall thereafter issue his certificate stating what modifications, if any, he
deems required for compliance with applicable laws and ordinances. (1975 Code
§8-2.04)
   B.   Sanitation Requirements: All businesses and premises for which a permit
is required by this Chapter shall be constructed, equipped, operated and
maintained so as to comply with the provisions of articles 2 through 6,
inclusive, of division 21, chapter 11, Health and Safety Code of the State of
California. (1975 Code §8-2.05)
3-5-8: FOOD HANDLERS:
   A.   Food Handler's Card: It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in
the handling, serving, preparation or storage of food or drink in any bakery,
butcher shop, restaurant, hotel, fountain, tavern or other eating or drinking
place in the City, or in the sanitizing of utensils in any of the foregoing
establishments for a period of time longer than fifteen (15) working days, or
for any food establishment operator to employ or permit any person to engage in
such activities therein for longer than said period of time unless such person
holds a food handler's card issued by the Kings County Health Officer. All food
handlers' cards shall expire one year from the date of issuance, and a fee of
one dollar ($1.00) shall be charged for each card issued.
   B.   X-Ray Card: As a prerequisite to the issuance of a food handler's card,
every person engaged in the aforesaid activities must obtain and have in his
possession a current and negative X-ray card which may be obtained without
charge from the Kings County Health Department.
   C.   Additional Requirements: In addition to the said X-ray examination, the
Health Officer may, as a prerequisite to the issuance of a food handler's card,
impose any other requirement including physical or other tests and examinations
which may be necessary for the protection of the public health. The Health
Officer shall not give any treatment required for any condition revealed by
such examination or such tests, and the said Kings County Health Department
shall not be responsible in any manner for the cost of such treatments. (1975
Code §8-2.03)
3-5-9: INTERFERENCE WITH INSPECTORS:
It shall be a violation of this Chapter for any person to deny or hinder entry
by an inspector for the purpose of inspecting any of the premises described in
Section
3-5-2 of this Chapter, or any portion thereof; and in such event, the inspector
may forthwith suspend the food vending permit issued for the premises. (1975
Code §8-2.10)
3-5-10: NOTICE OF VIOLATION; HEARING:
   A.   Notice of Violation: When any of the aforesaid laws, this Chapter, or
rules and regulations have been violated, an inspector may serve written notice
thereof entitled "Notice of Violation", specifying:
      1.   The acts and conditions constituting each violation;
      2.   The provision or provisions violated thereby;
      3.   The corrective steps required;
      4.   The date by which all such corrections must be completed allowing a
reasonable period therefor;
      5.   That the permittee has a right to a hearing, upon request, and
      6.   That if no hearing is requested and if the Health Department does
not receive notice that all such corrections have been made before nine o'clock
(9:00) A.M. of the date named under paragraph 4 above, the permit will be
suspended from that time until such violations are corrected. (1975 Code §8-
2.07)
   B.   Hearing: The permit holder shall have the right to a hearing on all
violations listed in the notice. The permit shall, however, be suspended unless
the Department receives from the permit holder, before nine o'clock (9:00) A.M.
of the date specified under subsection A4 above, a written or oral request for
a hearing or notice that all violations have been corrected as specified.
The hearing shall be held by the Health Officer or his duly authorized
representative who is a qualified sanitarian as defined in section 517 of the
Health and Safety Code and registered as provided in section 519 thereof, but
shall not be the inspector who reported the violations or who inspected any
corrective measures taken.
The person conducting the hearing shall make a written order as to each alleged
violation listed on the notice and shall deliver a signed copy thereof to the
permittee. As to each violation, the order shall either:
      1.   Suspend the permit until it is corrected, or
      2.   Extend the time or modify the measures to be taken for correction
before suspension, or
      3.   Declare that the violation has been corrected so as to comply with
the applicable law, or
      4.   Declare that there was no violation. (1975 Code §8-2.08)
3-5-11: SUSPENSION OR REVOCATION OF PERMIT:
   A.   Suspensions:
      1.   A permit issued under this Chapter or its predecessor may be
suspended, under the procedure set forth herein, for any of the following
reasons:
         a.   Violation of State law,
         b.   Violation of this Chapter,
         c.   Violation of the rules and regulations adopted pursuant to
Section
3-5-13 of this Chapter, or
         d.   Upon a recommendation for revocation of the permit, pending a
hearing thereon. (1975 Code §8-2.06)
      2.   Whenever an inspector finds unsanitary or other conditions in the
operation of any food establishment which, in his judgment, constitute an
immediate and substantial hazard to the public health, he shall issue a written
notice to the permit holder or person in charge of the premises as provided in
subsection
3-5-10A of this Chapter, except that, instead of the matter specified under
paragraph 3-5-10A6, it shall state that the permit is immediately suspended and
shall set forth the substance of the following sentence: Any person to whom
such an order is issued shall immediately comply therewith; but, upon request
made to the inspector who orders the suspension, or to the Health Officer or
his authorized representative, either personally or by telephone or in writing,
he shall be afforded a hearing as soon as possible, and notice of its setting
may be given in the same manner as the request. (1975 Code §8-2.11)
   B.   Revocation for Repeated Violations: If there shall have been three (3)
or more notices of violation issued within the twelve (12) month period
immediately preceding the current violation as to the premises in question as
provided in subsection
3-5-10A of this Chapter, and not overruled upon hearing, the order of the
person conducting the hearing or, if no hearing is held, of the inspector, who
is responsible for the third such notice, shall recommend to the Health Officer
whether or not the permit shall be revoked as provided below. If it is so
recommended, the permit may be ordered suspended forthwith by the Health
Officer, pending the hearing on such proposed revocation.
Upon such a recommendation for revocation by the person conducting the hearing,
the permit in question may be revoked by the Health Officer after hearing, upon
his finding that such violations were serious enough and showed such lack of
responsibility towards the public health as to require such revocation to
protect the public health. (1975 Code §8-2.09)
3-5-12: SUPERVISION OF CLOSING DOWN PREMISES:
When any permit is first suspended hereunder, or when any premises governed
hereby as defined in Section
3-5-2 of this Chapter shall have been closed for business and left in an
unsanitary condition, the Health Department shall have the power to insure that
the premises are closed down in a manner which will not endanger the public
health. If the permittee or his employee in charge cannot be found, or is
unwilling or unable to remedy the condition of the premises, the owner of the
premises shall be notified of the unsanitary condition and shall be required to
take such remedial action as may be necessary to alleviate such condition.
(1975 Code §8-2.12)
3-5-13: RULES AND REGULATIONS:
The health officer may adopt and enforce rules and regulations necessary to
administer this chapter, including regulations pertaining to:
   A.   Forms for applications, permits and notices.
   B.   Forms and procedures for hearing upon the granting.
   C.   Inspections of premises and reporting thereon. (1975 Code §8-2.13)
3-5-14: EXEMPTIONS FROM PROVISIONS:
   A.   This chapter shall not apply to cigar stands or other places of
business or vehicles where no food of any kind is sold, other than candy, or
soft drinks received and sold in sealed containers, nor to vehicles engaged in
the delivery of food products to wholesale or retail establishments for resale.
(1975 Code §8-2.02)
   B.   This chapter shall not apply to churches, church societies, private
clubs or other nonprofit associations of a religious, philanthropic, civic
improvement, social, political or educational nature which purchase food, food
products or beverages or which receive donations of food, food products or
beverages for service without charge to their members or for service or sale at
a reasonable charge to their members or to the general public at occasional
fundraising events for consumption on or off the premises at which the food,
food products or beverages are served or sold if the service or sale of such
food, food products or beverages does not constitute a primary purpose or
function of the club or association and if no employee or member is assigned
full-time to care for or operate equipment used in such arrangement. (1975 Code
§8-2.02)
   C.   This chapter shall not apply to the lawful conduct of permittees acting
pursuant to section
5-2-5 of this code. (Ord. 8906, 9-19-1989)
CHAPTER 6
MOTOR VEHICLE RELATED BUSINESSES
ARTICLE A. TAXICAB PERMITS
SECTION:
3-6A-1: Title
3-6A-2: Purpose
3-6A-3: Definitions
3-6A-4: Taxicab Vehicle And Drivers' Permits Required
3-6A-5: Medical Transportation Exempted
3-6A-6: Application For Taxicab Vehicle Permit
3-6A-7: Issuance/Renewal Of Taxicab Vehicle Permit
3-6A-8: Posting Requirements
3-6A-9: Radio Dispatch
3-6A-10: Illuminated Top Light
3-6A-11: Application For Taxicab Driver's Permit
3-6A-12: Issuance/Renewal Of Taxicab Driver's Permit
3-6A-13: Unlawful Activities
3-6A-14: Liability Insurance
3-6A-15: General Provisions Regarding Taxicab Vehicle And Drivers' Permits
3-6A-16: Rules And Regulations
3-6A-17: Enforcement Authority
3-6A-18: Suspension And Revocation
3-6A-19: Emergency Suspension
3-6A-20: City Held Harmless
3-6A-21: Other Remedies Not Precluded
3-6A-22: Appeals
3-6A-1: TITLE:
The title of this article shall be TAXICAB PERMITS. (Ord. 2007-05, 6-5-2007)
3-6A-2: PURPOSE:
Regulating the operation of taxicabs is necessary in order to control traffic
flow, ensure passenger safety and protect the public health, safety and
welfare. This article has been adopted in accordance with the requirements of
Government Code section 53075.5, as amended. (Ord. 2007-05, 6-5-2007)
3-6A-3: DEFINITIONS:
As used in this article, the following words and terms shall have the meanings
ascribed to them in this section:
DISABLED PERSON: Any person who, by reason of illness, injury, age, medical
condition, or other permanent or temporary incapacity or disability, is unable
without special facilities or special planning or design to use mass
transportation facilities and services as efficiently as persons who are not so
affected, and shall include ambulatory persons whose capacities are hindered by
sensory disabilities such as blindness or deafness, such mental disabilities as
mental retardation or emotional illness, and physical disabilities that still
permit the person to walk comfortably, or a combination of these disabilities,
and shall also include a semiambulatory person who requires such special aids
to travel as canes, crutches, walkers, respirators, or human assistance, and a
nonambulatory person who must use wheelchairs or wheelchair like equipment to
travel.
OPERATING TAXICAB IN THE CITY OF LEMOORE: Owning, leasing, advertising,
driving, occupying and/or otherwise using a taxicab that at any time transports
any passenger or item for compensation from a point within the geographical
confines of the city of Lemoore. The vehicle is considered to be operating
during the administering of inspections. This term does not include being in
control of a vehicle that is physically inoperable.
OWNER: The person whose lawful right of possession of a taxicab has most
recently been recorded with the state department of motor vehicles.
PERMITTEE: Any person or entity issued a permit under this article.
TAXICAB: Any motor vehicle designed and used for carrying passengers, operated
in the streets of the city other than over a defined or fixed route, and
irrespective of whether the operations extend beyond the boundary limits of the
city, between such points and over such route for the transportation of persons
for hire at the direction of the passengers. Taxicab shall not include a
charter party carrier of passengers within the meaning of section 5351 of the
Public Utilities Code.
TAXICAB DRIVER'S PERMIT: A permit issued under this article, to a person for
the privilege of operating a taxicab.
TAXICAB VEHICLE PERMIT: A taxicab permit issued under this article.
TAXIMETER: Any instrument or device attached to a taxicab, and designed or
intended to measure mechanically or electronically the distance traveled by
such taxicab, or to record the time said taxicab is in waiting, and to
indicate, by figures or designs, the fare to be charged in dollars and cents.
(Ord. 2007-05, 6-5-2007)
3-6A-4: TAXICAB VEHICLE AND DRIVERS' PERMITS REQUIRED:
It shall be unlawful to operate or cause to be operated any taxicab in the city
of Lemoore, without a valid taxicab vehicle permit and a valid taxicab driver's
permit. A permit shall not be required for a taxicab which is lawfully
transporting a passenger from a point outside this city to a destination within
this city, or which is en route from a point outside this city to a destination
outside this city; provided that a driver of a taxicab without such taxicab
permit and driver's permit shall not solicit or accept a passenger or
passengers from within this city for transportation to any destination
whatsoever.
   A.   The act or omission of any permittee's and/or owner's officer, agent,
employee or independent contractor, or of any driver whose services are engaged
by any of the above, is for all purposes the act or omission of the respective
permittee and/or owner operating the transportation services regulated by this
article.
   B.   The city may adopt a resolution to levy service charges, fees, or
assessments in an amount sufficient to pay for the costs of carrying out the
requirements of this article. (Ord. 2007-05, 6-5-2007)
3-6A-5: MEDICAL TRANSPORTATION EXEMPTED:
This article shall not apply to the transportation of disabled persons in
specially equipped vehicles, which vehicles cannot ordinarily be used for the
transportation of taxicab patrons. Persons operating a service claiming such an
exemption shall transport only handicapped or disabled persons and their
attendants. (Ord. 2007-05, 6-5-2007)
3-6A-6: APPLICATION FOR TAXICAB VEHICLE PERMIT:
Any person desiring to secure a taxicab permit shall file an application with
the police chief. The application shall include the following:
   A.   Ownership and form of business organization:
      1.   If the owner is an individual, the owner's full name, home address,
home and business telephone numbers and date of birth (which shall be at least
18 years prior to the date of application).
      2.   If the owner is a corporation, partnership or other legal entity,
the names, home addresses, telephone numbers and dates of birth (which must be
at least 18 years before the date of application) for the corporation's or
entity's officers, directors, general, managing or operating partners,
registered agents, and each person vested with authority to manage or direct
the affairs of the legal entity or to bind the legal entity in dealings with
third parties; the corporation's, partnership's or entity's true legal name,
fictitious names, business statement(s) (if any), state of incorporation,
articles of organization, or partnership registration (if any), business
address and telephone and facsimile numbers and city of Lemoore's business
license number, and any other information that the city manager may reasonably
require. The police chief may request copies of the entity's governing
documents.
      3.   For each person with a ten percent (10%) or greater financial
interest in the business which operates the taxicab, fingerprinting by the
police department and/or department of justice personnel, submission of three
(3) recent dated portrait photographs, one to be attached to the application
and two (2) for the use of the investigations, and a list, signed under penalty
of perjury, of each conviction of such person and whether such conviction was
by verdict, plea of guilty, or plea of nolo contendere. The list shall, for
each such conviction, set forth the date of arrest, the offense charged, and
the offense of which the person was convicted. A person who acquires a ten
percent (10%) or greater financial interest in the business which operates the
taxicab during the life of the permit issued pursuant to this article shall
immediately so notify the police chief and comply with this subsection. Any
holder of a valid taxicab driver's permit issued pursuant to this article shall
be exempt from the requirements of this subsection.
   B.   The number of permits desired and a list of vehicles to be used as
taxicabs, including a full description of each vehicle, the taxicab vehicle
number assigned by any regulatory agency, the make, model, model year, vehicle
identification number, California vehicle license plate number, and any other
vehicle information required by rule or regulation adopted under this article;
provided, that the full description of new vehicles may be submitted within
thirty (30) days of the date of issuance of a permit hereunder.
   C.   A full description of the location and operation of the applicant's
place of business, including any required two-way communications system.
   D.   The date upon which the applicant desires the permit to be issued.
   E.   Proof of liability insurance policy as required by this article.
   F.   A rate schedule setting forth all rates for taxi service and the
methodology for computing the rate.
   G.   Such other and further information as the police chief may require.
   H.   An annual nonproratable, nonrefundable permit fee, including any
applicable vehicle inspection or reinspection fee, as established by resolution
of the city council.
   I.   The application shall be under penalty of perjury, and shall not be
accepted unless it is clearly filled out in full with all required information
and is accompanied by the application fees for each permit requested. (Ord.
2007-05, 6-5-2007)
3-6A-7: ISSUANCE/RENEWAL OF TAXICAB VEHICLE PERMIT:
   A.   The police chief shall cause an investigation to be made of the facts
stated in the taxicab permit application, and shall, within thirty (30) days,
physically inspect the taxicab and otherwise determine the following:
      1.   Whether the applicant has had a taxicab permit revoked for any cause
within the last twenty four (24) months.
      2.   Whether the application fee has been paid.
      3.   Whether any fact exists that would be cause for revocation of a
taxicab permit because of a violation of any of the terms of this article or
rules promulgated pursuant thereto.
      4.   Whether any statement made in the application is false.
      5.   Whether the applicant, including all persons doing business under
fictitious names as members of partnerships, or as officers of corporations or
associations, has been convicted of a crime involving moral turpitude including
whether subject to any sex offender registration requirement, or a conviction
of use, possession or sale of a controlled substance.
      6.   Whether each vehicle and related equipment proposed for use or used
as a taxicab has been inspected and approved by a licensed automotive repair
facility. Such inspection shall include, without limitation, the mileage,
engine, gears, transmission, brake system, lighting system, seat belts, doors,
windshield wipers, radio dispatch system, exhaust and air pollution control
system, tires, wheels, and whether each vehicle meets ultra low emission
standards of the air resources board.
   B.   If the police chief makes a finding unfavorable to the applicant, with
respect to any of the above factors, the police chief shall deny issuance of
the permit and shall give the applicant prompt written notice of such finding
and decision. The notice shall include a statement of the specific reasons for
denial, and the right to appeal the decision under the city's administrative
hearing procedures ordinance.
   C.   Should the police chief's report conclude that the applicant meets the
requirements of this article, the police chief shall issue such permit or
permits. Each permit shall be numbered and shall state the name and address of
the permittee and the date of issuance. One permit shall be issued for each
taxicab. Any fees deposited by unsuccessful applicants shall be refunded, less
any amount designated in the city's master user's fee resolution to be retained
to defray the cost of application and investigation processing.
   D.   The police chief may impose such terms, conditions or restrictions on
the taxicab permit as deemed necessary to provide adequate and dependable
service to the public and to protect the use of public streets and facilities.
   E.   Upon any change in ownership of a taxicab company, the new owner shall
submit an application for and be issued a taxicab permit in the manner provided
in this article.
   F.   All vehicles and operation thereof which are subject to the Americans
with disabilities act (ADA) shall comply with the applicable provisions of said
act. (Ord. 2007-05, 6-5-2007)
3-6A-8: POSTING REQUIREMENTS:
   A.   There shall be displayed in the taxicab passenger compartment in full
view of any passenger:
      1.   A copy of a valid taxicab vehicle permit;
      2.   A copy of a valid taxicab driver's permit;
      3.   A rate schedule; and
      4.   The register display of the taximeter.
   B.   There shall be displayed on each exterior side of the taxicab in full
view of prospective passengers in letters not less than two inches (2") in
height, the business name and telephone number of the taxicab vehicle
permittee. (Ord. 2008-05, 7-1-2008)
3-6A-9: RADIO DISPATCH:
Every taxicab shall be equipped with a required two-way communications system.
(Ord. 2007-05, 6-5-2007)
3-6A-10: ILLUMINATED TOP LIGHT:
A top light containing light or lights shall be affixed to the roof of every
taxicab and shall be illuminated in nondaylight hours when the taxicab is
available for hire. The word "taxicab", "taxi", "cab" or the business name of
the taxicab owner or other words identifying the vehicle as a taxicab shall be
visible on the top light. (Ord. 2007-05, 6-5-2007)
3-6A-11: APPLICATION FOR TAXICAB DRIVER'S PERMIT:
Any person desiring to secure a taxicab driver's permit shall submit an
application to the police chief. The application shall be in a form approved by
the police chief and shall include the following:
   A.   The applicant's name, home address, business address, and telephone
numbers.
   B.   The applicant's age and place of birth.
   C.   The date upon which the applicant wishes the permit to be issued.
   D.   Identification, including the number, of any previous driver's permit
issued to the applicant.
   E.   A statement that the applicant has been fingerprinted by the police
department and/or department of justice personnel.
   F.   Submission of three (3) recent dated portrait photographs, two (2) to
be attached to the application, and one to be attached to the driver's permit
if issued.
   G.   A statement of the applicant's criminal convictions including any
related sex offender registration requirements, whether such conviction was by
verdict, plea of guilty, or plea of nolo contendere, for each such conviction,
the date of arrest, the offense charged, and the offense of which applicant was
convicted, excluding parking violations.
   H.   Type, number, and description of California drivers' licenses held by
the applicant and date(s) of expiration.
   I.   A declaration signed by a taxicab employer that the applicant is
employed by or has an offer of employment by that employer to operate a
taxicab, or a declaration that the applicant is a self-employed independent
driver.
   J.   A declaration by a taxicab employer for an applicant who is employed by
or has an offer of employment with the employer, or by applicant if applicant
is a self-employed independent driver, that applicant has been tested for
controlled substances (and alcohol for permit renewal) in accordance with
Government Code section 53075.5 and the results thereof are negative.
   K.   All applicants shall take and pass with negative results a controlled
substance and/or alcohol test in accordance with Government Code section
53075.5 as it may be amended or renumbered. Such test shall be taken no more
than thirty (30) days preceding the date the application is filed for a new
permit or renewal of an expired permit. In the event that an applicant or
permittee takes a controlled substance and/or alcohol test with positive
results, the employing taxicab operator shall report such results to the city.
In the event that a self-employed independent driver takes a controlled
substance and/or alcohol test with positive results, the city shall report such
results to any taxicab leasing/licensing entity.
   L.   If applicant is a self-employed independent driver, test results from
the controlled substance (and alcohol for permit renewal) test shall be
reported to the city and are to be made a part of the application.
   M.   A statement of whether the applicant's state driver's license has ever
been revoked or suspended and, if so, the reason(s) for such revocation or
suspension.
   N.   The application shall be under penalty of perjury, and shall not be
accepted unless it is clearly filled out in full with all required information
and is accompanied by the nonrefundable permit fee designated in the master
user's fee resolution. (Ord. 2007-05, 6-5-2007)
3-6A-12: ISSUANCE/RENEWAL OF TAXICAB DRIVER'S PERMIT:
   A.   The police chief shall cause an investigation to be made of the facts
stated in the application and shall, within thirty (30) days, make a
determination.
   B.   The police chief may deny issuance/renewal of a permit in the event he
or she makes a finding adverse to the applicant with respect to any of the
above factors including the following grounds:
      1.   Failure to submit a complete application.
      2.   Failure to submit fingerprinting and photographs.
      3.   Making a false statement of fact required to be revealed in the
permit application.
      4.   The applicant has been convicted of a crime involving moral
turpitude or a crime substantially related to the qualifications, functions, or
duties of a taxicab driver, and the time for appeal has elapsed, or when an
order granting parole or probation is made suspending the imposition of
sentence, irrespective of the entry of a subsequent order under Penal Code
section 1203.4. However, no person shall be denied a permit solely on the basis
that he or she has been convicted of a felony if he or she has obtained a
certificate of rehabilitation under state Penal Code section 4852.01 et seq.,
or that he or she has been convicted of a misdemeanor if he or she has met all
applicable requirements of the criteria of rehabilitation developed to evaluate
the rehabilitation of a person when considering the denial of a license under
state Penal Code section 4852.01(a).
      5.   Refusal or failure to submit to a controlled substance and/or
alcohol test required by Government Code section 53075.5.
      6.   Applicant tests positive for any controlled substance or alcohol
when tested for controlled substances and/or alcohol in accordance with
Government Code section 53075.5.
      7.   Failure to pay application, permit and related fees.
   C.   If a permit is denied, the police chief shall give the applicant prompt
written notice of such decision. The notice shall include a statement of the
specific reasons for denial including any complaints received against any
applicant currently holding a permit and the right to appeal the decision under
the city's administrative hearing procedures ordinance.
   D.   If the police chief concludes that the applicant meets the requirements
of this article, the police chief shall issue the taxicab driver's permit. Any
taxicab driver's permit issued/renewed shall be subject to such terms,
conditions or restrictions on the taxicab driver's permit as the police chief
deems necessary to provide adequate and dependable service to the public and to
protect the use of public streets and facilities, including, without
limitation, the following conditions and requirements:
      1.   The police chief may, upon reasonable cause, require any taxicab
driver permittee to take a controlled substance and/or alcohol test in
accordance with Government Code section 53075.5. Such test shall be taken by a
driver within twenty four (24) hours after police chief gives notice of the
requirement. Notice shall be given to permittee, and to permittee's employer if
permittee is not self-employed. Notice shall be deemed effective upon
depositing said notice in the U.S. mail, first class postage prepaid, addressed
to the permittee and permittee's employer, if applicable, at the last address
on record with the police chief. Failure to take the test within the time
specified shall result in automatic suspension of the permittee's taxicab
driver's permit and shall be grounds for revocation of the permit.
      2.   The applicant's photograph shall be permanently attached to the
taxicab driver's permit. The taxicab driver's permit shall be posted in a place
conspicuous from the passenger's compartment of the taxicab.
      3.   All employers shall maintain, and all drivers shall comply with, a
mandatory controlled substance and alcohol testing certification program. The
program shall include, but need not be limited to, all of the following
requirements:
         a.   Drivers shall test negative for each of the controlled substances
specified in part 40 (commencing with section 40.1) of title 49 of the code of
federal regulations. Drivers shall test negative for these controlled
substances and for alcohol as a condition of permit issuance/renewal and at
such other times as the police chief shall designate. As used in this section,
a "negative test for alcohol" means an alcohol screening test showing a breath
alcohol concentration of less than 0.02 percent.
         b.   Procedures shall be substantially as in part 40 (commencing with
section 40.1) of title 49 of the code of federal regulations, except that the
driver shall show a valid California driver's license at the time and place of
testing, and except as provided otherwise in this section.
         c.   A test in one jurisdiction shall be accepted as meeting the same
requirement in any other jurisdiction. Any negative test result shall be
accepted for one year as meeting a requirement for periodic permit renewal
testing or any other periodic testing in that jurisdiction or any other
jurisdiction, if the driver has not tested positive subsequent to a negative
result. However, an earlier negative result shall not be accepted as meeting
the preemployment testing requirement for any subsequent employment, or any
testing requirements under the program other than periodic testing.
         d.   In the case of a self-employed independent driver, the test
results shall be reported directly to the city, which shall notify the taxicab
leasing company of record, if any, of positive results. In all other cases, the
results shall be reported directly to the employing transportation operator,
who shall be required to notify the city of positive results.
         e.   All test results are confidential and shall not be released
without the consent of the driver, except as authorized or required by law.
         f.   Self-employed independent drivers shall be responsible for
compliance with, and shall pay all costs of, this program with regard to
themselves. Employing transportation operators shall be responsible for
compliance with, and shall pay all costs of, this program with respect to their
employees and potential employees, except that an operator may require
employees who test positive to pay the costs of rehabilitation and of return to
duty and follow up testing.
      4.   Upon the request of a driver applying for a permit, the city shall
give the driver a list of entities certified pursuant to part 382 (commencing
with section 382.101) of title 49 of the code of federal regulations that the
city knows offer tests in or near the jurisdiction.
      5.   No evidence derived from a positive test result pursuant to the
program shall be admissible in a criminal prosecution concerning unlawful
possession, sale, or distribution of controlled substances.
   E.   For purposes of this section, "employment" includes self-employment as
an independent driver. (Ord. 2008-05, 7-1-2008)
3-6A-13: UNLAWFUL ACTIVITIES:
   A.   It is unlawful for any person to operate a taxicab for compensation
with knowledge that the taxicab, driver, or taximeter is not authorized by a
valid permit or that grounds for revocation or suspension of the permit under
this article exist.
   B.   It is unlawful for any taxicab driver or person in the business of
operating a taxicab for compensation to do any of the following:
      1.   Charge an additional type of fee or higher fee other than those fees
posted;
      2.   Transport a greater number of passengers than the rated seat
capacity of the taxicab;
      3.   Fail to answer all calls received in the order of receipt;
      4.   Refuse, upon request, to give a passenger a written receipt showing
the fare due, and the miles and minutes employed;
      5.   For the primary purpose of obtaining higher fees, drive passengers
via indirect or circuitous routes;
      6.   Refuse to provide service on the basis of the short length of the
prospective ride;
      7.   Fail to display a valid permit, issued pursuant to this article, in
the taxicab interior in full view of any passenger;
      8.   Pick up additional passengers without prior consent of the passenger
(s) already in the taxicab;
      9.   Solicit or carry passengers for compensation in a taxicab not posted
in compliance with this article, or not equipped with an operable accurate
taximeter;
      10.   Knowingly fail to report to the taxicab vehicle permittee or
authorized agent thereof all property of value left by a passenger in the
taxicab within twenty four (24) hours of discovery of such property;
      11.   Operate the taxicab for hire without engaging the taxicab meter;
      12.   Refuse to drive to a destination different from that originally
stated;
      13.   Refuse, upon request, to allow a passenger to disembark at a
location different from the originally stated destination;
      14.   Operate a taxicab for which insurance coverage as required by this
article is not in effect;
      15.   Operate a taxicab with an invalid, suspended or revoked driver's
license;
      16.   Employ or contract with any person to be a taxicab driver while the
owner or permittee is not in full compliance with the applicable provisions of
this title; or
      17.   Park an out of service or off duty taxicab on a public street in
excess of two (2) hours.
   C.   Except where credit is extended, any person who shall wilfully or
fraudulently fail or refuse to pay, at the end of the trip, or the termination
or discharge of service, the legal fare for a taxicab that he or she has hired,
shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. (Ord. 2008-05, 7-1-2008)
3-6A-14: LIABILITY INSURANCE:
   A.   No taxicab shall be driven or operated in the city unless the permittee
thereof obtains and maintains, at no cost to the city, a motor vehicle
liability insurance policy, with coverage limits not less than as prescribed in
subsection B of this section, with an insurance company either: 1) admitted by
the California insurance commissioner to do business in the state of California
and rated not less than "A- VII" in "Best's Insurance Rating Guide", or 2)
authorized by the city's risk manager.
   B.   Such policy shall insure permittee, owner and driver against liability
for injury to or death of any person, or damage to property, arising or alleged
to have arisen directly or indirectly out of the ownership, maintenance or use
of the permitted taxicab. The minimum limits of insurance required hereunder
are one hundred thousand dollars ($100,000.00) for injury to or death of any
one person in any one accident, three hundred thousand dollars ($300,000.00)
for injury to or death of more than one person in any one accident, and one
hundred thousand dollars ($100,000.00) for property damage in any one accident.
   C.   Such policy shall be endorsed to provide that the coverage shall not be
canceled, nonrenewed, reduced in coverage or in limits except after thirty (30)
calendar days' written notice by certified mail, return receipt requested, has
been given to the city. Upon issuance by the insurer, broker, or agent of a
notice of cancellation, nonrenewal, or reduction in coverage or in limits,
permittee shall furnish the city with a new certificate and applicable
endorsements for such policy. In the event the policy is due to expire during
the permit period, the permittee shall provide a new certificate, and
applicable endorsements, evidencing renewal of such policy not less than
fifteen (15) calendar days prior to the expiration date of the expiring policy.
   D.   Such policy shall be endorsed to provide that the city, its officers,
officials, employees, agents and volunteers are named as additional insureds
and that permittee's insurance shall be primary and no contribution shall be
required of the city, its officers, officials, employees, agents and
volunteers.
   E.   Permittee shall furnish the city with the certificate of insurance and
applicable endorsements for all required insurance prior to issuance of the
permit.
   F.   Permittee shall furnish the city with copies of the actual policy upon
the request of the risk manager at any time during the life of the permit or
any extension, and this requirement shall survive revocation, suspension or
expiration of the permit.
   G.   Failure to maintain the required insurance for any period of time is a
violation of this article and shall be sufficient grounds for suspension,
revocation or nonrenewal of a permit. (Ord. 2007-05, 6-5-2007)
3-6A-15: GENERAL PROVISIONS REGARDING TAXICAB VEHICLE AND DRIVERS' PERMITS:
   A.   All permits issued under this article are enforceable and subject to
suspension and revocation in accordance with this article, and are to be
exercised only in conformance with any and all rules and regulations
promulgated and enforceable hereunder.
   B.   All permits issued under this article are personal to the permittee. A
permittee shall not permit any right or privilege thereunder to be exercised by
another, nor shall any permit or any interest therein or any right or privilege
thereunder be sold, transferred, leased, assigned or otherwise disposed of
except as may be provided in this article. A transfer in violation of this
subsection shall be ineffective and shall constitute permittee's violation of
this article.
   C.   Upon the death of any taxicab permittee, the permit may be exercised by
the executor or administrator of the deceased permittee's estate during the
period of estate administration. The period shall not exceed one year from the
permittee's death.
      1.   A deceased permittee's surviving heir(s) who inherits the
permittee's entire taxicab company may apply for the taxicab permit(s) held by
decedent permittee.
      2.   A permittee may sell the taxicab company, or one or more taxicabs,
to another current permittee, who may then apply for the taxicab permits held
by the selling company.
   D.   A permit issued under this article is an annual permit which expires on
the following December 31, provided, that whenever a taxicab vehicle or
driver's permit has been applied for and issued within a period of sixty (60)
days before December 31, it shall be valid when issued and may be issued for
the next ensuing year. Application for renewal must be received by the police
chief before expiration of the permit and will require permittee to attest that
all information on file remains current and correct and submission of current
insurance certificates and other required certifications and declarations, as
applicable.
   E.   The renewal fee shall be the annual amount designated in the master
user's fee resolution and shall be paid at such times designated in the master
user's fee resolution. If any permit is not exercised or is suspended or
rescinded, the fee shall not be refunded. The fee required is a permit fee and
shall not be deemed to be in lieu of a business tax as required by the
provisions of this code. Prior to the payment of the annual permit renewal fee
for a taxicab permit, the permittee must submit a valid state of California
vehicle registration card.
   F.   Late penalty on renewal shall be charged on all applications for
renewal received later than ten (10) working days after the expiration date.
The amount of such late penalty shall be fixed annually in the master user's
fee resolution. (Ord. 2008-05, 7-1-2008)
3-6A-16: RULES AND REGULATIONS:
The police chief, with the approval of the city manager, may adopt rules and
regulations enforceable hereunder, which are not inconsistent with the
provisions of this article and which may be necessary or desirable to aid in
its administration or enforcement. (Ord. 2007-05, 6-5-2007)
3-6A-17: ENFORCEMENT AUTHORITY:
The police chief shall have the authority to enforce the provisions of this
article and to arrest any person without a warrant for a violation of this
article when committed in his/her presence, to impound any taxicab vehicle(s),
and to issue a notice to appear pursuant to Penal Code section 836.5. This
authority shall be in addition to the authority granted to police officers
under this code.
   A.   Each day on which a taxicab vehicle is operated in violation of any
provision of this article shall constitute a separate violation.
   B.   Each day on which a taxicab driver operates a taxicab in violation of
any provision of this article shall constitute a separate violation. (Ord.
2007-05, 6-5-2007)
3-6A-18: SUSPENSION AND REVOCATION:
   A.   Subject to emergency suspension procedures in section
3-6A-19 of this article, the police chief may suspend or revoke a permit issued
under this article upon written notice to affected permittee(s) specifying any
of the following grounds for the proposed action and a date and place for a
hearing thereon:
      1.   Any of the permit conditions are being violated.
      2.   The permit is being exercised in violation of this code or state
law.
      3.   The fact(s) which supported the issuance of the permit no longer
exists.
      4.   The permit is being used for a purpose detrimental to public morals,
peace, or order, or is being used for a purpose contrary to that for which the
permit was issued.
      5.   The application contained falsehoods.
      6.   Any fact or condition exists which, if it had been known to exist at
the time of the original application for such permit, reasonably would have
warranted the police chief in refusing originally to issue the permit.
      7.   The taxicab or its equipment is in such condition that its operation
violates the state Vehicle Code.
      8.   Transfer or sale of the permit to a vehicle or taximeter other than
that identified in the permit application.
      9.   Failure of the permittee to notify the city of cancellation,
expiration, or change of insurance coverage as required by this article.
      10.   Operation of a taxicab for which the insurance coverage required by
this article is not in effect.
      11.   Submitting a false controlled substance and/or alcohol test
declaration or employment declaration. Such suspension or revocation may apply
to all taxicab permits in the name of the person, persons or business in whose
behalf the declaration is submitted.
      12.   Allowing an employee without a valid taxicab driver's permit to
operate a taxicab vehicle for compensation. Such suspension or revocation may
apply to all permits in the name of the person, persons or business who allow
an employee without a valid taxicab driver's permit to operate a taxicab
vehicle for compensation.
      13.   If permittee or permittee's employer submits a false controlled
substance and/or alcohol test declaration or employment declaration.
      14.   Operation of a taxicab in an unsafe manner or any conduct which
places any passenger, motorist or pedestrian at unreasonable or unnecessary
risk.
   B.   Upon written notice by an insurer or verification of cancellation,
expiration or change in insurance coverage resulting in noncompliance with this
article, a permit shall be automatically suspended effective upon the effective
date of the cancellation, expiration, or change in coverage. The suspension
shall continue until the earlier of the required insurance coverage being
reinstated and the city receives written notice from the insurer indicating
compliance with the requirements of this article or permit expiration.
   C.   Any taxicab driver's permit suspended or revoked for positive results
of a controlled substance and/or alcohol test shall not be reinstated, nor
shall a new permit be issued, until the requirements for rehabilitation and
return to duty in accordance with Government Code section 53075.5 are
satisfied.
   D.   Except in the case of an emergency suspension and automatic suspension
relating to cancellation, expiration or change in insurance coverage, the
permit suspension or revocation shall become effective following an opportunity
to be heard. The hearing shall be informal and shall provide permittee(s)
notice pursuant to this section with the opportunity to present and examine
witnesses and documentary evidence and to be represented by counsel. At the
hearing any issuance of a written notice of cancellation, expiration or change
in coverage by an insurance company shall be conclusive proof at the hearing of
the change in the policy so indicated. An unexcused failure by permittee(s) to
appear for hearing shall be deemed acquiescence in the proposed action. The
police chief, within ten (10) days following the hearing, shall mail or
otherwise furnish to persons noticed pursuant to this section a written
decision stating the grounds for the decision. The decision of the police chief
may be appealed under the city's administrative hearing procedures.
   E.   Any permit suspension shall continue in effect until the earlier of: 1)
satisfaction of the requirements specified to the end of the suspension period,
or 2) expiration of any period of suspension as may be specified therein. The
permit holder may not exercise the permit at any time during the suspension
period unless expressly allowed under this code.
   F.   A suspended or revoked permit may not be renewed. (Ord. 2007-05, 6-5-
2007)
3-6A-19: EMERGENCY SUSPENSION:
   A.   In addition to a notice of suspension or revocation under section
3-6A-18 of this article the police chief may issue a notice for emergency
suspension of a taxicab permit and/or a taxicab driver's permit for a period
not exceeding twenty (20) days without having conducted a hearing therefor,
upon a determination that the continued use of the permit will cause immediate
hazard to the public safety, health or welfare. Such a notice shall also
contain a notice of the hearing setting forth the date, time and place of the
hearing.
   B.   Within ten (10) days of the effective date of the order, the police
chief shall hold a hearing to allow the affected permittee(s) to show cause why
the permit should not be suspended or revoked. The police chief, within ten
(10) days following the hearing, shall mail or otherwise furnish to persons
noticed pursuant to this section a written decision, stating the grounds for
the decision.
   C.   Any permit suspension by the police chief following hearing shall
continue in effect until the earlier of: 1) satisfaction of the requirements
specified to the end of the suspension period, or 2) expiration of any period
of suspension as may be specified therein.
   D.   The decision of the police chief may be appealed under the city's
administrative hearing procedure ordinance, provided such an appeal shall not
stay the effectiveness of the decision of the police chief. The permit holder
may not exercise the permit at any time during the suspension period unless
expressly allowed under this code.
   E.   A permit suspended on an emergency basis may not be renewed. (Ord.
2007-05, 6-5-2007)
3-6A-20: CITY HELD HARMLESS:
A permittee under this article shall, and by acceptance of his permit does,
agree to indemnify, defend and hold the city, its officers, employees and
agents free and harmless from any and all claims, costs, liability, damages or
expenses, including costs of suit and fees, including attorney fees, arising
out of or related to the permittee's acts, omissions and/or operations
thereunder, except for that liability caused by the sole negligence of the
city. The foregoing is not intended to and shall not be construed to limit any
responsibility or liability to which the permittee may be subjected under other
laws. (Ord. 2007-05, 6-5-2007)
3-6A-21: OTHER REMEDIES NOT PRECLUDED:
Any remedy provided under this article is cumulative to any other remedy
provided in equity or at law. Nothing in this article shall be deemed to limit
the right of the city to bring a civil or criminal action against any person
who violates this article; nor shall any conviction for such violation exempt
any person from a civil action brought by the city or its authorized collection
agent(s). (Ord. 2007-05, 6-5-2007)
3-6A-22: APPEALS:
Unless otherwise expressly provided by this code, any person adversely and
directly affected by any determination made or action taken by the police chief
pursuant to the provisions of this article may file an administrative appeal
under the city's administrative hearing procedures. If no appeal is filed
within the time prescribed, the determination or action of the police chief
shall be final. (Ord. 2007-05, 6-5-2007)
ARTICLE B. AMBULANCE OPERATORS
SECTION:
3-6B-1: Definitions
3-6B-2: License Required
3-6B-3: Application For License
3-6B-1: DEFINITIONS:
As used in this article, the following words and terms shall have the meanings
ascribed to them in this section:
AMBULANCE: Any privately owned vehicle equipped or used for transporting those
who are wounded, injured or sick.
AMBULANCE OPERATOR: Any person who, for a monetary or other consideration,
transports in one or more ambulances one or more persons from any location in
the city to any hospital or other place. (1975 Code §4-2.01)
3-6B-2: LICENSE REQUIRED:
No person shall engage in the business of an ambulance operator in the city
without first obtaining an ambulance operator's license. No permit to engage in
the business of an ambulance operator will be issued until and unless the city
council, after public hearing, has determined that the public convenience and
necessity requires the issuance of a permit or additional permits. (1975 Code
§4-2.02)
3-6B-3: APPLICATION FOR LICENSE:
An application for a license for the operation of an ambulance shall be filed
with the chief of police upon forms provided. Each application shall be
certified under penalty of perjury and shall furnish the following information:
   A.   The name, business and residence address and citizenship status of the
applicant.
   B.   The experience of the applicant in the transportation and care of sick
or injured persons.
   C.   The number and type, age, condition and patient capacity of each
private ambulance proposed to be operated by the applicant and the location and
description of the premises which are to serve as a base of operation.
   D.   A schedule of the rates to be charged for carrying passengers. (1975
Code §4-2.02)
CHAPTER 7
PEDDLERS, SOLICITORS AND TRANSIENT MERCHANTS 1
SECTION:
3-7-1: Application for Peddler's License
3-7-2: Uninvited Peddling or Soliciting
 
Notes
1 1. See also Section
  3-1A-2-8 of this Title.
3-7-1: APPLICATION FOR PEDDLER'S LICENSE:
No application for a peddler's license under the provisions of this Title shall
be acted upon or any such license issued without referring such application
first to the Chief of Police for investigation and fingerprinting report in
order to protect the public peace, health and safety; and no business license
shall be issued to any such peddler until the Chief of Police shall have first
endorsed his approval thereon in writing. (1975 Code §5-1.17)
3-7-2: UNINVITED PEDDLING OR SOLICITING:
   A.   Nuisance Declared: The practice of going in and upon private residences
in the City by solicitors, peddlers, hawkers, itinerant merchants and transient
vendors of merchandise, not having been requested or invited so to do by the
owner or owners, occupant or occupants of said private residence, for the
purpose of soliciting orders for the sale of goods, wares and merchandise, and/
or for the purpose of disposing of and/or peddling or hawking the same is
hereby declared to be a nuisance and punishable as such nuisance as a
misdemeanor. (1975 Code §4-3.01)
   B.   Enforcement: The Chief of Police and police force of the City are
hereby required and directed to suppress the same and to abate any such
nuisance as is described in subsection A of this Section. (1975 Code §4-3.02)
   C.   Penalties: Any person convicted of perpetrating a nuisance as described
and prohibited in subsection A hereof, upon conviction thereof, shall be fined
a sum of not less than twenty five dollars ($25.00) nor more than one hundred
dollars ($100.00) together with costs of proceedings, which said fine may be
satisfied, if not paid in cash, by execution against the person of anyone
convicted of committing the misdemeanor herein prohibited. (1975 Code §4-3.03)
CHAPTER 8
GARAGE AND YARD SALES; FUNDRAISERS
SECTION:
3-8-1: Permit Required
3-8-2: Rules And Regulations Applicable To All Sales
3-8-3: Restrictions On Items Sold
3-8-4: Advertising Signs
3-8-5: Exceptions To Provisions
3-8-6: Violation And Penalties
3-8-1: PERMIT REQUIRED:
No person in any zone in the city shall sell or advertise in any manner
whatever a sale of new or used merchandise at a garage, yard, patio or similar
sale without obtaining a special permit from the building inspector and
complying with the rules and regulations for same. (1975 Code §5-3.01)
3-8-2: RULES AND REGULATIONS APPLICABLE TO ALL SALES:
The provisions of this section shall apply to all such sales whether conducted
by the owner, tenants, their agents, consignees or otherwise and/or by profit
and nonprofit organizations. (1975 Code §5-3.04)
   A.   License Fee: The license fee for sales covered by this chapter shall be
according to the city of Lemoore master user fee schedule. (Ord. 2014-03, 7-1-
2014)
   B.   Term Of Sale: The maximum period of sale shall be three (3) days.
   C.   Number Of Sales Per Year: The maximum number of such sales at any one
address shall be limited to two (2) per calendar year while the land is vested
in the same ownership.
One additional individual or family may, without license, jointly participate
with the licensee in the sales referred to in the above paragraph, provided the
items offered for sale by such person or persons are as defined by section
3-8-3 of this chapter.
   D.   Enforcement:
      1.   The building inspector and police department shall enforce the
provisions of this section and may establish other necessary rules and
regulations pertaining to the sale affecting the public health and safety, and
providing a reasonable area for public travel.
      2.   The police department shall have the right to order the withdrawal
from sale of any items which do not comply with this section. (1975 Code §5-
3.04)
3-8-3: RESTRICTIONS ON ITEMS SOLD:
No person shall sell or offer for sale personal property in any residential
zone except personal property owned, utilized and maintained by such person or
members of his family on or in connection with the premises which they occupy.
Personal property offered for sale shall not be displayed in any sidewalk or
public right of way. (1975 Code §5-3.02)
In the event miscellaneous items of personal property are to be offered for
sale to the general public by means of a garage sale, patio sale or other sale
similarly conducted, the person conducting such sale shall file an affidavit
with the city clerk stating that all the property to be sold is his own
personal property and has not been acquired or consigned to him for purposes of
resale. (1975 Code §5-3.03)
3-8-4: ADVERTISING SIGNS:
No signs shall be posted in any place other than the property where the sale is
being conducted. Said signs shall not exceed six (6) square feet in size. (1975
Code §5-3.05)
3-8-5: EXCEPTIONS TO PROVISIONS:
   A.   The above sections shall not apply to sales of personal property made
under court order or process.
   B.   In the case of churches, public schools, fraternal organizations and
other nonprofit entities, sales for charitable purposes may be conducted in
other than single-family residential zones upon issuance of a permit. (1975
Code §5-3.06)
3-8-6: VIOLATION AND PENALTIES:
Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall be guilty of
an infraction and shall be punishable as set forth in sections 19(c) and 19(d)
of the Penal Code of the state of California. (1975 Code §5-3.07)
CHAPTER 9
DISPLAY OF ADULT MATERIAL
SECTION:
3-9-1: Legislative Finding And Authorization
3-9-2: Definitions
3-9-3: Display Of Adult Material Prohibited
3-9-4: Violation And Penalties
3-9-5: Public Nuisance
3-9-6: Other Laws
3-9-1: LEGISLATIVE FINDING AND AUTHORIZATION:
The City Council does find that there exists and has existed an increasing
trend towards display of adult materials at grocery stores, convenient stores,
drug stores, video stores and other retail outlets within the City. This
Council recognizes that businesses which sell sexually orientated materials
often use objectionable sales and marketing methods which when concentrated can
have a deleterious effect upon adjacent areas. It is recognized that many
persons are offended by the public display of certain sexual material. Further,
adult material is often displayed within the open view of children of tender
years and is easily accessible to them. The City Council finds that this
material is adverse to the public peace, morals and the protection of young
children under the age of eighteen (18) years. The Council further finds that
it is in the best interest of the public safety, welfare and convenience of the
City to regulate the display of adult material and to adopt the following
regulations, pursuant to Penal Code section 313.1(d), so that adverse impacts
upon young children are kept to a minimum. (Ord. 9509, 12-5-1995)
3-9-2: DEFINITIONS:
As used in this Chapter, the following words and phrases shall have the
following meaning:
ADULT MATERIAL: All material that is defined as "harmful matter" in section 313
(a) of the California Penal Code which is contained or exhibited in magazines,
newspapers, publications, posters, displays, photographs, video recordings or
advertisements (including materials appearing on the covers or wrappers of
merchandise offered for sale or rent to the public). For purposes of this
Chapter, "adult material" includes but is not limited to:
   A.   The complete or partial exposure of the nipple or the areola area of
the female breast except those of infants;   
   B.   The complete or partial exposure of any part of the genitalia, pubic
area or buttocks of either males or females, except those of infants;
   C.   The display or depiction of any of the acts or conduct listed in Penal
Code section 313(c)(1).
This definition of "adult material" does not apply to material contained in any
scientific or photography publication which devotes at least fifty percent
(50%) of the lineage of each edition to articles and advertisements dealing
with the subjects of science or the art of photography. Nor does this
definition apply to any news periodical which reports or describes current
events and which, from time to time, publish photographs or depictions of nude
or semi-nude persons when describing current events.
DISPLAY: Exhibiting or exposing adult material so that it is within open view
of patrons, invitees or visitors to the premises where such material is
located, or is visible from any public street, thoroughfare, sidewalk or
pedestrian way, or other residential or business premises. The prohibitions of
this Chapter shall not apply to rooms or places from which minors are both
physically and visually excluded by an opaquely covered door or barrier
designed in a way that the adult material is not visible from the doorway or
entrance, whether it is open or closed. "Display" includes the exhibiting of
adult material from news racks or newspaper vending stands or vending machines.
MINORS: Persons under the age of eighteen (18) years.
PERSON: Any individual, partnership, firm, association, corporation, limited
liability company, or other legal entity. (Ord. 9509, 12-5-1995)
3-9-3: DISPLAY OF ADULT MATERIAL PROHIBITED:
No person shall display adult material or permit or allow the display of adult
material unless blinder racks or wrappings are placed on or in front of such
materials such that not less than the lower two-thirds (2/3) of the material is
completely and opaquely covered. (Ord. 9509, 12-5-1995)
3-9-4: VIOLATION AND PENALTIES:
Any person, whether as principal, agent, employee or otherwise, violating or
causing the violation of any of the provisions of this Chapter shall be guilty
of a misdemeanor, punishable as prescribed in this Code. Any violation of this
Chapter constitutes a separate offense for each and every day during which such
violation is continued, as provided in this Code. (Ord. 9509, 12-5-1995)
3-9-5: PUBLIC NUISANCE:
In addition to the criminal penalty provisions provided by this Code, violation
of any section or sections of this Chapter is declared to be a public nuisance
and may be abated as such by the City. (Ord. 9509, 12-5-1995)
3-9-6: OTHER LAWS:
Nothing herein is intended to supersede any other law or rule contained in
State or local law or to excuse compliance with such laws. (Ord. 9509, 12-5-
1995)
TITLE 4
PUBLIC HEALTH AND SAFETY
CHAPTER 1
GARBAGE AND REFUSE
SECTION:
4-1-1: Compliance With Provisions
4-1-2: Definitions
4-1-3: Prohibited Accumulation
4-1-4: Refuse Storage Regulations
4-1-5: Use Of City Refuse Collection Service
4-1-6: Refuse Collection Fees
4-1-7: Refuse Collection And Disposal Other Than By City
4-1-8: Burning, Burying Or Dumping Garbage And Solid Waste
4-1-9: Nuisance Conditions
4-1-10: Enforcement Of Provisions
4-1-11: Violation And Penalties
4-1-1: COMPLIANCE WITH PROVISIONS:
Effective on and after the effective date hereof, users of the refuse
collection system to the city shall pay the monthly rates and fees then in
effect and as may be amended from time to time in accordance with this chapter
and abide by the regulations established pursuant to the provisions of this
chapter. (Ord. 8402, 3-20-1984)
4-1-2: DEFINITIONS:
When used in this chapter, the following words and terms shall have the
meanings ascribed to them in this section:
CONTAINER: Any city provided refuse, recyclables, or green waste carts or other
receptacle. When referring to the storage of such carts, the term "container"
refers to all of the aforementioned carts.
CONTAINERIZED SERVICE: Service approved by the director of public works wherein
the city provides a vehicle equipped for mechanical handling of one, two (2)
and three (3) cubic yard containers with casters. Said containers shall be
provided by the customer and shall be a type and shall be placed in a location
approved by the public works director.
GARBAGE: Table refuse and offal swill and every accumulation of animal,
vegetable and other matter that attends the preparation, consumption, decay,
dealing in or storage of meats, fish, fowl, fruit and other foods of whatever
character and shall include all animal and vegetable refuse from kitchens and
all household waste that shall have been prepared for or intended to be used as
food or shall have resulted from the preparation of food. Dead animals over ten
(10) pounds in weight, dishwater or wastewater are not included under garbage.
GREEN WASTE: Grass clippings, weeds, leaves, small branches, sod, clean dirt,
lumber (without nails or glue), plants and sawdust.
PUBLIC WORKS DIRECTOR: Person employed in the position of director of public
works for the city of Lemoore, or his designee, in matters relating to this
chapter.
RECYCLABLES: Aluminum cans, tin cans, glass bottles, plastic bottles, empty
food household goods containers made entirely of glass, plastic, aluminum, or
tin; fiber products such as newspaper, magazines, books, catalogs, telephone
books, school or business papers, paper grocery bags, and empty cardboard
boxes.
REFUSE: Each of the definitions of "garbage", "rubbish" and "waste matter"
contained in this section.
RUBBISH: Leaves, chips, woodenware, paper, pasteboard, grass, rags, shoes,
hats, sawdust, packing material, shavings, trimmings from lawns and flower
gardens and boxes, tin cans and bottles.
UTILITY: A system, plant, works, facilities or undertaking for:
   A.   The collection, treatment or disposal of sewage, or
   B.   The obtaining, conserving, treating and supplying of water, or
   C.   Sanitation or garbage removal or disposal system.
WASTE MATTER: Brickbats, plaster, cement, broken crockery, broken glass, broken
bottles, earth and ashes, cinders, shells, metals and other noncombustible
waste materials; provided, however, that the words "waste matter" shall not
include any material leftover from the repair or construction of buildings,
sidewalks or other improvements. (Ord. 8402, 3-20-1984; amd. Ord. 9904, 5-18-
1999; Ord. 2006-05, 7-18-2006; Ord. 2011-06, 12-6-2011)
4-1-3: PROHIBITED ACCUMULATION:
It shall be unlawful for any person, owner or occupant of any building, lot or
premises in the city to suffer, allow or permit to collect or remain upon said
lot or premises, rubbish or waste matter of any description in such manner or
quantity as likely to become a fire menace or menace to the health of the
people of the city. (Ord. 8402, 3-20-1984)
4-1-4: REFUSE STORAGE REGULATIONS:
   A.   Use Of Containers Required: Every owner, tenant, lessee, occupant or
other person in possession, charge or control of any place in or from which
refuse is created, accumulated or produced, shall use city provided refuse
containers capable of holding all refuse which would ordinarily accumulate on
such premises between the times of successive collections.
It shall be the duty of each occupant to place in such refuse containers all
refuse created or accumulated upon the premises occupied by him or her between
times for the removal of the refuse.
   B.   Container Specifications: Said refuse containers shall be city
automated refuse carts, and the loaded weight of each such cart shall not
exceed the maximum amount that is written on the cart lid. When approved by the
director of public works, containers as described in section
4-1-2 of this chapter for "containerized service" may be provided by the
customer.
   C.   Placement Of Containers:
      1.   Placement During Times Of Collection: Refuse containers shall be
located at the curbside or other location designated by the public works
director, where they are readily accessible for emptying, up to twenty four
(24) hours prior to collection, but not later than five o'clock (5:00) A.M. on
the day of collection.
      2.   Storage Of Containers: Other than times of collection, as described
in subsection C1 of this section, refuse containers, and any other receptacles,
must be properly stored on the same day as collection is made by using any of
the following methods:
         a.   Back yard, behind fence, or
         b.   Front yard, if screened from direct view from street, or
         c.   Side yard, if screened from direct view, or adjacent to the main
building structure and placed in a manner that only one can is directly
visible, or
         d.   Alley, adjacent to fence or building structure (removed from
designated pick up area). (Ord. 2011-06, 12-6-2011)
   D.   Containers Maintained In A Sanitary Condition: All refuse containers
shall be kept in a clean and sanitary condition by the person using the same,
and shall be kept covered with proper and suitable lids at all times, except
when refuse is being deposited therein or removed therefrom. Any container
which does not comply with these requirements shall be promptly replaced on
notice being given by the public works director. (Ord. 9904, 5-18-1999)
   E.   Solid Waste Separation:
      1.   All customers within the city shall separate all recyclables from
all other solid waste produced at their premises and dispose of it only in
accordance with the standards established by the director of public works.
      2.   The regulations shall generally include the following areas of solid
waste control:
         a.   Require source separation of solid waste by all customers.
         b.   Require placement of "refuse", "green waste" and "recyclables",
as defined in section
4-1-2 of this chapter, into separate containers so as to facilitate segregation
of materials at the recovery facility.
         c.   Require delivery of all refuse, green waste and recyclables to
one or more locations designated by the public works director. (Ord. 2006-05,
7-18-2006)
   F.   Solid Waste Processing:
      1.   It shall be unlawful for any person to process or haul solid waste
without obtaining a solid waste hauling/processing permit in conjunction with a
business license from the city. The following operations are exempt from the
requirement to obtain a solid waste hauling/processing permit:
         a.   Private Residences Exempt: Persons within their own home, whether
owned or rented, who perform salvage for their own purposes are exempt from the
requirement to obtain a license.
         b.   Public Operated Facilities: All public operated waste processing
facilities which operate under a state permit shall be exempt from the
requirement to obtain a license.
      2.   No solid waste hauling/processing operation shall be maintained in
such a manner as to constitute a private or public nuisance.
      3.   Every solid waste hauling/processing operation established or
maintained within the city shall be maintained in compliance with the "State
Minimum Standards For Solid Waste Handling And Disposal", title 14 California
Code Of Regulations, commencing with section 17200. All solid waste facilities
shall be subject to inspection by the local enforcement agency at any
reasonable time.
      4.   Each licensee of a solid waste hauling/processing operation shall
post his or her rates in a visible location outside the disposal area if the
site is made available for use by the public.
      5.   No licensee of a solid waste hauling/processing operation shall burn
any solid waste within the facility nor in adjacent areas without the prior
written consent of the local enforcement agency, the local fire agency, and the
air pollution control officer.
      6.   No licensee of a solid waste hauling/processing operation shall
operate the facility or conduct processing of solid waste without an
appropriate permit from the city planning department.
      7.   Each licensee of a solid waste hauling/processing operation shall
keep and maintain records related to the type of and quantity of solid waste
processed. Quarterly, a report shall be made and submitted to the public works
director. Said report shall contain the quantities of and constituent type of
solid waste processed by the licensee in the prior three (3) month period.
Reporting shall conform to the following:
         a.   The name of the person or firm conducting the solid waste
hauling/processing.
         b.   The type of solid waste processing conducted.
         c.   The license number.
         d.   The total tonnage of solid waste received for processing.
         e.   The type of and tonnage of solid waste processed as recyclables.
         f.   The destination of the solid waste processed as recyclables.
(Ord. 9408, 6-21-1994)
4-1-5: USE OF CITY REFUSE COLLECTION SERVICE:
It is hereby found and determined that the periodic collection of refuse from
all places and premises in the city is necessary, and such owner, tenant,
lessee or other occupants or persons in possession, charge or control of any
place in or from which refuse is created, accumulated or produced are liable
for and shall pay the refuse collection fees established by the city council of
the city.
Refuse collection service is provided by the city, and it shall be mandatory
for all owners, tenants, lessees or other occupants or persons in possession,
charge or control of places and premises in the city in or from which refuse is
created, accumulated or produced to use the city's collection service;
provided, however, that there may be joint or multiple use of refuse
containers, subject to securing a permit therefor from the director of public
works and pursuant to rules and regulations therefor established by the
director of public works. (Ord. 8402, 3-2-1984)
4-1-6: REFUSE COLLECTION FEES:
   A.   Fees Established: The fees to be charged by the City for refuse
collection service within the City shall be established by resolution of the
City Council after a duly noticed public hearing regarding the establishment of
said fees.
   B.   Payment Of Fees; Delinquencies:
      1.   Billing: All refuse charges shall be collected together with, and
not separately from, the charges for any utility service rendered by the City,
and all charges shall be billed upon the same bill and collected as one item.
All utility service charges shall be payable upon presentation date at the
Office of the City Water Collector in the City Hall and shall be delinquent on
the twenty fifth day of the calendar month following the date of presentment.
      2.   Liability: The owner or owners of any parcel of real property,
together with any and all occupants of such real property, shall be jointly
liable for all charges incurred by reason of the use of said waste and refuse
pick-up service by any and all occupants of such real property.
      3.   Discontinued: In the event a utility bill is not paid on or before
the tenth day after the bill becomes delinquent, the refuse service shall be
discontinued. On the eleventh day after the bill becomes delinquent the fees of
twenty five dollars ($25.00), in addition to the amount of the utility bill,
shall be charged.
      4.   Restoring: If refuse service has been discontinued for failure to
pay a utility bill as set forth in subsection B3 of this section, the entire
amount of the refuse bill and all fines and penalties provided below shall be
paid in full before refuse service is restored.
         a.   A fee of twenty five dollars ($25.00) shall be charged on all
returned items (to include online payments) in payment of utility charges.
      5.   Disputed Bills: Should the amount of any bill for service be
questioned, the customer should promptly request an explanation. If the
explanation is not satisfactory or is not understood, the customer must pay the
bill under protest to avoid discontinuance of service. Protests will be
addressed to the Director of Finance, must be in writing, and must state the
reasons why the charges are believed to be incorrect. The Director of Finance
will analyze the facts of the case and is authorized to make such adjustments
in the charges as may be necessary to effect an equitable settlement. Failure
of a customer to pay under protest after initial explanation is offered will
result in discontinuance of service without further notice if bill is not paid
by the delinquency date.
      6.   Collections: Accounts shall be subject to collection of any
delinquent fees and charges in the following manner:
         a.   At the time the fees become delinquent and until such time they
are fully paid, the delinquent account balance, including late charges, shall
constitute an unrecorded lien against the property and, as such, may be
identified during a title search. For commercial businesses, delinquent account
balances, including late charges, may be considered an unrecorded lien against
the business name and/or owner of the business.
         b.   Once a year there may be prepared a report of delinquent fees
including late charges. The City Council shall fix a time, date and place for
hearing the report and receive any objections or protests thereto.
         c.   The City Council shall cause notice of hearing to be mailed to
the landowners listed on the report not less than fifteen (15) days prior to
the date of the hearing.
         d.   At the hearing, the City Council shall hear any objections or
protests of landowners liable to be assessed for delinquent fees including late
charges and administrative fees, as set by resolution of the City Council. The
City Council may make revisions or corrections to the report as it deems just,
after which, by resolution, the report shall be confirmed.
         e.   The delinquent fees set forth in the report as confirmed shall
constitute special assessments against the respective parcels of land and are a
lien on the property for the amount of such delinquent fees, including late
charges. A certified copy of the resolution confirming the assessments shall be
filed with the County Recorder and the County Auditor- Controller/Tax Collector
for the amounts of the assessments against the respective parcels as they
appear on the current assessment roll. The lien created attaches upon filing.
The assessments shall be collected at the same time and in the same manner as
other Property Taxes and shall be subject to the same penalties and the same
procedure and sale in case of delinquency as provided for such taxes. All laws
applicable to the levy, collection and enforcement of Property Taxes shall be
applicable to such assessments. However, if, for the first year for which the
charges are prescribed, the property served by the City has been transferred or
conveyed to a bona fide purchaser for value, and attached thereon, prior to the
date on which the first installment of County taxes would become delinquent,
the charge will not result in a lien against the real property, but shall
become transferred to the unsecured roll for collection.
         f.   In addition to, or alternatively to, imposing a lien, the City
may file an action for the collection of any amounts due and unpaid against the
owner, tenant, lessee or other occupants or persons in possession, charge or
control of any place in or from which refuse is created, accumulated or
produced. In any such action, the delinquent balances may also be processed
through a collection agency.
   C.   Application Of Funds Received: Any payment received for City utility
charges in an amount less than the total charge billed shall be treated as a
partial payment for each such charge and the amount received allocated to the
separate departments in the same ratio as each such charge bears to the whole
of the bill.
   D.   Vacant Premises; Refunds: Whenever the premises for which collection
and disposal service is provided is vacant or unused for a period of thirty
(30) days or more, the person to whom the collection charge is made may secure
a rebate of his refuse collection service charges for said period of vacancy by
presenting to the Director of Public Works an affidavit setting forth all the
facts of the vacancy under penalty of perjury. If satisfied with the truth of
the statements of vacancy, the Director of Public Works shall approve said
claim and the Finance Department shall make the appropriate refund of such
charges. No charge shall be made for newly constructed premises until the same
is occupied; provided, however, that a person shall be conclusively presumed to
be using refuse collection and disposal service when the premises is connected
to the City water or sewer system. (Ord. 2018-07, 9-18-2018)
4-1-7: REFUSE COLLECTION AND DISPOSAL OTHER THAN BY CITY:
   A.   Garbage Collection And Disposal Prohibited: It shall be unlawful for
any person other than authorized agents or employees of the City to haul,
remove or dispose of garbage within the City; provided, however, that nothing
contained herein shall prevent the use of garbage disposal devices as provided
in the City Plumbing Code 1 .
   B.   Collection And Disposal Of Rubbish And Waste Matter: Rubbish and waste
matter which is deposited in containers not containing garbage may be collected
and disposed of by private rubbish haulers. Such haulers shall secure a
business license as provided by this Code 1 . All vehicles used to transport
rubbish shall be provided with equipment to prevent rubbish from blowing out
of, falling from or otherwise escaping from such vehicle. Such rubbish haulers
shall comply with all applicable rules and regulations established by the
Director of Public Works 2 . (Ord. 8402, 3-20-1984)
   C.   Recyclable Collection Prohibited: It shall be unlawful for any person
other than authorized agents or employees of the City to haul, remove or
dispose of recyclables placed in recyclable containers; provided, however, that
nothing contained herein shall prevent persons from disposing of recyclables
produced at their own premises in accordance with standards established by the
Public Works Director. (Ord. 2006-05, 7-18-2006)
 
Notes
1 1. See title 8, chapter 1, article B of this Code.
1 1. See title 3, chapter 1 of this Code.
2 2. See the prohibitions set forth in subsection
  6-3-10A3 of this Code.
4-1-8: BURNING, BURYING OR DUMPING GARBAGE AND SOLID WASTE:
   A.   Burning, Burying Or Dumping Garbage Prohibited: It shall be unlawful
for any person to incinerate, deposit, dump or bury, or cause or permit to be
incinerated, deposited, dumped or buried, any garbage upon or in any public
street, alley or other public place, or upon any private property within the
City. (Ord. 8402, 3-20-1984)
   B.   Burning Solid Waste: It shall be unlawful for any person to dispose of
any solid waste by burning the same. (Ord. 2006-05, 7-18-2006)
4-1-9: NUISANCE CONDITIONS:
The keeping of garbage in containers other than containers prescribed by this
chapter or the keeping upon premises garbage, rubbish or waste matter which is
allowed to become offensive and noisome shall constitute a public nuisance and
may be abated in the manner provided by law for the abatement of nuisances in
addition to any other criminal penalty or civil remedy provided for by law.
(Ord. 8402, 3-20-1984)
4-1-10: ENFORCEMENT OF PROVISIONS:
To enforce this chapter, any member of the Police Department or of the Fire
Department, City Code enforcement personnel, and any employee of the Health
Department representing the City, may enter any restaurant, hotel or public
place or yard and the yard of any private residence for the purpose of
ascertaining the sanitary condition thereof and removing the unlawful
accumulation of refuse therein, and it is made the duty of each of said
officers to enforce this chapter. Any person who shall obstruct or prevent the
entry or inspection of any premises in the City by an authorized officer shall
be guilty of an infraction. (Ord. 2006-05, 7-18-2006)
4-1-11: VIOLATION AND PENALTIES:
   A.   Any person who violates any of the provisions of this chapter shall be
guilty of an infraction.
   B.   In addition to the criminal penalty as above provided, any person who
shall fail to pay the utility bill as levied and assessed in full within the
time limits prescribed for the payment thereof, or who shall violate any of the
laws of the State, the ordinances of the City or the rules and regulations so
established referring to the disposal of garbage, rubbish or waste matter, and
upon five (5) days' written notice from the Director of Public Works, shall be
subject to having any and all service for which the bill is rendered
discontinued, and thereafter, no such service which has been discontinued for
the nonpayment of such service charges or for the violation of any of the above
mentioned State laws or City ordinances, rules or regulations shall be
reestablished until the owner or such person shall have paid all delinquent
service charges owed the City by such person and all expenses incurred by the
City in causing such discontinuance and reestablishment. (Ord. 8402, 3-20-1984)
ARTICLE A. MANDATORY ORGANIC WASTE DISPOSAL REDUCTION
SECTION:
4-1A-1: Purpose and Findings
4-1A-2: Title Of Ordinance
4-1A-3: Definitions
4-1A-4: Requirements For Single-Family Generators (Standard Compliance
Approach)
4-1A-5: Requirements For Commercial Businesses (Standard-Compliance Approach)
4-1A-6: Waivers For Generators
4-1A-7: Requirements For Commercial Edible Food Generators
4-1A-8: Requirements For Food Recovery Organizations And Services
4-1A-9: Requirements For Haulers And Facility Operators
4-1A-10: Self-Hauler Requirements
4-1A-11: Compliance With Calgreen Recycling Requirements
4-1A-12: Model Water Efficient Landscaping Ordinance Requirements
4-1A-13: Procurement Requirements For Jurisdiction Departments, Direct Service
Providers, And Vendors
4-1A-14: Inspections And Investigations By Jurisdiction
4-1A-15: Enforcement
4-1A-16: Effective Date
4-1A-1: PURPOSE AND FINDINGS:
The Jurisdiction finds and declares:
   A.   State recycling law, Assembly Bill 939 of 1989, the California
Integrated Waste Management Act of 1989 (California Public Resources Code
Section 40000, et seq., as amended, supplemented, superseded, and replaced from
time to time), requires cities and counties to reduce, reuse, and recycle
(including composting) Solid Waste generated in their Jurisdictions to the
maximum extent feasible before any incineration or landfill disposal of waste,
to conserve water, energy, and other natural resources, and to protect the
environment.
   B.   State recycling law, Assembly Bill 341 of 2011 (approved by the
Governor of the State of California on October 5, 2011, which amended Sections
41730, 41731, 41734, 41735, 41736, 41800, 42926, 44004, and 50001 of, and added
Sections 40004, 41734.5, and 41780.01 and Chapter 12.8 (commencing with Section
42649) to Part 3 of Division 30 of, and added and repealed Section 41780.02 of,
the Public Resources Code, as amended, supplemented, superseded and replaced
from time to time), places requirements on businesses and Multi-Family property
owners that generate a specified threshold amount of Solid Waste to arrange for
recycling services and requires Jurisdictions to implement a Mandatory
Commercial Recycling program.
   C.   State organics recycling law, Assembly Bill 1826 of 2014 (approved by
the Governor of the State of California on September 28, 2014, which added
Chapter 12.9 (commencing with Section 42649.8) to Part 3 of Division 30 of the
Public Resources Code, relating to Solid Waste, as amended, supplemented,
superseded, and replaced from time to time), requires businesses and Multi-
Family property owners that generate a specified threshold amount of Solid
Waste, Recycling, and Organic Waste per week to arrange for recycling services
for that waste, requires Jurisdictions to implement a recycling program to
divert Organic Waste from businesses subject to the law, and requires
Jurisdictions to to implement a Mandatory Commercial Organics Recycling
program.
   D.   SB 1383, the Short-lived Climate Pollutant Reduction Act of 2016,
requires CalRecycle to develop regulations to reduce organics in landfills as a
source of methane. The regulations place requirements on multiple entities
including Jurisdictions, residential households, Commercial Businesses and
business owners, Commercial Edible Food Generators, haulers, Self-Haulers, Food
Recovery Organizations, and Food Recovery Services to support achievement of
Statewide Organic Waste disposal reduction targets.
   E.   SB 1383, the Short-lived Climate Pollutant Reduction Act of 2016,
requires Jurisdictions to adopt and enforce an ordinance or enforceable
mechanism to implement relevant provisions of SB 1383 Regulations. This article
will also help reduce food insecurity by requiring Commercial Edible Food
Generators to arrange to have the maximum amount of their Edible Food, that
would otherwise be disposed, be recovered for human consumption. (Ord. 2021-08,
11-16-2021)
4-1A-2: TITLE OF ORDINANCE:
This chapter shall be entitled “Mandatory Organic Waste Disposal Reduction
Ordinance.” (Ord. 2021-08, 11-16-2021)
4-1A-3: DEFINITIONS:
The following terms shall apply to this article as written unless context
indicates or requires a different meaning:
BLUE CONTAINER: Has the same meaning as in 14 CCR Section 18982.2(a)(5) and
shall be used for the purpose of storage and collection of Source Separated
Recyclable Materials or Source Separated Blue Container Organic Waste.
CALRECYCLE: California's Department of Resources Recycling and Recovery, which
is the Department designated with responsibility for developing, implementing,
and enforcing SB 1383 Regulations on Jurisdictions (and others).
CALIFORNIA CODE OF REGULATIONS or CCR: The State of California Code of
Regulations. CCR references in this article are preceded with a number that
refers to the relevant Title of the CCR (e.g., “14 CCR” refers to Title 14 of
CCR).
COMMERCIAL BUSINESS or COMMERCIAL: A firm, partnership, proprietorship, joint-
stock company, corporation, or association, whether for-profit or nonprofit,
strip mall, industrial facility, or a multifamily residential dwelling, or as
otherwise defined in 14 CCR Section 18982(a)(6). A Multi-Family Residential
Dwelling that consists of fewer than five (5) units is not a Commercial
Business for purposes of implementing this article.
COMMERCIAL EDIBLE FOOD GENERATOR: Includes a Tier One or a Tier Two Commercial
Edible Food Generator as defined in Sections 3(rrr) and 3(sss) of this article
or as otherwise defined in 14 CCR Section 18982(a)(73) and (a)(74). For the
purposes of this definition, Food Recovery Organizations and Food Recovery
Services are not Commercial Edible Food Generators pursuant to 14 CCR Section
18982(a)(7).
COMPLIANCE REVIEW: A review of records by a Jurisdiction to determine
compliance with this chapter.
COMMUNITY COMPOSTING: Any activity that composts green material, agricultural
material, food material, and vegetative food material, alone or in combination,
and the total amount of feedstock and Compost on-site at any one time does not
exceed one hundred (100) cubic yards and seven hundred and fifty (750) square
feet, as specified in 14 CCR Section 17855(a)(4); or, as otherwise defined by
14 CCR Section 18982(a)(8).
COMPOST: Has the same meaning as in 14 CCR Section 17896.2(a)(4), which stated,
as of the effective date of this article, that "Compost" means the product
resulting from the controlled biological decomposition of organic Solid Wastes
that are Source Separated from the municipal Solid Waste stream, or which are
separated at a centralized facility.
COMPOSTABLE PLASTICS or COMPOSTABLE PLASTIC: Plastic materials that meet the
ASTM D6400 standard for compostability, or as otherwise described in 14 CCR
Section 18984.1(a)(1)(A) or 18984.2(a)(1)(C).
CONTAINER CONTAMINATION or CONTAMINATED CONTAINER: A container, regardless of
color, that contains Prohibited Container Contaminants, or as otherwise defined
in 14 CCR Section 18982(a)(55).
C&D: Construction and demolition debris.
DESIGNATED SOURCE SEPARATED ORGANIC WASTE FACILITY: As defined in 14 CCR
Section 18982(14.5), means a Solid Waste facility that accepts a Source
Separated Organic Waste collection stream as defined in 14 CCR Section 17402(a)
(26.6) and complies with one of the following:
   1.   The facility is a "transfer/processor," as defined in 14 CCR Section
18815.2(a)(62), that is in compliance with the reporting requirements of 14 CCR
Section 18815.5(d), and meets or exceeds an annual average Source Separated
organic content Recovery rate of fifty (50) percent between January 1, 2022 and
December 31, 2024 and seventy-five (75) percent on and after January 1, 2025 as
calculated pursuant to 14 CCR Section 18815.5(f) for Organic Waste received
from the Source Separated Organic Waste collection stream.
      a.   If a transfer/processor has an annual average Source Separated
organic content Recovery rate lower than the rate required in Paragraph 1 of
this definition for two (2) consecutive reporting periods, or three (3)
reporting periods within three (3) years, the facility shall not qualify as a
"Designated Source Separated Organic Waste Facility".
   2.   The facility is a "composting operation" or "composting facility" as
defined in 14 CCR Section 18815.2(a)(13), that pursuant to the reports
submitted under 14 CCR Section 18815.7 demonstrates that the percent of the
material removed for landfill disposal that is Organic Waste is less than the
percent specified in 14 CCR Section 17409.5.8(c)(2) or 17409.5.8(c)(3),
whichever is applicable, and, if applicable, complies with the digestate
handling requirements specified in 14 CCR Section 17896.5.
DESIGNEE: An entity that a Jurisdiction contracts with or otherwise arranges to
carry out any of the Jurisdiction's responsibilities of this article as
authorized in 14 CCR Section 18981.2. A Designee may be a government entity, a
hauler, a private entity, or a combination of those entities.
EDIBLE FOOD: Food intended for human consumption, or as otherwise defined in 14
CCR Section 18982(a)(18). For the purposes of this article or as otherwise
defined in 14 CCR Section 18982(a)(18), "Edible Food" is not Solid Waste if it
is recovered and not discarded. Nothing in this article or in 14 CCR, Division
7, Chapter 12 requires or authorizes the Recovery of Edible Food that does not
meet the food safety requirements of the California Retail Food Code.
ENFORCEMENT ACTION: An action of the Jurisdiction to address non-compliance
with this article including, but not limited to, issuing administrative
citations, fines, penalties, or using other remedies.
EXCLUDED WASTE: Hazardous substance, hazardous waste, infectious waste,
designated waste, volatile, corrosive, medical waste, infectious, regulated
radioactive waste, and toxic substances or material that facility operator(s),
which receive materials from the Jurisdiction and its generators, reasonably
believe(s) would, as a result of or upon acceptance, transfer, processing, or
disposal, be a violation of local, State, or Federal law, regulation, or
ordinance, including: land use restrictions or conditions, waste that cannot be
disposed of in Class III landfills or accepted at the facility by permit
conditions, waste that in Jurisdictions, or its Designee's reasonable opinion
would present a significant risk to human health or the environment, cause a
nuisance or otherwise create or expose Jurisdiction, or its Designee, to
potential liability; but not including de minimis volumes or concentrations of
waste of a type and amount normally found in Single-Family or Multi-Family
Solid Waste after implementation of programs for the safe collection,
processing, recycling, treatment, and disposal of batteries and paint in
compliance with Sections 41500 and 41802 of the California Public Resources
Code.
FOOD DISTRIBUTOR: A company that distributes food to entities including, but
not limited to, Supermarkets and Grocery Stores, or as otherwise defined in 14
CCR Section 18982(a)(22).
FOOD FACILITY: Has the same meaning as in Section 113789 of the Health and
Safety Code.
FOOD RECOVERY: Actions to collect and distribute food for human consumption
that otherwise would be disposed, or as otherwise defined in 14 CCR Section
18982(a)(24).
FOOD RECOVERY ORGANIZATION: An entity that engages in the collection or receipt
of Edible Food from Commercial Edible Food Generators and distributes that
Edible Food to the public for Food Recovery either directly or through other
entities or as otherwise defined in 14 CCR Section 18982(a)(25), including, but
not limited to:
   1.   A food bank as defined in Section 113783 of the Health and Safety Code;
   2.   A nonprofit charitable organization as defined in Section 113841 of the
Health and Safety code; and,
   3.   A nonprofit charitable temporary food facility as defined in Section
113842 of the Health and Safety Code.
A Food Recovery Organization is not a Commercial Edible Food Generator for the
purposes of this article and implementation of 14 CCR, Division 7, Chapter 12
pursuant to 14 CCR Section 18982(a)(7).
If the definition in 14 CCR Section 18982(a)(25) for Food Recovery Organization
differs from this definition, the definition in 14 CCR Section 18982(a)(25)
shall apply to this article.
FOOD RECOVERY SERVICE: A person or entity that collects and transports Edible
Food from a Commercial Edible Food Generator to a Food Recovery Organization or
other entities for Food Recovery, or as otherwise defined in 14 CCR Section
18982(a)(26). A Food Recovery Service is not a Commercial Edible Food Generator
for the purposes of this article and implementation of 14 CCR, Division 7,
Chapter 12 pursuant to 14 CCR Section 18982(a)(7).
FOOD SCRAPS: All food such as, but not limited to, fruits, vegetables, meat,
poultry, seafood, shellfish, bones, rice, beans, pasta, bread, cheese, and
eggshells. Food Scraps excludes fats, oils, and grease when such materials are
Source Separated from other Food Scraps. Food Scraps also excludes Food-Soiled
paper and containers until such time when our composter can process them.
FOOD SERVICE PROVIDER: An entity primarily engaged in providing food services
to institutional, governmental, Commercial, or industrial locations of others
based on contractual arrangements with these types of organizations, or as
otherwise defined in 14 CCR Section 18982(a)(27).
FOOD-SOILED PAPER: Compostable paper material that has come in contact with
food or liquid, such as, but not limited to, compostable paper plates, paper
coffee cups, napkins, pizza boxes, and milk cartons.
FOOD WASTE: Food Scraps.
GREEN CONTAINER: Has the same meaning as in 14 CCR Section 18982.2(a)(29) and
shall be used for the purpose of storage and collection of Source Separated
Green Container Organic Waste.
GROCERY STORE: A store primarily engaged in the retail sale of canned food; dry
goods; fresh fruits and vegetables; fresh meats, fish, and poultry; and any
area that is not separately owned within the store where the food is prepared
and served, including a bakery, deli, and meat and seafood departments, or as
otherwise defined in 14 CCR Section 18982(a)(30).
HAULER ROUTE: The designated itinerary or sequence of stops in a particular
area for each segment of the Jurisdiction's collection service area for each
day of the week, or as otherwise defined in 14 CCR Section 18982(a)(31.5).
HIGH DIVERSION ORGANIC WASTE PROCESSING FACILITY: A facility that is in
compliance with the reporting requirements of 14 CCR Section 18815.5(d) and
meets or exceeds an annual average Mixed Waste organic content Recovery rate of
fifty (50) percent between January 1, 2022 and December 31, 2024, and seventy-
five (75) percent after January 1, 2025, as calculated pursuant to 14 CCR
Section 18815.5(e) for Organic Waste received from the "Mixed waste organic
collection stream" as defined in 14 CCR Section 17402(a)(11.5); or, as
otherwise defined in 14 CCR Section 18982(a)(33).
INSPECTION: A site visit where a Jurisdiction reviews records, containers, and
an entity's collection, handling, recycling, or landfill disposal of Organic
Waste or Edible Food handling to determine if the entity is complying with
requirements set forth in this article, or as otherwise defined in 14 CCR
Section 18982(a)(35).
JURISDICTION: The City of Lemoore city limits and reach of service.
JURISDICTION ENFORCEMENT OFFICIAL: The city manager, county administrative
official, chief operating officer, executive director, or other executive in
charge or their authorized Designee(s) who is/are partially or whole
responsible for enforcing the ordinance. See also “Regional or County Agency
Enforcement Official.”
LARGE EVENT: An event, including, but not limited to, a sporting event or a
flea market, that charges an admission price, or is operated by a local agency,
and serves an average of more than two thousand (2,000) individuals per day of
operation of the event, at a location that includes, but is not limited to, a
public, nonprofit, or privately owned park, parking lot, golf course, street
system, or other open space when being used for an event. If the definition in
14 CCR Section 18982(a)(38) differs from this definition, the definition in 14
CCR Section 18982(a)(38) shall apply to this article.
LARGE VENUE: A permanent venue facility that annually seats or serves an
average of more than two thousand (2,000) individuals within the grounds of the
facility per day of operation of the venue facility. For purposes of this
article and implementation of 14 CCR, Division 7, Chapter 12, a venue facility
includes, but is not limited to, a public, nonprofit, or privately owned or
operated stadium, amphitheater, arena, hall, amusement park, conference or
civic center, zoo, aquarium, airport, racetrack, horse track, performing arts
center, fairground, museum, theater, or other public attraction facility. For
purposes of this article and implementation of 14 CCR, Division 7, Chapter 12,
a site under common ownership or control that includes more than one Large
Venue that is contiguous with other Large Venues in the site, is a single Large
Venue. If the definition in 14 CCR Section 18982(a)(39) differs from this
definition, the definition in 14 CCR Section 18982(a)(39) shall apply to this
article.
LOCAL EDUCATION AGENCY: A school district, charter school, or county office of
education that is not subject to the control of city or county regulations
related to Solid Waste, or as otherwise defined in 14 CCR Section 18982(a)(40).
MULTI-FAMILY RESIDENTIAL DWELLING or MULTI-FAMILY: Means of, from, or
pertaining to residential premises with five (5) or more dwelling units. Multi-
Family premises do not include hotels, motels, or other transient occupancy
facilities, which are considered Commercial Businesses.
MWELO: Refers to the Model Water Efficient Landscape Ordinance (MWELO), 23 CCR,
Division 2, Chapter 2.7.
NON-COMPOSTABLE PAPER: Includes but is not limited to paper that is coated in a
plastic material that will not breakdown in the composting process, or as
otherwise defined in 14 CCR Section 18982(a)(41).
NON-LOCAL ENTITY: The following entities that are not subject to the
Jurisdiction's enforcement authority, or as otherwise defined in 14 CCR Section
18982(a)(42): Public universities (including community colleges) located within
the boundaries of the Jurisdiction, including West Hills College Lemoore.
NON-ORGANIC RECYCLABLES: Non-putrescible and non-hazardous recyclable wastes
including but not limited to bottles, cans, metals, plastics and glass, or as
otherwise defined in 14 CCR Section 18982(a)(43).
NOTICE OF VIOLATION (NOV): A notice that a violation has occurred that includes
a compliance date to avoid an action to seek penalties, or as otherwise defined
in 14 CCR Section 18982(a)(45) or further explained in 14 CCR Section 18995.4.
ORGANIC WASTE: Solid Wastes containing material originated from living
organisms and their metabolic waste products, including but not limited to
food, green material, landscape and pruning waste, organic textiles and
carpets, lumber, wood, Paper Products, Printing and Writing Paper, manure,
biosolids, digestate, and sludges or as otherwise defined in 14 CCR Section
18982(a)(46). Biosolids and digestate are as defined by 14 CCR Section 18982
(a).
ORGANIC WASTE GENERATOR: A person or entity that is responsible for the initial
creation of Organic Waste, or as otherwise defined in 14 CCR Section 18982(a)
(48).
PAPER PRODUCTS: Include, but are not limited to, paper janitorial supplies,
cartons, wrapping, packaging, file folders, hanging files, corrugated boxes,
tissue, and toweling, or as otherwise defined in 14 CCR Section 18982(a)(51).
PRINTING AND WRITING PAPERS: Include, but are not limited to, copy,
xerographic, watermark, cotton fiber, offset, forms, computer printout paper,
white wove envelopes, manila envelopes, book paper, note pads, writing tablets,
newsprint, and other uncoated writing papers, posters, index cards, calendars,
brochures, reports, magazines, and publications, or as otherwise defined in 14
CCR Section 18982(a)(54).
PROHIBITED CONTAINER CONTAMINANTS:
Option 1, Three-container or three-plus-container collection service (Blue
Container, Green Container, and Black Containers): "Prohibited Container
Contaminants" means the following:
   1.   Discarded materials placed in the Blue Container that are not
identified as acceptable Source Separated Recyclable Materials for the
Jurisdiction's Blue Container;
   2.   Discarded materials placed in the Green Container that are not
identified as acceptable Source Separated Green Container Organic Waste for the
Jurisdiction's Green Container;
   3.   Discarded materials placed in the Black Container that are acceptable
Source Separated Recyclable Materials and/or Source Separated Green Container
Organic Wastes to be placed in Jurisdiction's Green Container and/or Blue
Container; and
   4.   Excluded Waste placed in any container.
RECOVERED ORGANIC WASTE PRODUCTS: Products made from California, landfill-
diverted recovered Organic Waste processed in a permitted or otherwise
authorized facility, or as otherwise defined in 14 CCR Section 18982(a)(60).
RECOVERY: Any activity or process described in 14 CCR Section 18983.1(b), or as
otherwise defined in 14 CCR Section 18982(a)(49).
RECYCLED-CONTENT PAPER: Paper Products and Printing and Writing Paper that
consists of at least 30 percent, by fiber weight, postconsumer fiber, or as
otherwise defined in 14 CCR Section 18982(a)(61).
REGIONAL AGENCY: Regional agency as defined in Public Resources Code Section
40181.
REGIONAL OR COUNTY AGENCY ENFORCEMENT OFFICIAL: A regional or county agency
enforcement official, designated by the Jurisdiction with responsibility for
enforcing the ordinance in conjunction or consultation with Jurisdiction
Enforcement Official.
REMOTE MONITORING: The use of the internet of things (IoT) and/or wireless
electronic devices to visualize the contents of Blue Containers, Green
Containers, and Black Containers for purposes of identifying the quantity of
materials in containers (level of fill) and/or presence of Prohibited Container
Contaminants.
RENEWABLE GAS: Gas derived from Organic Waste that has been diverted from a
California landfill and processed at an in-vessel digestion facility that is
permitted or otherwise authorized by 14 CCR to recycle Organic Waste, or as
otherwise defined in 14 CCR Section 18982(a)(62).
RESTAURANT: An establishment primarily engaged in the retail sale of food and
drinks for on-premises or immediate consumption, or as otherwise defined in 14
CCR Section 18982(a)(64).
ROUTE REVIEW: A visual Inspection of containers along a Hauler Route for the
purpose of determining Container Contamination, and may include mechanical
Inspection methods such as the use of cameras, or as otherwise defined in 14
CCR Section 18982(a)(65).
SB 1383: Senate Bill 1383 of 2016 approved by the Governor on September 19,
2016, which added Sections 39730.5, 39730.6, 39730.7, and 39730.8 to the Health
and Safety Code, and added Chapter 13.1 (commencing with Section 42652) to Part
3 of Division 30 of the Public Resources Code, establishing methane emissions
reduction targets in a Statewide effort to reduce emissions of short-lived
climate pollutants as amended, supplemented, superseded, and replaced from time
to time.
SB 1383 REGULATIONS or SB 1383 REGULATORY: Means or refers to, for the purposes
of this article, the Short-Lived Climate Pollutants: Organic Waste Reduction
regulations developed by CalRecycle and adopted in 2020 that created 14 CCR,
Division 7, Chapter 12 and amended portions of regulations of 14 CCR and 27
CCR.
SELF-HAULER: A person, who hauls Solid Waste, Organic Waste or recyclable
material he or she has generated to another person. Self-hauler also includes a
person who back-hauls waste, or as otherwise defined in 14 CCR Section 18982(a)
(66). Back-haul means generating and transporting Organic Waste to a
destination owned and operated by the generator using the generator's own
employees and equipment, or as otherwise defined in 14 CCR Section 18982(a)(66)
(A).
SINGLE-FAMILY: Means of, from, or pertaining to any residential premises with
fewer than five (5) units.
SOLID WASTE: Has the same meaning as defined in State Public Resources Code
Section 40191, which defines Solid Waste as all putrescible and nonputrescible
solid, semisolid, and liquid wastes, including garbage, trash, refuse, paper,
rubbish, ashes, industrial wastes, demolition and construction wastes,
abandoned vehicles and parts thereof, discarded home and industrial appliances,
dewatered, treated, or chemically fixed sewage sludge which is not hazardous
waste, manure, vegetable or animal solid and semi-solid wastes, and other
discarded solid and semisolid wastes, with the exception that Solid Waste does
not include any of the following wastes:
   1.   Hazardous waste, as defined in the State Public Resources Code Section
40141.
   2.   Radioactive waste regulated pursuant to the State Radiation Control Law
(Chapter 8 (commencing with Section 114960) of Part 9 of Division 104 of the
State Health and Safety Code).
   3.   Medical waste regulated pursuant to the State Medical Waste Management
Act (Part 14 (commencing with Section 117600) of Division 104 of the State
Health and Safety Code). Untreated medical waste shall not be disposed of in a
Solid Waste landfill, as defined in State Public Resources Code Section
40195.1. Medical waste that has been treated and deemed to be Solid Waste shall
be regulated pursuant to Division 30 of the State Public Resources Code.
SOURCE SEPARATED: Materials, including commingled recyclable materials, that
have been separated or kept separate from the Solid Waste stream, at the point
of generation, for the purpose of additional sorting or processing those
materials for recycling or reuse in order to return them to the economic
mainstream in the form of raw material for new, reused, or reconstituted
products, which meet the quality standards necessary to be used in the
marketplace, or as otherwise defined in 14 CCR Section 17402.5(b)(4). For the
purposes of the ordinance, Source Separated shall include separation of
materials by the generator, property owner, property owner's employee, property
manager, or property manager's employee into different containers for the
purpose of collection such that Source Separated materials are separated from
Black Container Waste or other Solid Waste for the purposes of collection and
processing.
SOURCE SEPARATED BLUE CONTAINER ORGANIC WASTE: Source Separated Organic Wastes
that can be placed in a Blue Container that is limited to the collection of
those Organic Wastes and Non-Organic Recyclables as defined in Section 18982(a)
(43), or as otherwise defined by Section 17402(a)(18.7).
SOURCE SEPARATED GREEN CONTAINER ORGANIC WASTE: Source Separated Organic Waste
that can be placed in a Green Container that is specifically intended for the
separate collection of Organic Waste by the generator, excluding Source
Separated Blue Container Organic Waste, carpets, Non-Compostable Paper, and
textiles.
SOURCE SEPARATED RECYCLABLE MATERIALS: Source Separated Non-Organic Recyclables
and Source Separated Blue Container Organic Waste.
STATE: The State of California.
SUPERMARKET: A full-line, self-service retail store with gross annual sales of
two million dollars ($2,000,000), or more, and which sells a line of dry
grocery, canned goods, or nonfood items and some perishable items, or as
otherwise defined in 14 CCR Section 18982(a)(71).
TIER ONE COMMERCIAL EDIBLE FOOD GENERATOR: A Commercial Edible Food Generator
that is one of the following:
   1.   Supermarket.
   2.   Grocery Store with a total facility size equal to or greater than ten
thousand (10,000) square feet.
   3.   Food Service Provider.
   4.   Food Distributor.
   5.   Wholesale Food Vendor.
If the definition in 14 CCR Section 18982(a)(73) of Tier One Commercial Edible
Food Generator differs from this definition, the definition in 14 CCR Section
18982(a)(73) shall apply to this article.
TIER TWO COMMERCIAL EDIBLE FOOD GENERATOR: A Commercial Edible Food Generator
that is one of the following:
   1.   Restaurant with two hundred and fifty (250) or more seats, or a total
facility size equal to or greater than five thousand (5,000) square feet.
   2.   Hotel with an on-site Food Facility and two hundred (200) or more
rooms.
   3.   Health facility with an on-site Food Facility and one hundred (100) or
more beds.
   4.   Large Venue.
   5.   Large Event.
   6.   A State agency with a cafeteria with two hundred and fifty (250) or
more seats or total cafeteria facility size equal to or greater than five
thousand (5,000) square feet.
   7.   A Local Education Agency facility with an on-site Food Facility.
If the definition in 14 CCR Section 18982(a)(74) of Tier Two Commercial Edible
Food Generator differs from this definition, the definition in 14 CCR Section
18982(a)(74) shall apply to this article.
UNCONTAINERIZED GREEN WASTE AND YARD WASTE COLLECTION SERVICE or
UNCONTAINERIZED SERVICE: A collection service that collects green waste and
yard waste that is placed in a pile or bagged for collection on the street in
front of a generator's house or place of business for collection and transport
to a facility that recovers Source Separated Organic Waste, or as otherwise
defined in 14 CCR Section 189852(a)(75).
WHOLESALE FOOD VENDOR: A business or establishment engaged in the merchant
wholesale distribution of food, where food (including fruits and vegetables) is
received, shipped, stored, prepared for distribution to a retailer, warehouse,
distributor, or other destination, or as otherwise defined in 14 CCR Section
189852(a)(76). (Ord. 2021-08, 11-16-2021)
4-1A-4: REQUIREMENTS FOR SINGLE-FAMILY GENERATORS (STANDARD COMPLIANCE
APPROACH):
Single-Family Organic Waste Generators shall comply with the following
requirements:
   A.   Shall subscribe to Jurisdiction's Organic Waste collection services for
all Organic Waste generated as described below in Section
4-1A-4 B. Jurisdiction shall have the right to review the number and size of a
generator's containers to evaluate adequacy of capacity provided for each type
of collection service for proper separation of materials and containment of
materials; and, Single-Family generators shall adjust its service level for its
collection services as requested by the Jurisdiction. Generators may
additionally manage their Organic Waste by preventing or reducing their Organic
Waste, managing Organic Waste on site, and/or using a Community Composting site
pursuant to 14 CCR Section 18984.9(c).
   B.   Shall participate in the Jurisdiction's Organic Waste collection
service(s) by placing designated materials in designated containers as
described below, and shall not place Prohibited Container Contaminants in
collection containers.
      1.   Generator shall place Source Separated Green Container Organic
Waste, including Food Waste, in the Green Container; Source Separated
Recyclable Materials in the Blue Container; and Black Container Waste in the
Black Container. Generators shall not place materials designated for the Black
Container into the Green Container or Blue Container. (Ord. 2021-08, 11-16-
2021)
4-1A-5: REQUIREMENTS FOR COMMERCIAL BUSINESSES (STANDARD-COMPLIANCE APPROACH):
Generators that are Commercial Businesses, including Multi-Family Residential
Dwellings, shall:
   A.   Subscribe to Jurisdiction's three-container collection services and
comply with requirements of those services as described below in Section
4-1A-5 B., except Commercial Businesses that meet the Self-Hauler requirements
in Section
4-1A-10 of this article. Jurisdiction shall have the right to review the number
and size of a generator's containers and frequency of collection to evaluate
adequacy of capacity provided for each type of collection service for proper
separation of materials and containment of materials; and, Commercial
Businesses shall adjust their service level for their collection services as
requested by the Jurisdiction.
   B.   Except Commercial Businesses that meet the Self-Hauler requirements in
Section
4-1A-10 of this article, participate in the Jurisdiction's Organic Waste
collection service(s) by placing designated materials in designated containers
as described below.
      1.    Generator shall place Source Separated Green Container Organic
Waste, including Food Waste, in the Green Container; Source Separated
Recyclable Materials in the Blue Container; and Black Container Waste in the
Black Container. Generator shall not place materials designated for the Black
Container into the Green Container or Blue Container.
   C.   Supply and allow access to adequate number, size and location of
collection containers with sufficient labels or colors (conforming with
Sections
4-1A-5 D.1. and D.2. below) for employees, contractors, tenants, and customers,
consistent with Jurisdiction's Blue Container, Green Container, and Black
Container collection service or, if self-hauling, per the Commercial
Businesses' instructions to support its compliance with its self-haul program,
in accordance with Section
4-1A-10.
   D.   Excluding Multi-Family Residential Dwellings, provide containers for
the collection of Source Separated Green Container Organic Waste and Source
Separated Recyclable Materials in all indoor and outdoor areas where disposal
containers are provided for customers, for materials generated by that
business. Such containers do not need to be provided in restrooms. If a
Commercial Business does not generate any of the materials that would be
collected in one type of container, then the business does not have to provide
that particular container in all areas where disposal containers are provided
for customers. Pursuant to 14 CCR Section 18984.9(b), the containers provided
by the business shall have either:
      1.   A body or lid that conforms with the container colors provided
through the collection service provided by Jurisdiction, with either lids
conforming to the color requirements or bodies conforming to the color
requirements or both lids and bodies conforming to color requirements. A
Commercial Business is not required to replace functional containers, including
containers purchased prior to January 1, 2022, that do not comply with the
requirements of the subsection prior to the end of the useful life of those
containers, or prior to January 1, 2036, whichever comes first.
      2.   Container labels that include language or graphic images, or both,
indicating the primary material accepted and the primary materials prohibited
in that container, or containers with imprinted text or graphic images that
indicate the primary materials accepted and primary materials prohibited in the
container. Pursuant 14 CCR Section 18984.8, the container labeling requirements
are required on new containers commencing January 1, 2022.
   E.   Multi-Family Residential Dwellings are not required to comply with
container placement requirements or labeling requirement in Section
4-1A-5 D. pursuant to 14 CCR Section 18984.9(b).
   F.   To the extent practical through education, training, Inspection, and/or
other measures, excluding Multi-Family Residential Dwellings, prohibit
employees from placing materials in a container not designated for those
materials per the Jurisdiction's Blue Container, Green Container, and Black
Container collection service or, if self-hauling, per the Commercial
Businesses' instructions to support its compliance with its self-haul program,
in accordance with Section
4-1A-10.
   G.   Excluding Multi-Family Residential Dwellings, periodically inspect Blue
Containers, Green Containers, and Black Containers for contamination and inform
employees if containers are contaminated and of the requirements to keep
contaminants out of those containers pursuant to 14 CCR Section 18984.9(b)(3).
   H.   Annually provide information to employees, contractors, tenants, and
customers about Organic Waste Recovery requirements and about proper sorting of
Source Separated Green Container Organic Waste and Source Separated Recyclable
Materials.
   I.   Provide education information before or within fourteen (14) days of
occupation of the premises to new tenants that describes requirements to keep
Source Separated Green Container Organic Waste and Source Separated Recyclable
Materials separate from Black Container Waste (when applicable) and the
location of containers and the rules governing their use at each property.
   J.   Provide or arrange access for Jurisdiction or its agent to their
properties during all Inspections conducted in accordance with Section
4-1A-14 of this article to confirm compliance with the requirements of this
article.
   K.   Accommodate and cooperate with Jurisdiction's Remote Monitoring program
for Inspection of the contents of containers for Prohibited Container
Contaminants, which may be implemented at a later date, to evaluate generator's
compliance with Section
4-1A-5 B. The Remote Monitoring program shall involve installation of Remote
Monitoring equipment on or in the Blue Containers, Green Containers, and Black
Containers.
   L.   At Commercial Business's option and subject to any approval required
from the Jurisdiction, implement a Remote Monitoring program for Inspection of
the contents of its Blue Containers, Green Containers, and Black Containers for
the purpose of monitoring the contents of containers to determine appropriate
levels of service and to identify Prohibited Container Contaminants. Generators
may install Remote Monitoring devices on or in the Blue Containers, Green
Containers, and Black Containers subject to written notification to or approval
by the Jurisdiction or its Designee.
   M.   If a Commercial Business wants to self-haul, meet the Self-Hauler
requirements in Section
4-1A-10 of this article.
   N.   Nothing in this Section prohibits a generator from preventing or
reducing waste generation, managing Organic Waste on site, or using a Community
Composting site pursuant to 14 CCR Section 18984.9(c).
   O.   Commercial Businesses that are Tier One or Tier Two Commercial Edible
Food Generators shall comply with Food Recovery requirements, pursuant to
Section
4-1A-7. (Ord. 2021-08, 11-16-2021)
4-1A-6: WAIVERS FOR GENERATORS:
   A.   De Minimis Waivers A Jurisdiction may waive a Commercial Business'
obligation (including Multi-Family Residential Dwellings) to comply with some
or all of the Organic Waste requirements of this article if the Commercial
Business provides documentation that the business generates below a certain
amount of Organic Waste material as described in Section
4-1A-6 A.2. below. Commercial Businesses requesting a de minimis waiver shall:
      1.   Complete and Submit a waiver request form specifying the services
that they are requesting a waiver from and provide documentation as noted in
Section
4-1A-6 A.2. below.
      2.   Provide documentation or attest that either:
         a.   The Commercial Business' total Solid Waste collection service is
two cubic yards or more per week and Organic Waste subject to collection in a
Blue Container or Green Container comprises less than twenty (20) gallons per
week per applicable container of the business' total waste; or,
         b.   The Commercial Business' total Solid Waste collection service is
less than two cubic yards per week and Organic Waste subject to collection in a
Blue Container or Green Container comprises less than ten (10) gallons per week
per applicable container of the business' total waste.
      3.   Notify Jurisdiction if circumstances change such that Commercial
Business's Organic Waste exceeds threshold required for waiver, in which case
waiver will be rescinded.
      4.   Provide written verification of eligibility for de minimis waiver
every five (5) years, if Jurisdiction has approved de minimis waiver.
   B.   Physical Space Waivers Jurisdiction may waive a Commercial Business' or
property owner's obligations (including Multi-Family Residential Dwellings) to
comply with some or all of the recyclable materials and/or Organic Waste
collection service requirements if the Jurisdiction has evidence from its own
staff, a hauler, licensed architect, or licensed engineer demonstrating that
the premises lacks adequate space for the collection containers required for
compliance with the Organic Waste collection requirements of Section
4-1A-5.
A Commercial Business or property owner may request a physical space waiver
through the following process:
      1.   Submit a waiver request form specifying the type(s) of collection
services for which they are requesting a compliance waiver.
      2.   Provide documentation or attest that the premises lacks adequate
space for Blue Containers and/or Green Containers including documentation from
its hauler, licensed architect, or licensed engineer.
      3.   Provide written verification to Jurisdiction that it is still
eligible for physical space waiver every five (5) years, if Jurisdiction has
approved application for a physical space waiver.
      4.   Review and Approval of Waivers by Jurisdiction The Public Works
director and/or their designee is responsible for the review and approval of
all waivers. (Ord. 2021-08, 11-16-2021)
4-1A-7: REQUIREMENTS FOR COMMERCIAL EDIBLE FOOD GENERATORS:
   A.   Tier One Commercial Edible Food Generators must comply with the
requirements of this Section 9 commencing January 1, 2022, and Tier Two
Commercial Edible Food Generators must comply commencing January 1, 2024,
pursuant to 14 CCR Section 18991.3.
   B.   Large Venue or Large Event operators not providing food services, but
allowing for food to be provided by others, shall require Food Facilities
operating at the Large Venue or Large Event to comply with the requirements of
this Section, commencing January 1, 2024.
   C.   Commercial Edible Food Generators shall comply with the following
requirements:
      1.   Arrange to recover the maximum amount of Edible Food that would
otherwise be disposed.
      2.   Contract with, or enter into a written agreement with Food Recovery
Organizations or Food Recovery Services for:
         a.   The collection of Edible Food for Food Recovery; or
         b.   Acceptance of the Edible Food that the Commercial Edible Food
Generator self-hauls to the Food Recovery Organization for Food Recovery.
      3.   Shall not intentionally spoil Edible Food that is capable of being
recovered by a Food Recovery Organization or a Food Recovery Service.
      4.   Allow Jurisdiction's designated enforcement entity or designated
third party enforcement entity to access the premises and review records
pursuant to 14 CCR Section 18991.4.
      5.   Keep records that include the following information, or as otherwise
specified in 14 CCR Section 18991.4:
         a.   A list of each Food Recovery Service or organization that
collects or receives its Edible Food pursuant to a contract or written
agreement established under 14 CCR Section 18991.3(b).
         b.   A copy of all contracts or written agreements established under
14 CCR Section 18991.3(b).
         c.   A record of the following information for each of those Food
Recovery Services or Food Recovery Organizations:
            (1)   The name, address and contact information of the Food
Recovery Service or Food Recovery Organization.
            (2)   The types of food that will be collected by or self-hauled to
the Food Recovery Service or Food Recovery Organization.
            (3)   The established frequency that food will be collected or
self-hauled.
            (4)   The quantity of food, measured in pounds recovered per month,
collected or self-hauled to a Food Recovery Service or Food Recovery
Organization for Food Recovery.
      6.   When requested, Edible Food Generators are required to submit food
recovery reports to the City that include some or all of the following
information: Records/copies of contracts and agreements, and Food Recovery
activities, such as the type and amounts of edible food accepted and rejected
by Food Recovery Organizations or services for donation. Edible Food Generators
are required to submit the report to the City within fourteen (14) days of
receiving the report request.
   D.   Nothing in this article shall be construed to limit or conflict with
the protections provided by the California Good Samaritan Food Donation Act of
2017, the Federal Good Samaritan Act, or share table and school food donation
guidance pursuant to Senate Bill 557 of 2017 (approved by the Governor of the
State of California on September 25, 2017, which added Article 13 [commencing
with Section 49580] to Chapter 9 of Part 27 of Division 4 of Title 2 of the
Education Code, and to amend Section 114079 of the Health and Safety Code,
relating to food safety, as amended, supplemented, superseded and replaced from
time to time). (Ord. 2021-08, 11-16-2021)
4-1A-8: REQUIREMENTS FOR FOOD RECOVERY ORGANIZATIONS AND SERVICES:
   A.   Food Recovery Services collecting or receiving Edible Food directly
from Commercial Edible Food Generators, via a contract or written agreement
established under 14 CCR Section 18991.3(b), shall maintain the following
records, or as otherwise specified by 14 CCR Section 18991.5(a)(1):
      1.   The name, address, and contact information for each Commercial
Edible Food Generator from which the service collects Edible Food.
      2.   The quantity in pounds of Edible Food collected from each Commercial
Edible Food Generator per month.
      3.   The quantity in pounds of Edible Food transported to each Food
Recovery Organization per month.
      4.   The name, address, and contact information for each Food Recovery
Organization that the Food Recovery Service transports Edible Food to for Food
Recovery.
   B.   Food Recovery Organizations collecting or receiving Edible Food
directly from Commercial Edible Food Generators, via a contract or written
agreement established under 14 CCR Section 18991.3(b), shall maintain the
following records, or as otherwise specified by 14 CCR Section 18991.5(a)(2):
      1.   The name, address, and contact information for each Commercial
Edible Food Generator from which the organization receives Edible Food.
      2.   The quantity in pounds of Edible Food received from each Commercial
Edible Food Generator per month.
      3.   The name, address, and contact information for each Food Recovery
Service that the organization receives Edible Food from for Food Recovery.
   C.   Food Recovery Organizations and Food Recovery Services that have their
primary address physically located in the City of Lemoore and contract with or
have written agreements with one or more Commercial Edible Food Generators
pursuant to 14 CCR Section 18991.3(b) shall report to the City of Lemoore in
the total pounds of Edible Food recovered from the Tier One and Tier Two
Commercial Edible Food Generators they have established a contract or written
agreement with pursuant to 14 CCR Section 18991.3(b) within fourteen (14) days
of the information upon request.
   D.   Food Recovery Capacity Planning:
      1.   Food Recovery Services and Food Recovery Organizations. In order to
support Edible Food Recovery capacity planning assessments or other studies
conducted by the County, City, special district that provides solid waste
collection services, or its designated entity, Food Recovery Services and Food
Recovery Organizations operating in the Jurisdiction shall provide information
and consultation to the Jurisdiction, upon request, regarding existing, or
proposed new or expanded, Food Recovery capacity that could be accessed by the
Jurisdiction and its Commercial Edible Food Generators. A Food Recovery Service
or Food Recovery Organization contacted by the Jurisdiction shall respond to
such request for information within thirty (30) days, unless a shorter
timeframe is otherwise specified by the Jurisdiction. (Ord. 2021-08, 11-16-
2021)
4-1A-9: REQUIREMENTS FOR HAULERS AND FACILITY OPERATORS:
   A.   Requirements for Haulers:
      1.   Haulers providing residential, Commercial, or industrial Organic
Waste collection services to generators within the Jurisdiction's boundaries
shall meet the following requirements and standards as a condition of approval
of a contract, agreement, or other authorization with the Jurisdiction to
collect Organic Waste:
         a.   Through written notice to the Jurisdiction annually on or before
January 31 identify the facilities to which they will transport Organic Waste
including facilities for Source Separated Recyclable Materials, and Source
Separated Green Container Organic Waste.
         b.   Transport Source Separated Recyclable Materials and Source
Separated Green Container Organic Waste to a facility, operation, activity, or
property that recovers Organic Waste as defined in 14 CCR, Division 7, Chapter
12, Article 2.
         c.   Obtain approval from the Jurisdiction to haul Organic Waste,
unless it is transporting Source Separated Organic Waste to a Community
Composting site or lawfully transporting C&D in a manner that complies with 14
CCR Section 18989.1, Section 13 of this article, and Jurisdiction's C&D
ordinance.
      2.   Haulers authorization to collect Organic Waste shall comply with
education, equipment, signage, container labeling, container color,
contamination monitoring, reporting, and other requirements contained within
its franchise agreement, permit, license, or other agreement entered into with
Jurisdiction.
   B.   Requirements for Facility Operators and Community Composting Operations
      1.   Owners of facilities, operations, and activities that recover
Organic Waste, including, but not limited to, Compost facilities, in-vessel
digestion facilities, and publicly-owned treatment works shall, upon
Jurisdiction request, provide information regarding available and potential new
or expanded capacity at their facilities, operations, and activities, including
information about throughput and permitted capacity necessary for planning
purposes. Entities contacted by the Jurisdiction shall respond within thirty
(30) days.
      2.   Community Composting operators, upon Jurisdiction request, shall
provide information to the Jurisdiction to support Organic Waste capacity
planning, including, but not limited to, an estimate of the amount of Organic
Waste anticipated to be handled at the Community Composting operation. Entities
contacted by the Jurisdiction shall respond within thirty (30) days. (Ord.
2021-08, 11-16-2021)
4-1A-10: SELF-HAULER REQUIREMENTS:
   A.   Self-Haulers shall source separate all recyclable materials and Organic
Waste (materials that Jurisdiction otherwise requires generators to separate
for collection in the Jurisdiction's organics and recycling collection program)
generated on-site from Solid Waste in a manner consistent with 14 CCR Sections
18984.1 and 18984.2, or shall haul Organic Waste to a High Diversion Organic
Waste Processing Facility as specified in 14 CCR Section 18984.3.
   B.   Self-Haulers shall haul their Source Separated Recyclable Materials to
a facility that recovers those materials; and haul their Source Separated Green
Container Organic Waste to a Solid Waste facility, operation, activity, or
property that processes or recovers Source Separated Organic Waste.
Alternatively, Self-Haulers may haul Organic Waste to a High Diversion Organic
Waste Processing Facility.
   C.   Self-Haulers that are Commercial Businesses (including Multi-Family
Residential Dwellings) shall keep a record of the amount of Organic Waste
delivered to each Solid Waste facility, operation, activity, or property that
processes or recovers Organic Waste; this record shall be subject to Inspection
by the Jurisdiction. The records shall include the following information:
      1.   Delivery receipts and weight tickets from the entity accepting the
waste.
      2.   The amount of material in cubic yards or tons transported by the
generator to each entity.
      3.   If the material is transported to an entity that does not have
scales on-site, or employs scales incapable of weighing the Self-Hauler's
vehicle in a manner that allows it to determine the weight of materials
received, the Self-Hauler is not required to record the weight of material but
shall keep a record of the entities that received the Organic Waste.
   D.   Self-Haulers that are Commercial Businesses (including Multi-Family
Self-Haulers) shall provide information collected in Section
4-1A-10 C. to Jurisdiction if requested.
   E.   A residential Organic Waste Generator that self hauls Organic Waste is
not required to record or report information in Section
4-1A-10 C. and D. (Ord. 2021-08, 11-16-2021)
4-1A-11: COMPLIANCE WITH CALGREEN RECYCLING REQUIREMENTS:
   A.   Persons applying for a permit from the Jurisdiction for new
construction and building additions and alternations shall comply with the
requirements of this Section and all required components of the California
Green Building Standards Code, 24 CCR, Part 11, known as CALGreen, as amended,
if its project is covered by the scope of CALGreen or more stringent
requirements of the Jurisdiction. If the requirements of CALGreen are more
stringent then the requirements of this Section, the CALGreen requirements
shall apply.
Project applicants shall refer to Jurisdiction's building and/or planning code
for complete CALGreen requirements.
   B.   For projects covered by CALGreen or more stringent requirements of the
Jurisdiction, the applicants must, as a condition of the Jurisdiction's permit
approval, comply with the following:
      1.   Where five (5) or more Multi-Family dwelling units are constructed
on a building site, provide readily accessible areas that serve occupants of
all buildings on the site and are identified for the storage and collection of
Blue Container and Green Container materials, consistent with the
threecontainer collection program offered by the Jurisdiction, or comply with
provision of adequate space for recycling for Multi-Family and Commercial
premises pursuant to Sections 4.408.1, 4.410.2, 5.408.1, and 5.410.1 of the
California Green Building Standards Code, 24 CCR, Part 11 as amended provided
amended requirements are more stringent than the CALGreen requirements for
adequate recycling space effective January 1, 2020.
      2.   New Commercial construction or additions resulting in more than
thirty percent (30%) of the floor area shall provide readily accessible areas
identified for the storage and collection of Blue Container and Green Container
materials, consistent with the three-container collection program offered by
the Jurisdiction, or shall comply with provision of adequate space for
recycling for Multi-Family and Commercial premises pursuant to Sections
4.408.1, 4.410.2, 5.408.1, and 5.410.1 of the California Green Building
Standards Code, 24 CCR, Part 11 as amended provided amended requirements are
more stringent than the CALGreen requirements for adequate recycling space
effective January 1, 2020.
      3.   Comply with CALGreen requirements and applicable law related to
management of C&D, including diversion of Organic Waste in C&D from disposal.
Comply with all written and published Jurisdiction policies and/or
administrative guidelines regarding the collection, recycling, diversion,
tracking, and/or reporting of C&D. (Ord. 2021-08, 11-16-2021)
4-1A-12: MODEL WATER EFFICIENT LANDSCAPING ORDINANCE REQUIREMENTS:
   A.   Property owners or their building or landscape designers, including
anyone requiring a building or planning permit, plan check, or landscape design
review from the Jurisdiction, who are constructing a new (Single-Family, Multi-
Family, public, institutional, or Commercial) project with a landscape area
greater than five hundred (500) square feet, or rehabilitating an existing
landscape with a total landscape area greater than two thousand five hundred
(2,500) square feet, shall comply with Sections 492.6(a)(3)(B) (C), (D), and
(G) of the MWELO, including sections related to use of Compost and mulch as
delineated in this Section
4-1A-12.
   B.   The following Compost and mulch use requirements that are part of the
MWELO are now also included as requirements of this article. Other requirements
of the MWELO are in effect and can be found in 23 CCR, Division 2, Chapter 2.7.
   C.   Property owners or their building or landscape designers that meet the
threshold for MWELO compliance outlined in Section
4-1A-12 A. above shall:
      1.   Comply with Sections 492.6 (a)(3)(B)(C),(D) and (G) of the MWELO,
which requires the submittal of a landscape design plan with a soil
preparation, mulch, and amendments section to include the following:
         a.   For landscape installations, Compost at a rate of a minimum of
four (4) cubic yards per one thousand (1,000) square feet of permeable area
shall be incorporated to a depth of six (6) inches into the soil. Soils with
greater than six percent (6%) organic matter in the top six (6) inches of soil
are exempt from adding Compost and tilling.
         b.   For landscape installations, a minimum three (3)-inch layer of
mulch shall be applied on all exposed soil surfaces of planting areas except in
turf areas, creeping or rooting groundcovers, or direct seeding applications
where mulch is contraindicated. To provide habitat for beneficial insects and
other wildlife up to five percent (5%) of the landscape area may be left
without mulch. Designated insect habitat must be included in the landscape
design plan as such.
         c.   Organic mulch materials made from recycled or post-consumer
materials shall take precedence over inorganic materials or virgin forest
products unless the recycled post-consumer organic products are not locally
available. Organic mulches are not required where prohibited by local fuel
modification plan guidelines or other applicable local ordinances.
      2.   The MWELO compliance items listed in this Section are not an
inclusive list of MWELO requirements; therefore, property owners or their
building or landscape designers that meet the threshold for MWELO compliance
outlined in Section
4-1A-12 A. shall consult the full MWELO for all requirements.
   D.   If, after the adoption of this article, the California Department of
Water Resources, or its successor agency, amends 23 CCR, Division 2, Chapter
2.7, Sections 492.6(a)(3)(B) (C), (D), and (G) of the MWWELO September 15, 2015
requirements in a manner that requires Jurisdictions to incorporate the
requirements of an updated MWELO in a local ordinance, and the amended
requirements include provisions more stringent than those required in this
Section, the revised requirements of 23 CCR, Division 2, Chapter 2.7 shall be
enforced. (Ord. 2021-08, 11-16-2021)
4-1A-13: PROCUREMENT REQUIREMENTS FOR JURISDICTION DEPARTMENTS, DIRECT SERVICE
PROVIDERS, AND VENDORS:
   A.   Jurisdiction departments, and direct service providers to the
Jurisdiction, as applicable, must comply with the Jurisdiction's Recovered
Organic Waste Product procurement policy and Recycled-Content Paper procurement
policy.
   B.   All vendors providing Paper Products and Printing and Writing Paper
shall:
       1.   If fitness and quality are equal, provide Recycled-Content Paper
Products and Recycled-Content Printing and Writing Paper that consists of at
least thirty percent (30%), by fiber weight, postconsumer fiber instead of non-
recycled products whenever recycled Paper Products and Printing and Writing
Paper are available at the same or lesser total cost than non-recycled items.
      2.   Provide Paper Products and Printing and Writing Paper that meet
Federal Trade Commission recyclability standard as defined in 16 Code of
Federal Regulations (CFR) Section 260.12.
      3.   Certify in writing, under penalty of perjury, the minimum percentage
of postconsumer material in the Paper Products and Printing and Writing Paper
offered or sold to the Jurisdiction. This certification requirement may be
waived if the percentage of postconsumer material in the Paper Products,
Printing and Writing Paper, or both can be verified by a product label,
catalog, invoice, or a manufacturer or vendor internet website.
      4.   Certify in writing, on invoices or receipts provided, that the Paper
Products and Printing and Writing Paper offered or sold to the Jurisdiction is
eligible to be labeled with an unqualified recyclable label as defined in 16
Code of Federal Regulations (CFR) Section 260.12 (2013).
      5.   Provide records to the Jurisdiction's Recovered Organic Waste
Product procurement recordkeeping Designee, in accordance with the
Jurisdiction's Recycled-Content Paper procurement policy(ies) of all Paper
Products and Printing and Writing Paper purchases within thirty (30) days of
the purchase (both recycled-content and non-recycled content, if any is
purchased) made by any division or department or employee of the Jurisdiction.
Records shall include a copy (electronic or paper) of the invoice or other
documentation of purchase, written certifications as required in Sections
4-1A-13 B.3. and B.4. of this article for recycled-content purchases, purchaser
name, quantity purchased, date purchased, and recycled content (including
products that contain none), and if non-recycled content Paper Products or
Printing and Writing Papers are provided, include a description of why
Recycled-Content Paper Products or Printing and Writing Papers were not
provided. (Ord. 2021-08, 11-16-2021)
4-1A-14: INSPECTIONS AND INVESTIGATIONS BY JURISDICTION:
   A.   Jurisdiction representatives and/or its designated entity, including
Designees are authorized to conduct Inspections and investigations, at random
or otherwise, of any collection container, collection vehicle loads, or
transfer, processing, or disposal facility for materials collected from
generators, or Source Separated materials to confirm compliance with this
article by Organic Waste Generators, Commercial Businesses (including Multi-
Family Residential Dwellings), property owners, Commercial Edible Food
Generators, haulers, Self-Haulers, Food Recovery Services, and Food Recovery
Organizations, subject to applicable laws. This Section does not allow
Jurisdiction to enter the interior of a private residential property for
Inspection. For the purposes of inspecting Commercial Business containers for
compliance with Section
4-1A-5 B. of this article, Jurisdiction may conduct container Inspections for
Prohibited Container Contaminants using Remote Monitoring, and Commercial
Businesses shall accommodate and cooperate with the Remote Monitoring pursuant
to Section
4-1A-5 K. of this article.
   B.   Regulated entity shall provide or arrange for access during all
Inspections (with the exception of residential property interiors) and shall
cooperate with the Jurisdiction's employee or its designated entity/Designee
during such Inspections and investigations. Such Inspections and investigations
may include confirmation of proper placement of materials in containers, Edible
Food Recovery activities, records, or any other requirement of this article
described herein. Failure to provide or arrange for:
      1.   Access to an entity's premises:
      2.   Installation and operation of Remote Monitoring equipment
(optional); or
      3.   Access to records for any Inspection or investigation is a violation
of this article and may result in penalties described.
   C.   Any records obtained by a Jurisdiction during its Inspections, Remote
Monitoring, and other reviews shall be subject to the requirements and
applicable disclosure exemptions of the Public Records Act as set forth in
Government Code Section 6250 et seq.
   D.   Jurisdiction representatives, its designated entity, and/or Designee
are authorized to conduct any Inspections, Remote Monitoring, or other
investigations as reasonably necessary to further the goals of this article,
subject to applicable laws.
   E.   Jurisdiction shall receive written complaints from persons regarding an
entity that may be potentially non-compliant with SB 1383 Regulations,
including receipt of anonymous complaints. (Ord. 2021-08, 11-16-2021)
4-1A-15: ENFORCEMENT:
   A.   Violation of any provision of this article shall constitute grounds for
issuance of a Notice of Violation and assessment of a fine by a Jurisdiction
Enforcement Official or representative. Enforcement Actions under this article
are issuance of an administrative citation and assessment of a fine. The
Jurisdiction's procedures on imposition of administrative fines are hereby
incorporated in their entirety, as modified from time to time, and shall govern
the imposition, enforcement, collection, and review of administrative citations
issued to enforce this article and any rule or regulation adopted pursuant to
this article, except as otherwise indicated in this article.
   B.   Other remedies allowed by law may be used, including civil action or
prosecution as misdemeanor or infraction. Jurisdiction may pursue civil actions
in the California courts to seek recovery of unpaid administrative citations.
Jurisdiction may choose to delay court action until such time as a sufficiently
large number of violations, or cumulative size of violations exist such that
court action is a reasonable use of Jurisdiction staff and resources.
   C.   Responsible Entity for Enforcement
      1.   Enforcement pursuant to this article may be undertaken by the
Jurisdiction Enforcement Official, which may be the City Manager or their
designated entity, legal counsel, or combination thereof.
      2.   Enforcement may also be undertaken by a Regional or County Agency
Enforcement Official, designated by the Jurisdiction, in consultation with
Jurisdiction Enforcement Official.
         a.   Jurisdiction Enforcement Official(s) (and Regional or County
Agency Enforcement Official, if using) will interpret ordinance; determine the
applicability of waivers, if violation(s) have occurred; implement Enforcement
Actions; and, determine if compliance standards are met.
         b.   Jurisdiction Enforcement Official(s) (and Regional or County
Agency Enforcement Official, if using) may issue Notices of Violation(s).
   D.   Process for Enforcement:
      1.   Jurisdiction Enforcement Officials or Regional or County Enforcement
Officials and/or their Designee will monitor compliance with the ordinance
randomly and through Compliance Reviews, Route Reviews, investigation of
complaints, and an Inspection program (that may include Remote Monitoring).
Section
4-1A-14 establishes Jurisdiction's right to conduct Inspections and
investigations.
      2.   Jurisdiction may issue an official notification to notify regulated
entities of its obligations under the ordinance.
      3.   For Jurisdictions assessing contamination processing fees/penalties.
For incidences of Prohibited Container Contaminants found in containers,
Jurisdiction will issue a Notice of Violation to any generator found to have
Prohibited Container Contaminants in a container. Such notice will be provided
via a cart tag or other communication immediately upon identification of the
Prohibited Container Contaminants or within ten (10) days after determining
that a violation has occurred. If the Jurisdiction observes Prohibited
Container Contaminants in a generator's containers on more than one (1)
consecutive occasion(s), the Jurisdiction may assess contamination processing
fees or contamination penalties on the generator.
      4.   With the exception of violations of generator contamination of
container contents addressed under Section
4-1A-15 D.3., Jurisdiction shall issue a Notice of Violation requiring
compliance within sixty (60) days of issuance of the notice.
      5.   Absent compliance by the respondent within the deadline set forth in
the Notice of Violation, Jurisdiction shall commence an action to impose
penalties, via an administrative citation and fine, pursuant to the
Jurisdiction's requirements contained in Section
4-1A-15K., Table 1, List of Violations.
Notices shall be sent to "owner" at the official address of the owner
maintained by the tax collector for the Jurisdiction or if no such address is
available, to the owner at the address of the dwelling or Commercial property
or to the party responsible for paying for the collection services, depending
upon available information.
   E.   Penalty Amounts for Types of Violations: The penalty levels are as
follows:
      1.   For a first violation, the amount of the base penalty shall be fifty
dollars ($50) to one hundred dollars ($100) per violation.
      2.   For a second violation, the amount of the base penalty shall be one
hundred dollars ($100) to two hundred dollars ($200) per violation.
      2.   For a third or subsequent violation, the amount of the base penalty
shall be two hundred and fifty dollars ($250) to five hundred dollars ($500)
per violation.
   F.   Factors Considered in Determining Penalty Amount: The following factors
shall be used to determine the amount of the penalty for each violation within
the appropriate penalty amount range:
      1.   The nature, circumstances, and severity of the violation(s).
      2.   The violator's ability to pay.
      3.   The willfulness of the violator's misconduct.
      4.   Whether the violator took measures to avoid or mitigate violations
of this chapter.
      5.   Evidence of any economic benefit resulting from the violation(s).
      6.   The deterrent effect of the penalty on the violator.
      7.   Whether the violation(s) were due to conditions outside the control
of the violator.
   G.   Compliance Deadline Extension Considerations: The Jurisdiction may
extend the compliance deadlines set forth in a Notice of Violation issued in
accordance with Section
4-1A-15 if it finds that there are extenuating circumstances beyond the control
of the respondent that make compliance within the deadlines impracticable,
including the following:
      1.   Acts of God such as earthquakes, wildfires, flooding, and other
emergencies or natural disasters;
      2.   Delays in obtaining discretionary permits or other government agency
approvals; or,
      3.   Deficiencies in Organic Waste recycling infrastructure or Edible
Food Recovery capacity and the Jurisdiction is under a corrective action plan
with CalRecycle pursuant to 14 CCR Section 18996.2 due to those deficiencies.
   H.   Appeals Process: Persons receiving an administrative citation
containing a penalty for an uncorrected violation may request a hearing to
appeal the citation. A hearing will be held only if it is requested within the
time prescribed and consistent with Jurisdiction's procedures in the
Jurisdiction's codes for appeals of administrative citations. Evidence may be
presented at the hearing. The Jurisdiction will appoint a hearing officer who
shall conduct the hearing and issue a final written order.
   I.   Education Period for Non-Compliance: Beginning January 1, 2022 and
through December 31, 2023, Jurisdiction will conduct Inspections, Remote
Monitoring, Route Reviews or waste evaluations, and Compliance Reviews,
depending upon the type of regulated entity, to determine compliance, and if
Jurisdiction determines that Organic Waste Generator, Self-Hauler, hauler, Tier
One Commercial Edible Food Generator, Food Recovery Organization, Food Recovery
Service, or other entity is not in compliance, it shall provide educational
materials to the entity describing its obligations under this article and a
notice that compliance is required by January 1, 2022, and that violations may
be subject to administrative civil penalties starting on January 1, 2024.
   J.   Civil Penalties for Non-Compliance: Beginning January 1, 2024, if the
Jurisdiction determines that an Organic Waste Generator, Self-Hauler, hauler,
Tier One or Tier Two Commercial Edible Food Generator, Food Recovery
Organization, Food Recovery Service, or other entity is not in compliance with
this article, it shall document the noncompliance or violation, issue a Notice
of Violation, and take Enforcement Action pursuant to Section
4-1A-15, as needed.
   K.   Enforcement Table:
   Table 1: List of Violations
Requirement Description of Violation
Requirement                            Description of Violation
                                       Commercial Business fails to provide or
                                       arrange for Organic Waste collection
                                       services consistent with Jurisdiction
Commercial Business and Commercial     requirements and as outlined in this
Business Owner Responsibility          article, for employees, contractors,
Requirement, Sections                  tenants, and customers, including
4-1A-5                                 supplying and allowing access to
                                       adequate numbers, size, and location of
                                       containers and sufficient signage and
                                       container color.
Organic Waste Generator Requirement,   Organic Waste Generator fails to comply
Section                                with requirements adopted pursuant to
4-1A-4  and                            this article for the collection and
4-1A-5                                 Recovery of Organic Waste.
                                       A hauler providing residential,
                                       Commercial or industrial Organic Waste
Hauler Requirement Section, Section    collection service fails to transport
4-1A-9                                Organic Waste to a facility, operation,
                                       activity, or property that recovers
                                       Organic Waste, as prescribed by this
                                       article.
                                       A hauler providing residential,
                                       Commercial, or industrial Organic Waste
Hauler Requirement, Section            collection service fails to obtain
4-1A-9                                 applicable approval issued by the
                                       Jurisdiction to haul Organic Waste as
                                       prescribed by this article.
                                       A hauler fails to keep a record of the
Hauler Requirement, Section            applicable documentation of its approval
4-1A-9                                 by the Jurisdiction, as prescribed by
                                       this article.
Self-Hauler Requirement, Section       A generator who is a Self-Hauler fails
4-1A-10                                to comply with the requirements of 14
                                       CCR Section 18988.3(b).
                                       Tier One Commercial Edible Food
                                       Generator fails to arrange to recover
                                       the maximum amount of its Edible Food
Commercial Edible Food Generator       that would otherwise be disposed by
Requirement, Section                   establishing a contract or written
4-1A-7                                 agreement with a Food Recovery
                                       Organization or Food Recovery Service
                                       and comply with this Section commencing
                                       Jan. 1, 2022.
                                       Tier Two Commercial Edible Food
                                       Generator fails to arrange to recover
                                       the maximum amount of its Edible Food
Commercial Edible Food Generator       that would otherwise be disposed by
Requirement, Section                   establishing a contract or written
4-1A-7                                 agreement with a Food Recovery
                                       Organization or Food Recovery Service
                                       and comply with this Section commencing
                                       Jan. 1, 2024.
                                       Tier One or Tier Two Commercial Edible
Commercial Edible Food Generator       Food Generator intentionally spoils
Requirement, Section                   Edible Food that is capable of being
4-1A-7                                 recovered by a Food Recovery
                                       Organization or Food Recovery Service.
Organic Waste Generator, Commercial
Business Owner, Commercial Edible Food Failure to provide or arrange for access
Generator, Food Recovery Organization  to an entity's premises for any
or Food Recovery Service, Sections     Inspection or investigation.
4-1A-5  and
4-1A-7
Recordkeeping Requirements for         Tier One or Tier Two Commercial Edible
Commercial Edible Food Generator,      Food Generator fails to keep records, as
Section                                prescribed by Section
4-1A-7                                 4-1A-7 .
                                       A Food Recovery Organization or Food
                                       Recovery Service that has established a
Recordkeeping Requirements for Food    contract or written agreement to collect
Recovery Services and Food Recovery    or receive Edible Food directly from a
Organizations, Section                 Commercial Edible Food Generator
4-1A-8                                 pursuant to 14 CCR Section 18991.3(b)
                                       fails to keep records, as prescribed by
                                       Section
                                       4-1A-9 .
 
(Ord. 2021-08, 11-16-2021)
4-1A-16: EFFECTIVE DATE:
This article shall be effective commencing on January 1, 2022. (Ord. 2021-08,
11-16-2021)
CHAPTER 2
PLANTS AND WEEDS 1
SECTION:
4-2-1: Noxious Weeds and Plants Prohibited
4-2-2: Nuisance Declared by Resolution
4-2-3: Weeds Defined
4-2-4: Abatement of Seasonal and Recurrent Nuisances; Notice
4-2-5: Posting Notice on Property
4-2-6: Notice Form
4-2-7: Written Notice of Abatement
4-2-8: Hearing on Objections
4-2-9: Abatement by Superintendent
4-2-10: Accounting of Abatement Cost, Report
4-2-11: Abatement by Contractor
4-2-12: Assessment and Lien for Abatement Costs
4-2-13: Collection of Assessment Costs
4-2-14: Refund of Assessment Costs in Error
 
Notes
1 1. See also Section
  8-1E-2 of this Code, section 27.119
4-2-1: NOXIOUS WEEDS AND PLANTS PROHIBITED:
No owner of any lot, place or area within the City, or agent of such owners,
shall permit on such lot, place or area, or upon any sidewalk or street
abutting the same, any weeds, grass, rubbish, refuse, dirt, or deleterious,
unhealthful growths, or other noxious matter that may be growing, lying or
located thereon.
4-2-2: NUISANCE DECLARED BY RESOLUTION:
   A.   The City Council may declare by resolution as public nuisances, and
abate:
      1.   All weeds growing upon the streets, sidewalks or private property in
the City.
      2.   All rubbish, refuse and dirt upon parkways, sidewalks or private
property in the City.
   B.   The resolution shall:
      1.   Refer to the street by its commonly known name.
      2.   Describe the property upon which or in front of which the nuisance
exists by giving its lot and block number according to the official or City
assessment map.
   C.   Any number of streets, sidewalks or parcels or private property may be
included in one resolution.
4-2-3: WEEDS DEFINED:
Weeds, as used in this Chapter, includes any of the following:
   A.   Weeds which bear seeds of a downy or wingy nature.
   B.   Sagebrush, chaparral and any other brush or weeds which attain such
large growth as to become, when dry, a fire menace to adjacent improved
property.
   C.   Weeds which are otherwise noxious or dangerous.
   D.   Poison oak and poison ivy when the conditions of growth are such as to
constitute a menace to the public health.
   E.   Dry grass, stubble, brush, litter or other flammable material which
endangers the public safety by creating a fire hazard.
4-2-4: ABATEMENT OF SEASONAL AND RECURRENT NUISANCES; NOTICE:
   A.   At the time it adopts the resolution as provided for or by Section
4-2-2, the City Council may also find and declare that weeds on specified
parcels of property are seasonal and recurrent nuisances.
   B.   Such seasonal and recurrent nuisances shall be abated in accordance
with the provisions of this Chapter; provided, that upon the second and any
subsequent occurrences of such nuisance on the same parcel or parcels within
the same calendar year, no further hearings need be held and it shall be
sufficient to mail a post card notice to the owners of the property as they and
their addresses appear upon the current assessment roll.
   C.   The notice shall refer to and describe the property and shall state
that noxious or dangerous weeds of a seasonal and recurrent nature are growing
on or in front of the property, and that the same constitute a public nuisance
which must be abated by the removal of said noxious or dangerous weeds, and
that otherwise they will be removed and the nuisance will be abated by the City
authorities, in which case the cost of such removal shall be assessed upon the
parcel and lands from which or in front of which such weeds are removed and
that, upon confirmation, such cost will constitute a lien upon such parcel or
lands until paid.
   D.   The notice required above shall, in addition to containing all other
required matters, state that the efficient and economical control of such
seasonal and recurrent nuisance requires preventive chemical control of such
weeds, weed seeds, and weed seedlings and that the City may require preventive
chemical control of such nuisance.
   E.   In the event the City is once required to abate such nuisance, the City
may, in addition, before and during the next following germinating season of
such weeds, provide for the preventative abatement of such nuisance by using
chemical control of such weeds.
4-2-5: POSTING NOTICE ON PROPERTY:
After passage of the resolution, the Superintendent shall cause notices to be
conspicuously posted on or in front of the property on or in front of which the
nuisance exists. He shall post:
   A.   One notice to each separately owned parcel of property of not over
fifty feet (50') frontage.
   B.   Not more than two (2) notices to any such parcel of one hundred feet
(100') frontage or less.
   C.   Notices at not more than one hundred feet (100') apart if the frontage
of such parcel is greater than one hundred feet (100').
The notices shall be posted at least five (5) days prior to the time for
hearing objections by the City Council.
4-2-6: NOTICE FORM:
The notice described in Section
4-2-5 shall be in substantially the following form:
   NOTICE TO DESTROY WEEDS AND REMOVE RUBBISH, REFUSE AND DIRT
   Notice is hereby given that on the          day of                 , 19    ,
the City Council of the City of Lemoore passed a resolution declaring that
noxious or dangerous weeds are growing upon or in front of the property on this
street, and that rubbish, refuse, and dirt are upon or in front of property on
this street, and more particularly described in the resolution, and that they
constitute a public nuisance which must be abated by the removal of the weeds,
rubbish, refuse and dirt. Otherwise they will be removed and the nuisance
abated by the City and the cost of removal assessed upon the land from or in
front of which the weeds, rubbish, refuse and dirt are removed and will
constitute a lien upon such land until paid. Reference is hereby made to the
resolution for further particulars. A copy of said resolution is on file in the
office of the City Clerk.
   All property owners having any objections to the proposed removal of the
weeds, rubbish, refuse and dirt are hereby notified to attend a meeting of the
City Council of the City of Lemoore to be held                      of 19    ,
when their objections will be heard and given due consideration.
4-2-7: WRITTEN NOTICE OF ABATEMENT:
   A.   As an alternative to posting notice of the resolution and notice of the
meeting when objections will be heard, the City Council may direct the City
Clerk to mail written notice of the proposed abatement to all persons owning
property described in the resolution. The City Clerk shall cause such written
notice to be mailed to each person to whom such described property is assessed
in the last equalized assessment roll available on the date the resolution was
adopted by the City Council.
   B.    The County Assessor, at the request of the City Clerk, shall, within
ten (10) days thereafter, mail to the City Clerk a list of the names and
addresses of all of the persons owning property described in the resolution.
The address of the owners shown on the assessment roll shall be conclusively
deemed to be the proper address for the purpose of mailing such notice. The
City shall reimburse the County for the actual cost of furnishing such list and
the cost shall be a part of the costs of abatement.
   C.    The notices mailed by the City Clerk shall be mailed at least five (5)
days prior to the time for hearing objections by the City Council, and said
notices shall be substantially in the form provided by Section
4-2-6 except that notices shall be signed by the City Clerk.
4-2-8: HEARING ON OBJECTIONS:
   A.    At the time stated in the notices, the City Council shall hear and
consider all objections to the proposed removal of weeds, rubbish, refuse and
dirt. It may continue the hearing from time to time.
   B.    By motion or resolution at the conclusion of the hearing, the City
Council shall allow or overrule any objections. Upon the passage of the motion
or on adoption of the resolution, the City Council acquires jurisdiction to
proceed and perform the work of removal.
   C.    The decision of the City Council is final.
4-2-9: ABATEMENT BY SUPERINTENDENT:
   A.    If objections have not been made or after the City Council has
disposed of those made, it shall order the Superintendent to abate the nuisance
by having the weeds, rubbish, refuse and dirt removed. The order shall be made
by motion or resolution.
   B.    The Superintendent may enter upon private property to abate the
nuisance.
   C.    Before the Superintendent arrives, any property owner may remove the
weeds, rubbish, refuse and dirt at his own expense. Nevertheless, in any case
in which an order to abate is issued, the City Council, by motion or
resolution, may further order that a special assessment and lien be imposed
pursuant to subsection
4-2-12A. In that case, the assessment and lien shall be limited to the costs
incurred by the City in enforcing abatement upon the parcels, including
investigation, boundary determination, measurement, clerical and other related
costs.
4-2-10: ACCOUNTING OF ABATEMENT COST, REPORT:
   A.    The Superintendent shall keep an account of the costs of abatement in
front of or on each separate parcel of land where the work is done by him. He
shall submit to the City Council for confirmation an itemized written report
showing such cost.
   B.    A copy of the report shall be posted for at least three (3) days prior
to its submission to the City Council on or near the location for the posting
of the agenda for any meeting of the Council, with a notice of the time of
submission of the report to the Council.
   C.    At the time fixed for receiving and considering the report, the City
Council shall hear the report with any objections of the property owners liable
to be assessed for the abatement. It may modify the report if it is deemed
necessary. The City Council shall then confirm the report by motion or
resolution.
4-2-11: ABATEMENT BY CONTRACTOR:
Abatement of the nuisance may, in the discretion of the City Council, be
performed by contract awarded by the City Council on the basis of competitive
bids let to the lowest responsible bidder pursuant to the Government Code of
the State of California. In such event, the contractor shall keep the account
and submit the itemized written report for such separate parcel of land.
4-2-12: ASSESSMENT AND LIEN FOR ABATEMENT COSTS:
   A.    The cost of abatement in front of or upon each parcel of land and the
costs incurred by the City in enforcing abatement upon the parcels, including
investigations, boundary determination, measurement, clerical and other related
costs, constitutes a special assessment against that parcel. After the
assessment is made and confirmed, a lien attaches on the parcel upon
recordation of the order confirming the assessment in the office of the County
Recorder of Kings County, except that if any real property to which such lien
would attach has been transferred or conveyed to a bona fide purchaser for
value, or if a lien of a bona fide encumbrance for value has been created and
attaches thereon, prior to the date on which the first installment of such
taxes as imposed by subsection B would become delinquent, then the lien which
would otherwise be imposed by this Section shall not attach to such real
property and the costs of abatement and the costs of enforcing abatement, as
confirmed, relating to such property shall be transferred to the unsecured roll
for collection.
   B.    Except as provided in subsection A, after confirmation of the report,
a copy shall be delivered to the County Assessor and the Tax Collector, who
shall add the amount of the assessment to the next regular tax bill levied
against the parcel.
   C.    Except as provided in subsection A, if the County Assessor and the Tax
Collector assess property and collect taxes for the City, a certified copy of
the report shall be filed with the County Auditor on or before August 10 of
each year. The descriptions of the parcels reported shall be those used for the
same parcels on the County Assessor's map books for the current year.
   D.    The County Auditor shall enter each assessment on the County tax roll
opposite the parcel of land.
   E.    The lien of said assessment shall have the priority of the taxes with
which it is collected.
4-2-13: COLLECTION OF ASSESSMENT COSTS:
   A.    The amount of the assessment shall be collected at the time and in the
manner of other assessments and taxes. If delinquent, the amounts shall be
subject to the same penalties and procedure of foreclosure and sale provided
for ordinary assessments and taxes.
   B.    As an alternative method, the County Tax Collector, in his discretion,
may collect the assessments without reference to the general taxes by issuing
separate bills and receipts for the assessments.
   C.    The Superintendent may receive the amount due on the abatement cost
and issue receipts at any time after the confirmation of the report and until
ten (10) days before a copy is given to the County Assessor and Tax Collector,
or where a certified copy is filed with the County Auditor, until August 1
following the confirmation of the report.
4-2-14: REFUND OF ASSESSMENT COSTS IN ERROR:
The City Council may order refunded all or part of an assessment paid pursuant
to this Chapter if it finds that all or part of the assessment has been
erroneously levied. An assessment or part thereof shall not be refunded unless
a claim is filed with the Clerk of the City Council on or before November 1
after the assessment lien became due and payable. The claim shall be verified
by the person who paid the assessment, or his guardian, executor or
administrator. (Ord. 8901, 2-7-89)
CHAPTER 3
ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGE LICENSE; PUBLIC CONVENIENCE OR NECESSITY 1
(Rep. by Ord. 2012-01, 4-17-2012)
 
Notes
1 1. See section
  9-2B-17 of this code.
CHAPTER 4
PROPERTY MAINTENANCE
SECTION:
4-4-1: Title
4-4-2: Definitions
4-4-3: Findings
4-4-4: Property Standards
4-4-5: Abatement
4-4-6: Penalties
4-4-7: Severability
4-4-8: Conflict With Other Ordinances
4-4-9: Cost Of Abatement
4-4-1: TITLE:
This chapter shall be known as the CITY OF LEMOORE PROPERTY MAINTENANCE
ORDINANCE. (Ord. 9606, 5-21-1996)
4-4-2: DEFINITIONS:
For purpose of this chapter, the following words or phrases shall have the
meaning prescribed below:
ABATE: To repair, replace, remove, destroy, or otherwise remedy a condition,
which constitutes a violation of this chapter by such means and in such a
manner and to such an extent as the applicable city department director or
designee(s) determines is necessary in the interest of the general health,
safety and welfare of the community.
CHRONIC NUISANCE ACTIVITY:
   A.   Any nuisance as defined by state law or local ordinance occurring on,
around or within the influence of the property or the person responsible for
the property.
   B.   Nuisance activity includes: Any criminal conduct as defined by state
law or local ordinance occurring on, around or within the influence of the
property or the person responsible for the property, including, but not limited
to, the following activities or behaviors:
      1.   Stalking;
      2.   Harassment;
      3.   Failure to disperse;
      4.   Disorderly conduct;
      5.   Assault;
      6.   Any domestic violence crimes;
      7.   Reckless endangerment;
      8.   Prostitution;
      9.   Patronizing a prostitute;
      10.   Public disturbance noises;
      11.   Lewd conduct;
      12.   Any firearms/dangerous weapons violations;
      13.   Drug related loitering;
      14.   Any drug related activity.
   C.   For purposes of this chapter, "nuisance activity" shall not include
conduct where the person responsible is the victim of a crime and had no
control over the criminal act.
CHRONIC NUISANCE PROPERTY: Property on which a combination of three (3) or more
nuisance activities occur or exist during any ninety (90) day period.
CONTROL: The ability to regulate, restrain, dominate, counteract or govern
property, or conduct that occurs on a property.
DRUG RELATED ACTIVITY: Any unlawful activity at a property which consists of
the manufacture, delivery, sale, storage, possession, or giving away of any
controlled substance as defined by state law.
PERSON: Natural person, joint venture, partnership, association, club, company,
corporation, business trust, organization, or the manager, lessee, agent,
officer or employee of any of them.
PERSON RESPONSIBLE FOR THE PROPERTY OR PERSON RESPONSIBLE: Unless otherwise
defined, any person who has titled ownership of the property or structure which
is subject to this chapter, an occupant in control of the property or structure
which is subject to this chapter, a developer, builder, or business operator or
owner who is developing, building or operating a business on the property or in
a structure which is subject to this chapter and/or any person who has control
over the property and allows a violation of this chapter to continue.
PREMISES AND PROPERTY: May be used by this chapter interchangeably and means
any public or private building, lot, parcel, dwelling, rental unit, real estate
or land or portion thereof including property used as a residential or
commercial property.
RENTAL UNIT: Any structure or that part of a structure, including, but not
limited to, single-family home, room or apartment, which is rented to another
and used as a home residence, or sleeping place by one or more persons. (Ord.
2015-01, 3-17-2015)
4-4-3: FINDINGS:
The city council finds and determines as follows:
   A.   The city has a history and reputation for well kept properties, and
property values and general welfare of the community are founded, in part, upon
the appearance and maintenance of private property;
   B.   Owners, person responsible for the property, and occupants of some
properties within the city have permitted visual blight, including, but not
limited to, deteriorated buildings, the accumulation of overgrown, rank and
noxious vegetation and the accumulation of broken or discarded personal
property in front yards;
   C.   The existence of such conditions as described in this chapter is
injurious and inimical to the public health, safety and welfare of city
residents and contributes to the deterioration of residential, commercial and
industrial areas;
   D.   Abatement of these conditions is in the best interest of the health,
safety and welfare of the citizens of the city because maximum use and
enjoyment of properties in close proximity to one another depends upon a
minimum standard of sightliness and the use and enjoyment of the property. The
beneficial effects of maintaining a minimum standard of sightliness and the use
and enjoyment for properties in the city include, but are not limited to,
appreciation of property values, physical improvements of residential,
commercial and industrial zones, attraction of capital investors to
residential, commercial and industrial zones, increase in commercial trade and
industrial productivity and increase in the tax base of the city;
   E.   The abatement of such conditions will improve the general welfare,
health, safety, and image of the city;
   F.   The abatement procedures set forth in this chapter are reasonable and
afford due process to all affected persons;
   G.   The uses and abuses of property, as described in this chapter,
reasonably relate to the proper exercise of police power to protect the health,
safety and welfare of the public. (Ord. 2015-01, 3-17-2015)
4-4-4: PROPERTY STANDARDS:
Unless expressly allowed by the zoning regulations, it is unlawful for any
landowner or person leasing, occupying or having charge or possession of any
real property in the city to keep, maintain, deposit or perform on such
property any of the following and existence of any of the following is hereby
declared a public nuisance:
   A.   Attractive nuisances dangerous to children and other persons,
including, but not limited to, hazardous pools, ponds and excavations, and
abandoned, broken or neglected household appliances, equipment and machinery,
unless located behind a screened fence preventing access to the area.
   B.   Overgrown, dead, diseased, decaying or hazardous trees, shrubs, ground
cover or weeds likely to harbor vermin, restrict or impede access to or public
use of adjacent sidewalks and streets, obstruct traffic control signs and
devices and fire hydrants, pose a risk of physical injury to the public or
constitute an unsightly appearance.
   C.   Used or damaged lumber, junk, trash, debris, scrap metal, concrete,
sand, asphalt, cans, bottles, tires, salvage materials, boxes, containers,
bins, and abandoned, discarded, inoperative or unusable furniture, stove,
refrigerator, freezer, sink, toilet, cabinet or other household fixture, yard
waste or equipment stored so as to be visible from a public street, alley or
from an adjoining property for a period in excess of one week, except nothing
herein shall preclude the placement of stacked firewood for use on the premises
in the side or rear yards of the premises.
   D.   Any wall, fence, or hedge in such condition of deterioration or
disrepair as to constitute a hazard to persons or property or cause
depreciation in the value of any adjacent or nearby property.
   E.   Broken windows or doors constituting hazardous conditions and inviting
trespassers or malicious mischief.
   F.   Buildings that are boarded up, partially destroyed, not properly
secured or partially constructed or incomplete after the building permit
authorizing its construction has expired.
   G.   Maintenance of the premises so out of harmony and conformity with the
maintenance quality of adjacent or nearby properties as to cause substantial
diminution in the enjoyment, use or property values of such adjacent or nearby
properties.
   H.   Storage of an automobile, motorcycle, and trailer or parts thereof on
residential properties within the front or side yard, unless parked on a paved
driveway or screened from view by a minimum six foot (6') high solid fence.
Recreational vehicles as defined in Section 6-8-1 which fail to comply with the
storage requirements of Title 6, Chapter 8.
   I.   Accumulate, store, abandon, dismantle, repair or otherwise locate
inoperative trailer, camper, boat or other watercraft, motor vehicle or parts
thereof on private property for a period in excess of fourteen (14) consecutive
days, unless stored within an entirely enclosed garage or screened by a minimum
six foot (6') high solid fence.
   J.   City provided refuse containers or other receptacles stored in front of
the front elevation of the building structure (front yard), unless screened;
stored behind the front elevation of the building structure (side yards),
unless screened or stored adjacent to the building structure and placed so that
only one can is directly visible; or on the street, except when placed in
locations of collection at times of collection. Containers may be placed for
collection up to twenty four (24) hours prior to collection and must be
properly stored on the same day as collection is made, as described in
subsection
4-1-4C of this title.
   K.   Placement of satellite dish antennas over two feet (2') in diameter
within the front or side yards abutting a street unless behind a solid fence of
a minimum six feet (6') high.
   L.   Fountains, pools and ponds unmaintained such that they harbor algae,
bacteria or mosquitoes.
   M.   Cracked walkways or driveways if the cracks are such that weeds and
growth come up through the cracks where an area is in overall poor condition.
   N.   Construction equipment and machinery and building supplies and
materials stored in areas visible from public rights of way or neighboring
properties unless part of an active and approved construction project.
   O.   Disposal of oil, gasoline, other petroleum products, noxious chemicals,
pesticides, or other gaseous, liquid or solid wastes in such a manner as to
constitute a health hazard or degrade the appearance of or detract from the
aesthetic and property values of neighboring properties.
   P.   Buildings in disrepair with wall cracks in excess of one-fourth inch
(1/4") width, leaking roofs, defective electric wiring or otherwise not in
compliance with building codes to the extent it presents a dangerous situation
or effect on property values.
   Q.   Any property within the city of Lemoore which is a chronic nuisance
property is in violation of this chapter and subject to its penalties and
remedies.
   R.   Any person responsible for property who permits property to be a
chronic nuisance property shall be in violation of this chapter and subject to
its penalties and remedies.
(Ord. 2015-01, 3-17-2015; amd. Ord. 2024-02, 6-18-2024; Ord. 2024-07, 12-3-
2024)
4-4-5: ABATEMENT:
   A.   Notice To Owner And/Or Lessee To Abate: In addition to the penalties
and other procedures provided herein, upon a determination by the chief of
police, or designee, that any activity or condition exists in violation of this
chapter, he/she may send by certified mail to the address of the owner and/or
lessee of the property concerned, a notice detailing the violation and
requirements of its abatement, advising the property owner and/or lessee to
cease the violation within a specified period if the city is not to proceed
with the further steps set forth in this chapter for abatement.
Alternatively, when the chief of police, or designee, receives documentation
confirming the occurrence of nuisance activities on any property, the chief of
police, or designee, may review such documentation to determine whether it
describes the nuisance activities enumerated in section
4-4-4 of this chapter. Upon such a finding, the chief of police, or designee,
shall warn the person responsible for such property, in writing, that the
property is in danger of being declared a chronic public nuisance property.
The warning shall contain: (public nuisance letter)
      1.   The address or legal description sufficient for identification of
the property;
      2.   A concise description of the nuisance activities that exist, or that
have occurred on the property;
      3.   Offer the person responsible an opportunity to abate the nuisance
activities giving rise to the violations; and
The chief of police, or designee, shall serve or cause to be served such
warning upon the person responsible in accordance with the procedures set forth
above.
   B.   Notice To City Council: In the event the violation is not ceased or
abated within the specified time, the chief of police, or designee, shall place
the matter on the city council's agenda for the next regular meeting.
   C.   Abatement Hearing: The city council at its next regular meeting may
pass a resolution declaring the violation and setting a hearing thereon. The
city clerk shall mail a copy of the resolution to the property owner at least
ten (10) days prior to such hearing.
   D.   Notice Of Violation; Posting: After the passage of such resolution, the
chief of police, or designee, shall post upon the property on which violation
is alleged to exist, a notice in letters not less than one inch (1") in height
and in the following form:
         NOTICE TO ABATE VIOLATION
      NOTICE is hereby given on the            day of           , 20        ,
the City Council of the City of Lemoore passed a Resolution declaring that
certain violation(s) upon (description of property) are (description of
violation(s)), and that the same must be abated by (work specified) or the
removal of the same, otherwise they will be (work specified) or removed and the
violation abated by the City, in which case the cost of such (work specified)
or removal shall be assessed upon the property from which such violation(s) are
located, and such cost will constitute a lien upon such property until paid.
      Any person objecting to the proposed (work specified) or removal, as
aforesaid, is hereby notified to attend the meeting of said City Council to be
held in the Council Chambers in the City Hall at (time) on the            day
of           , 20        , when such objections will be heard and given due
consideration.
      DATED this          day of            20        .
         City Clerk
         City of Lemoore
   The notice shall be posted at least five (5) days prior to the time for
hearing objections to the abatement of such violation(s).
   E.    Council Decision: At the time stated in such notice, the city council
shall hear and consider all objections to the proposed removal or work, and may
continue the hearing. Upon conclusion of such hearing, the city council shall
by resolution allow or overrule any and all objections, whereupon the city
council shall have acquired jurisdiction to proceed and perform the work or
removal. The decision of the city council shall be final.
   F.    Abatement Of Violation: After the city council has taken final action,
the chief of police, or designee, shall abate the violation. The chief of
police, or designee, is expressly authorized to enter upon private property for
such purposes.
   G.    Cost Of Abatement: The chief of police, or designee, shall keep
account of the abatement cost and shall submit an itemized statement thereof to
the city council at its next subsequent meeting. A copy of such statement shall
be mailed to the owner of such premises. In the event that any such owner is
unknown, the statement shall be posted on the bulletin board at city hall for
one week, giving notice when such statement shall be considered by the city
council.
   H.    Assessment Against Owner: The city council, at the arranged time,
shall consider such statement, and their determination shall be final. The
costs of abating the violation shall constitute special assessments against the
subject property. Upon confirmation of such statement, a copy thereof shall be
delivered to the county assessor. The assessor shall add the amount set forth
in such statement and charge it against the property. Thereafter, said amount
shall be collected when ordinary taxes are collected. Such special assessments
shall be subject to the same penalties and procedures under foreclosure and
sale in case of delinquency, as provided for ordinary municipal taxes. (Ord.
2015-01, 3-17-2015)
4-4-6: PENALTIES:
   A.    Any person who violates any of the provisions of this chapter shall be
guilty of a misdemeanor, as provided for in section
1-4-1 of this code. It shall be a separate offense either when a violation is
committed a second time more than twenty four (24) hours after a prior
violation or when a violation is continued or permitted to exist for a period
of more than twenty four (24) hours. Each and every day, or part thereof,
during which any such violation is committed, continued or permitted, shall be
a separate offense. In any civil action commenced by the city under this
chapter, the city shall be entitled to recover from the defendant in any such
action reasonable attorney fees and costs of suit.
   B.    If the chief of police, or designee, has provided a notice as
prescribed under subsection
4-4-5A of this chapter and the person responsible fails to respond to the
warning within the time prescribed, the chief of police, or designee, shall
issue a notice declaring the property to be a chronic nuisance property and
post such notice at the property and issue the person responsible a civil
infraction, punishable by:
      Citation amount of one hundred dollars ($100.00) for the first issuance;
      Citation amount of two hundred dollars ($200.00) for the second issuance;
      Citation amount of three hundred dollars ($300.00) for the third
issuance;
      Citation amount of five hundred dollars ($500.00) for the fourth
issuance.
      Total citation fees not to exceed five thousand dollars ($5,000.00) per
calendar year per individual parcel.
   If the person responsible responds as required by the notice and agrees to
abate the chronic nuisance activity, the chief of police, or designee, and the
person responsible, may work out an agreed upon course of action which would
abate the chronic nuisance activity. If an agreed course of action does not
result in the abatement of the chronic nuisance activities or if no agreement
concerning abatement is reached, the matter shall be forwarded to the city
attorney for enforcement action. Provided, that in the event the chief of
police, or designee, or the city attorney determines that the person
responsible has taken reasonable steps to abate the chronic nuisance activity,
the city attorney can choose not to commence an enforcement action under this
chapter, notwithstanding the continuance of the chronic nuisance activity.
(Ord. 2015-01, 3-17-2015)
4-4-7: SEVERABILITY:
If any provision, clause, sentence or paragraph of this chapter or the
application thereof to any person or circumstances shall be held invalid, such
invalidity shall not affect the other provisions or applications of the
provisions of this chapter which can be given effect without the invalid
provision or application, and to this end, the provisions of this chapter are
declared severable. (Ord. 2015-01, 3-17-2015)
4-4-8: CONFLICT WITH OTHER ORDINANCES:
Whenever any provision of this chapter is found to be in conflict with any
other city ordinance or any state laws, the most restrictive provisions shall
apply in such case. (Ord. 2015-01, 3-17-2015)
4-4-9: COST OF ABATEMENT:
   A.    The city may, pursuant to the provisions of this section, collect any
fee, cost, or charge incurred in: 1) the abatement of public nuisances; 2) the
correction of any violation of any law or regulation that would also be a
violation of section 1941.1 of the Civil Code; 3) the enforcement of zoning
ordinances adopted pursuant to chapter 4 (commencing with section 65800) of
division 1 of title 7 of the Government Code or any other constitutional or
statutory authority; 4) inspections and abatement of violations of article 1
(commencing with section 13100) of chapter 2 of part 2 of division 12 of the
Health And Safety Code; 5) inspections and abatement of violations of the state
housing law, part 1.5 (commencing with section 17910) of division 13 of the
Health And Safety Code and regulations adopted pursuant thereto; 6) inspections
and abatement of violations of the California building standards code, title 24
of the California code of regulations; or 7) inspections and abatement related
to local ordinances and regulations that implement any of the foregoing, if the
fee, cost, or charge has not been paid within forty five (45) days of notice
thereof, and the city does hereby make the amount of the unpaid fee, cost, or
charge a lien against the property that is the subject of the enforcement
activity.
   B.    Except as provided in subsection G of this section, the amount of the
proposed lien shall be collected at the same time and in the same manner as
property taxes are collected. All laws applicable to the levy, collection, and
enforcement of ad valorem taxes shall be applicable to the proposed lien,
except that if any real property to which the lien would attach has been
transferred or conveyed to a bona fide purchaser for value, or if a lien of a
bona fide encumbrance for value has been created and attaches thereon, prior to
the date on which the first installment of taxes would become delinquent, then
the lien that would otherwise be imposed by this section shall not attach to
real property and the costs of enforcement relating to the property shall be
transferred to the unsecured roll for collection.
   C.    The amount of any fee, cost, or charge shall not exceed the actual
cost incurred performing the inspections and enforcement activity, including
permit fees, fines, late charges, and interest.
   D.    This section does not apply to any enforcement, abatement, correction,
or inspection activity regarding a violation in which the violation was evident
on the plans that received a building permit.
   E.    The city shall provide the owner of the property with written notice
in plain language of the proposed lien, a description of the basis for the
amounts comprising the lien, a minimum of forty five (45) days after notice to
pay the fee, cost, or charge, and an opportunity to appear before the city
council and be heard regarding the amount of the proposed lien.
   F.    The city council may delegate the holding of the hearing required by
this subsection to an administrative hearing officer designated by the city
manager. The administrative hearing officer shall make a written recommendation
to the city council which shall include factual findings based on evidence
introduced at the hearing. The city council may adopt the recommendation
without further notice of hearing, or may set the matter for a de novo hearing
before the city council. Notice in writing of the de novo hearing shall be
provided to the property owner at least ten (10) days in advance of the
scheduled hearing.
   G.    If the city council determines that the lien authorized pursuant to
subsection A of this section shall become a lien, the body may also cause a
notice of lien to be recorded. This lien shall attach upon recordation in the
office of the county recorder and shall have the same force, priority, and
effect as a judgment lien, not a tax lien. The notice shall, at a minimum,
identify the record owner or possessor of the property, set forth the last
known address of the record owner or possessor, set forth the date upon which
the lien was created against the property, and include a description of the
real property subject to the lien and the amount of the lien. (Ord. 2015-01, 3-
17-2015)
CHAPTER 5
SHOPPING CARTS 1
SECTION:
4-5-1: Purpose; Declaration Of Nuisance
4-5-2: Definitions
4-5-3: Enforcement Of Chapter
4-5-4: Retrieval Of Shopping Carts
4-5-5: Storage And Disposal Of Shopping Carts
4-5-6: Appeal Of Decisions Of Custodian
4-5-7: Fines For Violations
4-5-8: City Agreements With Retail Establishments
 
Notes
1 1. See also section
  9-4D-20 of this Code.
4-5-1: PURPOSE; DECLARATION OF NUISANCE:
The proliferation of lost or stolen shopping carts abandoned or discarded on
public and private property causes blighting conditions in the community,
results in the obstruction of free access to public and private sidewalks,
streets, parking lots and other ways, and impedes emergency services. For the
aforesaid reasons, such lost, stolen or abandoned shopping carts are hereby
declared to be a public nuisance which shall be subject to abatement in the
manner set forth in this chapter. The purpose of this chapter is to set forth
reasonable regulations for the removal of lost or abandoned shopping carts from
public or private property, to complement and supplement provisions of State
law, and to adopt local regulations to the extent not otherwise preempted by
State statute. (Ord. 2001-04, 4-17-2001)
4-5-2: DEFINITIONS:
Except as otherwise expressly set forth herein, the following words and terms
as used in this chapter shall have the following meanings:
LAUNDRY CART: A basket which is mounted on wheels and used in a coin operated
laundry or dry cleaning retail establishment by a customer or an attendant for
the purpose of transporting fabrics and the supplies necessary to process them.
POLICE OFFICER: A Police Officer employed by the City.
REQUIRED IDENTIFICATION: All of the information required pursuant to the
provisions of section 22435.1 of the Business and Professions Code of the State
of California.
SHOPPING CART: A basket which is mounted on wheels or a similar device
generally used in a retail establishment by a customer for the purpose of
transporting goods of any kind. The term "shopping cart" includes a laundry
cart. (Ord. 2001-04, 4-17-2001)
4-5-3: ENFORCEMENT OF CHAPTER:
The provisions of this chapter shall be enforced by any enforcement personnel,
including, but not limited to, Police Officers. To the extent otherwise
permitted by law, said enforcement personnel may enter onto any public or
private property in the City to retrieve, remove, store and dispose of any
lost, stolen or abandoned shopping cart, or any part thereof. Any act
authorized to be performed by the City pursuant to any provision of this
chapter may be performed by any enforcement personnel. (Ord. 2001-04, 4-17-
2001)
4-5-4: RETRIEVAL OF SHOPPING CARTS:
   A.   The City may immediately retrieve any lost, stolen or abandoned
shopping cart within the City where the location of the shopping cart will
impede emergency services within the meaning of section 22435.7(c) of the
Business and Professions Code of the State of California.
   B.   The City may immediately retrieve any lost, stolen or abandoned
shopping cart within the City which shopping cart does not have the required
identification affixed thereto.
   C.   The City may retrieve any lost, stolen or abandoned shopping cart
within the City which shopping cart has the required identification affixed
thereto after providing the requisite notice to the owner of the shopping cart,
or his or her agent, as required by section 22435.7(b) of the Business and
Professions Code of the State of California unless such notice has been
voluntarily waived by the owner or his or her agent. (Ord. 2001-04, 4-17-2001)
4-5-5: STORAGE AND DISPOSAL OF SHOPPING CARTS:
   A.   Any shopping cart retrieved by the city pursuant to section
4-5-4 of this chapter, or pursuant to section 22435.7 of the Business and
Professions Code, shall be impounded and removed to the cart storage yard.
   B.   Any shopping cart which does not have the required identification
affixed thereto and is impounded by the city shall be stored and disposed of as
follows:
      1.   The enforcement personnel retrieving the shopping cart shall attach
a tag thereto, or make a written report, identifying the date, time and general
location from where the shopping cart was removed as well as the name of the
enforcement personnel who retrieved the shopping cart.
      2.   The shopping cart shall be delivered and custody thereof given to
the custodian at the cart storage yard.
      3.   If the shopping cart has the name, address, telephone number, or
other identifying marks of any retail establishment or person thereon, the city
shall attempt to notify such establishment or person of the retrieval and
location of the shopping cart and provide an opportunity for such establishment
or person to establish ownership or the right to possession of the retrieved
shopping cart to the custodian. In addition, if the shopping cart was retrieved
from private property, the city shall attempt to notify the owner or occupant,
if any, of such property and provide an opportunity for such owner or occupant
to establish ownership or the right to possession of the retrieved shopping
cart to the custodian.
      4.   The shopping cart shall be released to any establishment or person
who submits evidence satisfactory to the custodian to prove ownership or the
right to possession of the shopping cart. The shopping cart shall be released
only upon payment of the retrieval fee and applicable storage charges as
established by resolution of the city council of the city; provided, however,
no fee shall be required in any instance where the owner or person entitled to
possession of the shopping cart proves to the satisfaction of the custodian
that said shopping cart was not a lost, stolen or abandoned shopping cart
within the meaning of this chapter.
      5.   If the owner or other person or establishment entitled to possession
of a lost, stolen or abandoned shopping cart does not appear and present
evidence satisfactory to the custodian for the release of the shopping cart
within ninety (90) calendar days following the date said cart is retrieved by
the city, the shopping cart may be sold or disposed of by the custodian.
   C.   Any shopping cart which has the required identification affixed thereto
and is impounded by the city following compliance with the applicable
provisions of section
4-5-4 of this chapter shall be stored and disposed of as follows:
      1.   The enforcement personnel retrieving the shopping cart shall attach
a tag thereto, or make a written report, identifying the date, time and general
location from where the shopping cart was removed as well as the name of the
enforcement personnel who retrieved the shopping cart.
      2.   The shopping cart shall be delivered and custody thereof given to
the custodian at the cart storage yard.
      3.   The city shall provide a written notice of violation to the retail
establishment or owner as identified on the required identification informing
such owner or establishment of the retrieval and location of the shopping cart.
In addition, if the shopping cart was retrieved from private property, the city
shall attempt to notify the owner or occupant, if any, of such property of the
retrieval and location of the shopping cart and provide an opportunity for such
owner or occupant to establish ownership or the right to possession of the
retrieved shopping cart to the custodian.
      4.   The shopping cart shall be released to any establishment or person
who submits evidence satisfactory to the custodian to prove ownership or the
right to possession of the shopping cart. The shopping cart shall be released
only upon payment of the fine, if any, established by section
4-5-7 of this chapter, the redemption fee and applicable storage charges as
established by resolution of the city council of the city; provided, however,
no fee or charges shall be imposed or required in any instance where the owner
or person entitled to possession of the shopping cart proves to the
satisfaction of the custodian that said shopping cart was not a lost, stolen or
abandoned shopping cart within the meaning of this chapter. In addition, no fee
or charges shall be imposed or required to the extent the city and the owner or
retail establishment have entered into an agreement waiving any such fee or
charges, or any portion thereof, pursuant to section
4-5-8 of this chapter.
      5.   If the owner or other person or establishment entitled to possession
of the shopping cart does not appear and present evidence satisfactory to the
custodian for the release of the shopping cart within thirty (30) calendar days
following the date of the notice of violation provided herein, the shopping
cart may be sold or disposed of by the custodian. (Ord. 2001-04, 4-17-2001)
4-5-6: APPEAL OF DECISIONS OF CUSTODIAN:
Any decision of the custodian pursuant to this chapter shall be subject to
appeal to the city manager of the city by filing a written notice of appeal,
and specifying the grounds therefor, with the city clerk of the city within ten
(10) calendar days following the date of said decision by the custodian. In the
absence of a timely filed appeal, the decision of the custodian shall be final.
If a timely appeal is filed, the city clerk shall notify the appellant of the
date, time and place where such appeal will be considered by the city manager.
In such instances, the decision of the city manager shall be final. (Ord. 2001-
04, 4-17-2001)
4-5-7: FINES FOR VIOLATIONS:
The owner of a shopping cart shall pay a fine, and there is hereby imposed upon
such owner as a debt owing to the city, the sum of fifty dollars ($50.00) for
each occurrence in excess of three (3) occurrences during any six (6) month
period for failure to retrieve shopping carts in accordance with section
22435.7 of the Business and Professions Code of the state of California. (Ord.
2001-04, 4-17-2001)
4-5-8: CITY AGREEMENTS WITH RETAIL ESTABLISHMENTS:
Notwithstanding any other provision of this chapter to the contrary, nothing
contained in this chapter shall be deemed to impose a requirement upon the city
with regard to advance notice to a shopping cart owner or retail establishment
prior to the retrieval and impounding of a shopping cart to the extent the city
and the owner or retail establishment have entered into an agreement which
waives such requirement. Nothing contained herein shall require the city and
any owner or retailer to enter into any such agreement. The city manager is
hereby authorized to enter into such agreements on behalf of the city. (Ord.
2001-04, 4-17-2001)
CHAPTER 6
ABANDONED RESIDENTIAL PROPERTY REGISTRATION AND MAINTENANCE
SECTION:
4-6-1: Title
4-6-2: Purpose And Intent
4-6-3: Definitions
4-6-4: Recordation Of Transfer Of Loan, Deed Of Trust; Assignment Of Rents
4-6-5: Registration
4-6-6: Maintenance Requirements
4-6-7: Security Requirements
4-6-8: Additional Authority
4-6-9: Maintenance And Security By City
4-6-10: Fee
4-6-11: Enforcement
4-6-12: Violations And Penalties
4-6-1: TITLE:
This chapter shall be known as the ABANDONED RESIDENTIAL PROPERTY REGISTRATION
AND MAINTENANCE ORDINANCE and may be so cited. (Ord. 2008-07, 9-16-2008)
4-6-2: PURPOSE AND INTENT:
It is the purpose and intent of this chapter to establish an abandoned
residential property registration program as a mechanism to protect residential
neighborhoods within city limits of the city of Lemoore from becoming blighted
through the lack of adequate maintenance and security of abandoned properties.
(Ord. 2008-07, 9-16-2008)
4-6-3: DEFINITIONS:
The terms as used in this chapter or in any resolution or standard adopted by
the city council pursuant to this chapter shall have the following meanings:
ABANDONED: A property that is vacant and is under a current notice of default,
notice of trustee's sale, pending tax assessor's lien sale or that has been the
subject of a foreclosure sale where the title was retained by the beneficiary
of a deed of trust involved in the foreclosure, or that is transferred under a
deed in lieu of foreclosure or sale.
ACCESSIBLE PROPERTY: A property that is accessible through a compromised or
breached gate, fence, wall or other similar feature.
ACCESSIBLE STRUCTURE: A structure or building that is unsecured or breached in
such a way as to allow access to the interior space by unauthorized persons.
ASSIGNMENT OF RENTS: An instrument that transfers the beneficial interest under
a deed of trust from one lender or entity to another.
BENEFICIARY: A lender under a note secured by a deed of trust.
BUYER: Any person, copartnership, association, corporation, entity, or
fiduciary who agrees to transfer anything of value in consideration for
property described in an agreement of sale, as defined in this section.
DANGEROUS BUILDING: Any building or structure that would constitute a
"dangerous building" as defined in section 302 of the uniform building code for
abatement of dangerous buildings or as prepared by the International Conference
of Building Officials and adopted in force within the city.
DAYS: Consecutive calendar days.
DEED IN LIEU OF FORECLOSURE OR SALE: A recorded document that transfers
ownership of a property from the trustor to the holder of a deed of trust upon
consent of the beneficiary of the trust deed.
DEED OF TRUST: An instrument by which title to real estate is transferred to a
third party trustee as security for a real estate loan. This definition applies
to any and all subsequent deeds of trust, including second trust deed, third
trust deed, etc.
DEFAULT: The failure to fulfill a contractual obligation, monetary or
conditional.
DISTRESSED: A property that is under a current notice of default, notice of
trustee's sale, pending tax assessor's lien sale, has been foreclosed upon by
the trustee or has been conveyed to the beneficiary or trustee via a deed in
lieu of foreclosure or sale.
EVIDENCE OF VACANCY: Any condition that on its own, or combined with other
conditions present, would lead a reasonable person to believe that the property
is vacant. Such conditions include, but are not limited to, overgrown or dead
vegetation, accumulation of newspapers, circulars, flyers or mail, past due
utility notices or disconnected utilities, accumulation of trash, junk or
debris, the absence of window coverings such as curtains, blinds or shutters,
the absence of furnishings or personal items consistent with residential
habitation, and statements by neighbors, passersby, delivery agents, or
government employees that the property is vacant.
FORECLOSURE: The process by which a property, placed as security for a real
estate loan, is sold at auction to satisfy the debt if the trustor defaults.
LOCAL: Within forty (40) road driving miles' distance from the subject
property.
NEIGHBORHOOD STANDARD: Those conditions that are present on a simple majority
of properties within a three hundred foot (300') radius of an individual
property. A property that is the subject of a neighborhood standard comparison,
or any other abandoned property within the three hundred foot (300') radius,
shall not be counted toward the simple majority.
NOTICE OF DEFAULT: A recorded notice that a default has occurred under a deed
of trust and that the beneficiary intends to proceed with a trustee's sale.
OUT OF AREA: In excess of forty (40) road driving miles' distance of the
subject property.
OWNER: Any person, copartnership, association, corporation, entity, or
fiduciary having a legal or equitable title or any interest in any real
property.
OWNER OF RECORD: The person having recorded title to the property at any given
point in time the record is provided by the Kings County recorder's office.
PROPERTY: Any unimproved or improved real property, or portion thereof,
situated in the city and includes the buildings or structures located on the
property regardless of condition.
RESIDENTIAL BUILDING: Any improved real property, or portion thereof, situated
in the city, designed or permitted to be used for dwelling purposes, and shall
include the buildings and structures located on such improved real property.
This includes any real property being offered for sale, trade, transfer, or
exchange as "residential" whether or not it is legally permitted or zoned for
such use.
SECURING: Such measures as may be directed by the chief of police or his or her
designee that assist in rendering the property inaccessible to unauthorized
persons including, but not limited to, the repairing of fences and walls,
chaining or padlocking of gates, the repair of doors, windows or other openings
and locks.
TRUSTEE: The person, firm, corporation, or entity holding a deed of trust on a
property.
TRUSTOR: A borrower under a deed of trust, who deeds property to a trustee as a
security for the payment of debt.
VACANT: A building or structure that is not legally occupied. (Ord. 2008-07, 9-
16-2008)
4-6-4: RECORDATION OF TRANSFER OF LOAN, DEED OF TRUST; ASSIGNMENT OF RENTS:
Within ten (10) days of the purchase of transfer of a loan or deed of trust
secured by residential property, the beneficiary/trustee shall record with the
Kings County recorder's office an assignment of rents or similar document that
lists the name of the corporation, entity, or individual and the mailing
address and contact phone number of the new beneficiary or trustee responsible
for receiving payments associated with the loan or deed of trust. (Ord. 2008-
07, 9-16-2008)
4-6-5: REGISTRATION:
   A.   Any beneficiary/trustee who holds a deed of trust on a property located
within the city of Lemoore shall perform an inspection of the property that is
the security for the deed of trust upon default by the trustor and prior to
recording a notice of default with the Kings County recorder's office. If the
property is found to be vacant or shows evidence of vacancy, it is, by this
chapter, deemed abandoned and the beneficiary/trustee shall, within ten (10)
days of the inspection, register the property with the city housing specialist,
or his or her designee, on forms provided by the city.
   B.   If the property is occupied but remains in default, it shall be
inspected by the beneficiary/trustee or his or her designee monthly until:
      1.   The trustor or other party remedies the default, or
      2.   It is found to be vacant or shows evidence of vacancy, at which time
is deemed abandoned and the trustee shall, within ten (10) days of that
inspection, register the property with the city housing specialist, or his or
her designee, on forms provided by the city.
   C.   The registration required by either subsection A or B of this section
shall contain the name of the beneficiary/trustee (corporation, entity, or
individual), the direct street mailing address of the beneficiary/trustee (no
PO boxes), a direct contact name and phone number for the beneficiary/trustee,
and, in the case of a corporation, entity, or out of area beneficiary/trustee,
the local property management company responsible for the security,
maintenance, and marketing of the property.
   D.   An annual registration fee shall accompany the registration form. The
fee and registration shall be valid for the calendar year, or remaining portion
of the calendar year, in which the registration was initially required.
Subsequent registrations and fees are due January 1 of each year and must be
received no later than January 31 of the year due.
   E.   This section shall also apply to properties that have been the subject
of a foreclosure sale where the title was transferred to the beneficiary of a
deed of trust involved in the foreclosure and any properties transferred under
a deed in lieu of foreclosure or sale.
   F.   Properties subject to this chapter shall remain under the annual
registration requirement and the security and maintenance standards of this
chapter as long as they remain vacant.
   G.   Any person, firm, corporation, or entity that has registered a property
under this chapter must report any change of information contained in the
registration within ten (10) days of the change.
   H.   Any individual or entity who fails to comply with any of the
requirements of this section shall also be subject to the penalties contained
in section
1-4-1 of this code. (Ord. 2008-07, 9-16-2008)
4-6-6: MAINTENANCE REQUIREMENTS:
In addition to the requirements of chapter 4 of this title, properties subject
to registration under section
4-6-5 of this chapter shall comply with the following:
   A.   In comparison to the neighborhood standard, the property shall be kept
free of weeds, dry brush, dead vegetation, trash, junk, debris, building
materials, any accumulation of newspapers, circulars, flyers, notices, except
those required by federal, state or local law, discarded personal items,
including, but not limited to, furniture, clothing, large and small appliances,
printed material or any other items that give the appearance that the property
is abandoned.
   B.   The property shall be maintained free of graffiti, tagging, or similar
markings by removal or painting over with an exterior grade paint that matches
the color of the exterior of the structure.
   C.   All yards visible from the public right of way shall be landscaped and
maintained to the neighborhood standard at the time registration was required.
      1.   Landscape includes, but is not limited to, grass, ground covers,
bushes, shrubs, hedges or similar plantings, decorative rock or bark, or
artificial turf or sod designed specifically for residential installation.
      2.   Landscape does not include weeds, broken concrete, asphalt,
decomposed granite, plastic sheeting, mulch, indoor/outdoor carpet, or any
similar material.
      3.   Maintenance includes, but is not limited to, regular watering,
irrigation, cutting, pruning and mowing of required landscape, and removal of
all trimmings.
   D.   All yards not visible from the public right of way shall be kept free
from the accumulation of dry, overgrown grass, weeds, brush, debris or similar
items that would constitute a fire hazard.
   E.   Pools and spas shall either be kept in working order, treated so the
water remains clear and free of pollutants, debris, and any kind of larvae that
would cause a health danger to the surrounding vicinity, or drained and kept
dry. In either case, properties with pools or spas must comply with the minimum
security fencing requirements of the state of California.
   F.   Adherence to this section does not relieve the beneficiary/trustee or
property owner of any obligations set forth in any covenants, conditions, and
restrictions or homeowners' association rules and regulations which may apply
to the property. (Ord. 2008-07, 9-16-2008)
4-6-7: SECURITY REQUIREMENTS:
In addition to the requirements of chapter 4 of this title, properties subject
to registration under section
4-6-5 of this chapter shall comply with the following:
   A.   The property shall be maintained in a secure manner so as not to be
accessible to unauthorized persons. Secure manner includes, but is not limited
to, the closure and locking of windows, doors (walk-through, sliding and
garage), gates, and any other opening of such size that may allow a child to
access the interior of the property and or structure(s). In the case of broken
windows, "securing" means the reglazing of the window.
   B.   If the property is owned by a corporation, other entity, or out of area
beneficiary/trustee/owner:
      1.   A local property management company shall be contracted to perform,
at a minimum, monthly inspections to verify that the requirements of this
section, and any other applicable laws, are being met.
      2.   The property shall be posted with the name and twenty four (24) hour
contact phone number of the local property management company. The posting
shall be no less than eighteen inches by twenty four inches (18" x 24") and
shall be of a font that is legible from a distance of forty five feet (45') and
shall contain, along with the name and twenty four (24) hour contact phone
number, the words "THIS PROPERTY MANAGED BY" and "TO REPORT PROBLEMS OR
CONCERNS CALL". The posting shall be placed on the interior of a window facing
the street to the front of the property so it is visible to the street; if no
such area exists, on a stake of sufficient size to support the posting location
that is visible from the street to the front of the property but not readily
accessible to vandals. The exterior posting must be construed of and printed
with weather resistant materials.
      3.   The local property management company shall inspect the property no
less than on a monthly basis to determine if the property is in compliance with
the requirements of this chapter. (Ord. 2008-07, 9-16-2008)
4-6-8: ADDITIONAL AUTHORITY:
In addition to the enforcement remedies established by other provisions of this
code, the chief of police, or his or her designee, the fire chief, or his or
her designee, or code enforcement officers, shall have the authority to require
the beneficiary/trustee/owner and/or owner of record of any property affected
by this chapter to implement additional maintenance and/or security measures
including, but not limited to, securing any and all door, window or other
openings, installing additional security lighting, increasing on site
inspection frequency, employment of an on site security guard, or other
measures as may be reasonably required to arrest the decline of the property.
(Ord. 2008-07, 9-16-2008)
4-6-9: MAINTENANCE AND SECURITY BY CITY:
   A.   If any individual or entity covered by this chapter fails to maintain
and secure their property as required by this chapter within a reasonable time
of issuance of a notice of violation of any of the provisions of this chapter,
then the city manager shall cause the property to be maintained or secured by
city personnel or private contract, and entry upon the property is expressly
authorized for such purposes. Upon completion of the maintenance or securing by
the direction of the city manager, the city manager shall cause a statement of
the costs thereof to be prepared for submission to the city council. The city
manager shall set a time and place for the city council to receive and consider
the statement of costs, and shall serve on the owner or owners of the property
a copy of the statement of costs and a notice of the time and place at which
the city council will receive and consider the statement of costs. The
statement of costs and the notice of hearing shall be served in the same manner
as provided in section
4-4-5 of this title.
   B.   In addition to maintenance and securing of properties, any individual
or entity covered by this chapter who fails to maintain and secure the property
as required by this chapter within a reasonable time of issuance of a notice of
violation of any of the provisions of this chapter shall be deemed to have
authorized the city to remove trespassers from the property.
   C.   In addition to the city remedies described in this chapter and this
title, the city reserves the right to impose fines and penalties under the
provisions of section 2929.3 of the California Civil Code. (Ord. 2008-07, 9-16-
2008)
4-6-10: FEE:
The fee for registering an abandoned residential property shall be set by
resolution of the city council. (Ord. 2008-07, 9-16-2008)
4-6-11: ENFORCEMENT:
Every violation of this chapter is declared a nuisance and may be enforced in
any combination allowed in chapter 4 of this title. (Ord. 2008-07, 9-16-2008)
4-6-12: VIOLATIONS AND PENALTIES:
   A.   Violations of this chapter shall be treated as a strict liability
offense regardless of intent.
   B.   Any individual or entity that violates any portion of this chapter
shall be subject to civil penalties as provided in section
1-4-1 of this code. (Ord. 2008-07, 9-16-2008)
CHAPTER 7
MASSAGE REGULATIONS
SECTION:
4-7-1: Purpose And Intent
4-7-2: Definitions
4-7-3: Permit Required
4-7-4: Land Use And Zoning Requirements
4-7-5: Exemptions From Permit Requirements
4-7-6: Application For An Establishment Permit Or Outcall Massage Business
Permit
4-7-6-1: Certified Massage Therapist Registration Requirements
4-7-7: Updating Information And Renewal
4-7-8: Permit Fee
4-7-9: Permit Referral
4-7-10: Action By The Chief Of Police On Permit Application
4-7-11: Issuance Of Permit
4-7-12: Appeal
4-7-13: Revocation Of Permit
4-7-14: Suspension Of Permit
4-7-15: Permits Nontransferable; Change In Location
4-7-16: Notice Of Employees' Status
4-7-17: Application Of Chapter To Preexisting Massage Therapists
4-7-18: Prohibited Acts
4-7-19: Operating Requirements
4-7-20: Inspection By Officials
4-7-21: Hot Tub, Sauna, And Tanning Establishments
4-7-22: Outcall Massage Businesses
4-7-23: Penalties For Violation
4-7-1: PURPOSE AND INTENT:
Government Code sections 51030 through 51034 provide authority for the
legislative bodies of California cities to license and regulate the business of
massage. In enacting this chapter, the city council recognizes that massage is
a viable professional field offering the public valuable health and therapeutic
services. However, there are known instances, both within and outside the city,
where the practice of massage and the operation of massage establishments have
been associated with unlawful activity and pose a threat to the quality of life
in the community. It is the purpose and intent of this chapter to protect the
public health, safety, and welfare by adopting regulations to prevent blighting
conditions and deter criminal activity that could occur from the practice of
massage and the operation of massage establishments. It is not the intent of
this chapter to punish legitimate massage practitioners and establishments.
(Ord. 2017-01, 2-7-2017)
4-7-2: DEFINITIONS:
For the purposes of this chapter, unless the context clearly requires a
different meaning, the words, terms, and phrases set forth in this chapter
shall have the meanings given to them in this section.
CERTIFIED MASSAGE THERAPIST: A person who is certified by the California
Massage Therapy Council ("CAMTC") pursuant to chapter 10.5 (commencing with
section 4600) of division 2 of the California Business And Professions Code.
CHIEF OF POLICE: The chief of the Lemoore police department or his/her
designee.
FOR COMPENSATION: The exchange of massage services for money, goods, or other
services. An establishment or person cannot avoid the requirements of this
chapter by offering free massage in conjunction with other services or goods
provided to a client or customer for compensation.
MANAGING EMPLOYEE: Any employee of a massage establishment who has
responsibility for supervising, directing, or assigning work to massage
therapists.
MASSAGE: Any method of pressure on, or friction against, or stroking, kneading,
rubbing, tapping, pounding, vibrating or stimulating the external parts of the
human body with the hands or any other parts of the body or with the aid of any
mechanical or electrical apparatus or other appliances or devices, with or
without the use of oils, creams, tonics, lotions, antiseptics, tanning
products, or other similar preparations. Massage shall further include baths,
including aromatherapy, vapor, shower, electric tub, sponge, hot towels, sauna,
steam, or any other type of bath where the essential nature of the service
involves any method of pressure or friction against, or stimulating the
external parts of, the human body, with the hands or any other parts of the
body.
MASSAGE ESTABLISHMENT: An establishment having a fixed place of business where
any person, firm, association, or corporation practices or otherwise permits
massage for compensation. The term "massage establishment" includes
establishments that offer services such as relaxation, hot tub, towel wraps,
baths, health treatments, tanning, or any service where the essential nature of
the interaction between the employee and the customer involves a massage.
MASSAGE THERAPIST: Any person who, for any type of compensation, practices
massage.
OPERATOR: Any individual who has any ownership interest in the massage
establishment.
OUTCALL MASSAGE: Providing massage services for compensation at a location
other than at a permitted massage establishment.
PERMIT: A written document authorizing the holder to engage in the business
specified in the document. Two (2) types of permits are issued pursuant to this
chapter: establishment permits and outcall massage business permits. (Ord.
2017-01, 2-7-2017)
4-7-3: PERMIT REQUIRED:
   A.   Establishment Permit: It is unlawful for any owner, operator, officer,
director, or managing employee of a massage establishment to operate or permit
the operation of such business without a valid massage establishment permit as
required by this chapter.
   B.   Outcall Massage Business Permit: It is unlawful for any person to
provide outcall massage services without a valid outcall massage business
permit.
   C.   Certification: It is unlawful for any person other than a certified
massage therapist to provide massage services within the city unless exempted
as provided in this chapter. (Ord. 2017-01, 2-7-2017)
4-7-4: LAND USE AND ZONING REQUIREMENTS:
The premises and property on which the premises occupied by a massage
establishment is located must conform to all applicable land use and zoning
requirements. (Ord. 2017-01, 2-7-2017)
4-7-5: EXEMPTIONS FROM PERMIT REQUIREMENTS:
   A.   Exemption From Establishment Permit; Other Professionals Practicing
Within Scope Of Profession: No establishment permit shall be required for the
following persons when practicing massage within the scope of their profession:
      1.   Any cosmetologist, barber, aesthetician, manicurist, electrologist,
apprentice barber, or cosmetology instructor licensed under the California
barbering and cosmetology act.
      2.   Any person licensed to practice any healing art under the provisions
of division 2 (commencing with section 500) of the California Business And
Professions Code or the chiropractic act.
      3.   Acupuncturists who are licensed to practice their profession in the
state of California.
      4.   Nurses, physical therapists, or occupational therapists who are
licensed to practice their professions in the state of California.
      5.   Except as provided in subsection B of this section, the
establishment permit exemption in this subsection A does not apply if the place
of business allows professionals other than those identified in this subsection
A to perform massage either as employees or independent contractors. Under
those circumstances, the place of business shall have a valid establishment
permit and the nonexempt massage therapist shall have a valid therapist permit.
   B.   Exemption From Establishment Permit; Medical Offices: No establishment
permit shall be required for the offices of a licensed physician, surgeon, or
osteopath; provided that the person performing the massage has a valid massage
permit and is performing massage under the direct supervision and
recommendation of such licensed medical professional.
   C.   Exemption From Establishment Permit; Occasional Recreational Events: No
establishment permit shall be required where massage services are provided at
an occasional recreational or community event, provided the following
conditions are met: 1) the person providing the massage is in possession of a
valid massage therapist permit; 2) massage services are made equally available
to all participants of the event; 3) the event is open to participation by a
significant segment of the public such as employees of a sponsoring or
participating corporation; 4) massage services are provided at the event site
and during the hours the event is scheduled; 5) the event sponsors have
approved of the provision of massage services; and 6) those providing massage
services are not the primary sponsors of the event. "Occasional" shall mean not
more than once per month. (Ord. 2017-01, 2-7-2017)
4-7-6: APPLICATION FOR AN ESTABLISHMENT PERMIT OR OUTCALL MASSAGE BUSINESS
PERMIT:
Written application for an establishment permit or outcall massage business
permit required by this chapter shall be filed with the chief of police. Such
application shall be accompanied by a fee as approved by the city council. Upon
approval of the permit by the chief of police, the applicant must also apply
for a business license through the city clerk's office and pay any applicable
license fees.
The following information, unless specifically prohibited by California
Government Code section 51034, shall be provided in the application concerning
the applicant, if an individual; concerning each stockholder, each officer and
each director, if the applicant is a closely held corporation; concerning each
partner, including limited partners, if the applicant is a partnership;
concerning the operator of the establishment; and concerning principals of the
business that exercise control over operation of the business not identified
above.
   A.   Identifying Information: Name, present residential and business
addresses, telephone numbers, birth date and California driver's license or
identification card number of the applicant.
   B.   Prior Residential Addresses: All residential addresses and dates of
residence for five (5) years preceding the date of the application.
   C.   Prior Business And Employment History: Business, occupation or
employment history of the applicant for the five (5) years immediately
preceding the date of the application.
   D.   Evidence That Applicant Is Over Eighteen: Satisfactory proof that the
applicant is over the age of eighteen (18) years. Satisfactory proof may
consist of a California driver's license, California identification card, or a
United States passport.
   E.   Arrests And Convictions: A listing and explanation of any arrests or
convictions for any felonies or nontraffic related misdemeanors.
   F.   Fingerprints: Fingerprints of the applicant.
   G.   Photograph: Submit to a photograph taken by the police department.
   H.   Prior Abatement Of A Business: Statement indicating whether the
applicant has ever had an ownership interest in, operated or been employed by
any business which has been the subject of an abatement proceeding under the
California red light abatement act or any similar abatement laws, whether in
California or other jurisdictions.
   I.   Other Information: Any other information as required by the chief of
police.
In addition to the information required above, an applicant for an
establishment permit must also provide:
   J.   Premises Ownership And Lease Information: A statement on whether the
applicant owns, leases, or rents the premises where the massage establishment
will be located. If the applicant leases or rents the premises, the applicant
shall provide the name, address, and telephone number of the owner of the
premises and the term of any lease.
   K.   Address And Name Of Business: The address where the applicant proposes
to operate a massage establishment and the name under which the business will
be operated.
   L.   Prior Massage Businesses: The business name, street address, and city
of any and all businesses where the applicant conducted any business providing
massage, relaxation, hot tub, towel wraps, baths, health treatments, or tanning
services within twenty four (24) months preceding the date of the application.
   M.   Evidence Of Other Permits: Evidence of applicable land use and/or
building permits as required by the city of Lemoore. (Ord. 2017-01, 2-7-2017)
4-7-6-1: CERTIFIED MASSAGE THERAPIST REGISTRATION REQUIREMENTS:
Certified massage therapists must register with the Lemoore police department
prior to providing massage services. The registration application shall include
at a minimum, the following information: name, address, telephone number(s),
place(s) of employment, whether the applicant intends to engage in "outcall
massage" as defined in section
4-7-2 of this chapter, and evidence of certification from the CAMTC. There is
no charge for the registration.
Certified massage therapists shall update their registration within ten (10)
days of any changes and shall maintain on file with the Lemoore police
department a current copy of their CAMTC certificate. (Ord. 2017-01, 2-7-2017)
4-7-7: UPDATING INFORMATION AND RENEWAL:
Permits issued under this chapter shall be renewed every two (2) years as set
forth in section
4-7-11 of this chapter. Permittees and certified massage therapist registrants
shall, however, at all times maintain an active business license with the city
of Lemoore. In addition, the permittee shall notify the chief of police of the
following within ten (10) calendar days after they occur: a) any change of home
address, change in home or work telephone number, or change in location of
business; and b) any arrest for an offense listed under subsection
4-7-10B of this chapter. (Ord. 2017-01, 2-7-2017)
4-7-8: PERMIT FEE:
Fees for each establishment permit and outcall massage business permit shall be
paid to the Lemoore police department at the time the application is submitted
and are nonrefundable. Fee amounts shall be approved by the city council.
Upon approval by the police department of an establishment permit or outcall
massage business permit, the applicant shall also pay applicable business
license fees through the finance department. (Ord. 2017-01, 2-7-2017)
4-7-9: PERMIT REFERRAL:
The chief of police shall investigate the background of an applicant of any
permit. Additionally, the chief of police shall refer an application for an
establishment permit to the city of Lemoore planning department with respect to
applicable zoning and building requirements. The chief of police may also refer
an application to other persons, entities, or agencies as appropriate. (Ord.
2017-01, 2-7-2017)
4-7-10: ACTION BY THE CHIEF OF POLICE ON PERMIT APPLICATION:
   A.   Time To Act: The chief of police shall either issue or deny a permit
within sixty (60) calendar days following receipt of a completed application
for an establishment permit or outcall massage business permit. In taking such
action, the chief of police shall consider the recommendations of city
officials investigating the application, along with any other relevant
information.
   B.   Grounds For Denial Of A Permit: The chief of police shall deny an
establishment permit or outcall massage business permit on any of the following
grounds:
      1.   The applicant, owner, operator, any officer or director of a massage
establishment has been convicted of a violation of section 266h, 266i, 311
through 312.7, 314, 315, 316, 318, or subdivision (a), (b) or (d) of section
647 of the California Penal Code, any serious and/or violent felony as defined
in subdivision (c) of section 1192.7 or 667.5 of the California Penal Code, or
any other crime involving moral turpitude.
      2.   The applicant, owner, operator, any officer or director of a massage
establishment has been convicted of offenses equivalent to those listed above
under the laws of another jurisdiction, even if expunged.
      3.   The applicant, owner, operator, any officer or director of a massage
establishment is required to register under the provisions of section 290 of
the California Penal Code.
      4.   The applicant, owner, operator, any officer or director of a massage
establishment has been convicted of a violation of Health And Safety Code
section 11550 or any offense involving the possession or sale of a controlled
substance specified in section 11054, 11055, 11056, 11057, or 11058 of the
Health And Safety Code or convicted of an equivalent offense in any other
state.
      5.   The applicant, owner, operator, any officer, or director of a
massage establishment has been convicted of any offense involving sexual
misconduct with children.
      6.   The operation of a massage establishment at the proposed location
would be injurious to the health, safety, or welfare of the community.
      7.   The operation of the massage establishment, as proposed by the
applicant, would not comply with all applicable laws including city ordinances
and regulations.
      8.   The applicant knowingly made a material omission or misstatement of
fact in the license application.
      9.   The applicant, owner, operator, any officer or director of a massage
establishment has violated any provision of this chapter or any similar law,
rule or regulation of another public agency which regulates the operation of
massage establishments.
   C.   Conditions Of Approval: If a permit is approved, the chief of police
shall include such restrictions and conditions in the permit, as he/she deems
reasonable and necessary under the circumstances, to ensure compliance with the
purposes and intent of this chapter.
   D.   Notice And Appeal: Upon approval or denial of a permit, the chief of
police shall prepare and forward to the applicant written notice that the
permit has been granted, or denied, along with a statement of any conditions of
approval attached thereto. The written notice shall be sent by certified mail
to the applicant. The decision of the chief of police upon application for a
permit shall become final unless an appeal is filed with the city clerk within
fifteen (15) calendar days following delivery of the written notice. (Ord.
2017-01, 2-7-2017)
4-7-11: ISSUANCE OF PERMIT:
   A.   Issuance After Approval: Following the approval of a permit and the
lapse of a fifteen (15) calendar day appeal period, the chief of police shall
issue a permit.
   B.   Term Of Permit: Each newly issued establishment permit and outcall
massage business permit shall be valid for a term until the second succeeding
December 31 after issuance. Each establishment permit and outcall massage
business permit in effect as of the date of this chapter shall be valid for a
term until the second succeeding December 31 after the effective date of this
chapter. Thereafter, all permits shall be for a term of two (2) calendar years.
All permits automatically expire at the end of the term unless renewed prior to
that time.
   C.   Renewal: Permits may be renewed prior to expiration by submitting an
application for renewal to the chief of police prior to November 1, accompanied
by a renewal fee as approved by the city council. The application for renewal
shall contain the same information required by section
4-7-6 of this chapter, updated to reflect changes in the preceding two (2)
years. The denial or renewal of an establishment permit shall be evaluated in
the same manner as the initial granting of the permit.
   D.   Content Of Permit: The permit shall specify the full legal name of the
permittee. An establishment permit shall specify the name and address of the
business location. An establishment permit shall authorize massage services
only at the location specified in the permit. (Ord. 2017-01, 2-7-2017)
4-7-12: APPEAL:
   A.   Appeal Period: An applicant dissatisfied with the denial or conditions
of approval of an establishment permit or outcall massage business permit may
file an appeal with the city clerk. The appeal must be filed within fifteen
(15) calendar days following delivery of written notice from the chief of
police that the establishment permit or outcall massage business permit was
approved or denied. Delivery shall be the date the notice is mailed or hand
delivered. The appeal shall be accompanied by the payment of an appeal fee as
approved by the city council.
   B.   Public Hearing: The city clerk shall forward the appeal to the city
manager who shall schedule a public hearing for the appeal. Notice of such
hearing shall be mailed to the appellant at least ten (10) days prior to the
hearing. Notice of such hearing on an appeal of an establishment permit shall
also be mailed to the property owner.
   C.   Time To Hear Appeal: The appeal shall be heard within sixty (60)
calendar days after filing of the appeal.
   D.   Decision After Hearing: The city manager shall conduct a de novo
hearing and may approve, conditionally approve, or deny the permit application
based upon grounds set forth in section
4-7-10 of this chapter. (Ord. 2017-01, 2-7-2017)
4-7-13: REVOCATION OF PERMIT:
   A.   Revocation For Cause; Notice Of Revocation: The chief of police may
revoke an establishment permit or outcall massage business permit for good
cause. Before the chief of police revokes a permit, the chief of police shall
provide written notice of the revocation by certified mail. The notice shall
provide for revocation of the permit fifteen (15) calendar days after service
of the notice (the date of mailing or personal service) unless the permittee
requests an appeal hearing. The notice shall instruct the permittee on how to
file an appeal.
   B.   Appeal: Within fifteen (15) calendar days of service of the revocation
notice, the permittee may file an appeal of the revocation and request a
hearing be held in accordance with section
4-7-12 of this chapter. If an appeal is filed, the city manager shall conduct a
de novo hearing on the appeal of any permit revocation and may approve,
conditionally approve, modify, or deny the revocation based upon grounds as set
forth in subsection E of this section.
   C.   Stay Of Revocation Pending Appeal: If an appeal is filed, the
revocation decision of the chief of police shall be stayed pending a decision
by the city manager.
   D.   Effect Of No Appeal; Final Decision: If after the passage of fifteen
(15) calendar days from service of the revocation notice, the permittee has not
requested an appeal, the revocation decision of the chief of police shall
become final.
   E.   Grounds For Revocation: A permit may be revoked for good cause on the
basis of any of the following:
      1.   The permit was obtained by fraud; or
      2.   Any person making use of such permit is violating or has violated
any conditions of such permit; or
      3.   The detriment to the public health or safety, or the nuisance
arising from the conduct of the massage establishment, or from changed
circumstances, necessitates the revocation of the permit; or
      4.   The permittee has violated, or permitted any other person under his/
her control or supervision to violate, any provision of this chapter or of
other local, state, or federal law in connection with the practice of massage
or operation of a massage establishment; or
      5.   The permittee has committed any offense involving lewdness, indecent
exposure, prostitution, or any other offense which would be grounds for denial
of an application, or employees of the establishment have committed such
offenses in the course of their employment and the permittee has failed to
prevent them from doing so. The employer shall be responsible for those acts of
its employees and massage therapists which are done in the course and scope of
their employment, or which occur on the premises of the massage establishment.
(Ord. 2017-01, 2-7-2017)
4-7-14: SUSPENSION OF PERMIT:
   A.   Grounds For Immediate Suspension Of Permit: The chief of police may
immediately suspend an establishment permit or outcall massage business permit
if there is reasonable cause to believe that:
      1.   The permit holder is operating or managing the establishment, or
providing services in a manner which poses an immediate danger to the health or
safety of employees, clients, or the public; or
      2.   The permit holder has been convicted of or pleaded nolo contendere
to any offense involving lewdness, indecent exposure, prostitution, sexual
battery, or any sex related crime. The only permit, which shall be immediately
suspended under this condition, shall be the permit belonging to the person
convicted.
   B.   Notice Of Suspension: If the chief of police immediately suspends a
permit, the chief of police shall provide written notice to the permittee by
certified mail. The notice shall contain a statement that the permit is
immediately suspended and such suspension shall remain in effect during the
period of time that an appeal may be filed or an appeal is under consideration.
The notice shall provide information on the appeal process and explain that the
suspension may lead to a permanent revocation of the permit.
   C.   Appeal: Within fifteen (15) calendar days of service of the immediate
suspension (the date of mailing or personal service), the permittee may file an
appeal of the suspension and request a hearing in accordance with section
4-7-12 of this chapter. If an appeal is filed, the city manager shall conduct a
de novo hearing on the appeal of any permit suspension and may permanently
revoke the permit, reinstate the permit, conditionally reinstate the permit, or
modify the suspension, based upon findings related to circumstances described
in subsection
4-7-13E of this chapter and subsection A of this section.
   D.   Effect Of No Appeal; Final Decision: If after the passage of fifteen
(15) calendar days from service of the suspension notice, the permittee has not
filed an appeal, the decision of the chief of police to suspend the permit
shall become final and the permit shall be permanently revoked. (Ord. 2017-01,
2-7-2017)
4-7-15: PERMITS NONTRANSFERABLE; CHANGE IN LOCATION:
Permits granted under this chapter shall not be transferable, either as to the
permittee or the location. Any attempt to transfer shall render the permit
invalid and no further massages may be conducted under such permits. With
respect to a change in location only, the applicant may apply for and obtain an
amendment to the permit. Only that information necessary to process the change
in location shall be required. (Ord. 2017-01, 2-7-2017)
4-7-16: NOTICE OF EMPLOYEES' STATUS:
Every person holding an establishment permit shall notify the chief of police,
in writing, of the name and residence of each person employed as a massage
therapist within five (5) days of the start of employment. (Ord. 2017-01, 2-7-
2017)
4-7-17: APPLICATION OF CHAPTER TO PREEXISTING MASSAGE THERAPISTS:
The provisions of this chapter shall be applicable to all persons and
businesses described herein upon adoption of this chapter by the city council
except as provided herein.
   A.   Existing Massage Therapists Permits: Any person providing massage
services on the effective date of this chapter pursuant to a valid city issued
massage therapist permit under the city's previously allowed educational and
examination requirements shall be required to obtain certification from CAMTC
within two (2) years from the effective date of this chapter, or earlier upon
revocation of the permit. This grace period shall only apply if the individual:
      1.   Has an unexpired paid up Lemoore business license to operate a
massage business or the individual provides satisfactory evidence that he or
she is an employee of a Lemoore licensed massage establishment and not required
to have a business license; and
      2.   Operates in compliance with all applicable laws and regulations.
(Ord. 2017-01, 2-7-2017)
4-7-18: PROHIBITED ACTS:
No permittee, or any employee of a massage establishment, shall engage in, or
allow, any of the acts prohibited by California Business And Professions Code
section 4609. A violation of that section shall be considered a violation of
this chapter. (Ord. 2017-01, 2-7-2017)
4-7-19: OPERATING REQUIREMENTS:
Massage establishments shall comply with all applicable federal, state, and
local regulations, and with the following requirements:
   A.   Hours Of Operation: No massage establishment and no massage therapist
may provide massage services between the hours of ten o'clock (10:00) P.M. and
seven o'clock (7:00) A.M. Clients and visitors shall be excluded from a massage
establishment during those hours.
   B.   Maintenance Of Permits: A copy of the establishment permit and each
therapist's permit or CAMTC certificate shall be posted in a conspicuous place
on the establishment premises in such a manner that can be easily seen by
persons entering the establishment. A passport size photograph of the permittee
shall be affixed to each therapist's permit or certificate.
   C.   Posting Of Services Offered: A list of all services available, the
price thereof, and the length of time of each service shall be posted or
available in a conspicuous place in such a manner that it can be easily viewed
by persons entering the massage establishment. No services, other than those
set forth on the list, shall be provided.
   D.   Payment: All payments for massage services, including gratuities or
tips, shall be made at a designated reception area exclusively. At least one
sign, with lettering not less than one- half inch (1/2") in height, shall be
posted in a conspicuous place in such a manner that it can be easily seen by
persons entering the establishment stating, "All payments for massage services,
including gratuities or tips, shall be made in the designated reception area
exclusively". This provision shall not apply to one room massage establishments
that do not have a reception area.
   E.   Alcohol And Marijuana Prohibited: No alcoholic beverages and no
marijuana shall be sold, served, furnished, kept, or possessed in any part of a
massage establishment. The owner, operator, and managing employee shall be
responsible to ensure that no person possesses alcoholic beverages or marijuana
inside the massage establishment.
   F.   Payroll And Other Written Records: Every massage establishment shall
maintain payroll and written records of all business transactions. The written
records shall include, at a minimum, the type of service provided, the date and
hour the service is provided, and the name of the massage therapist
administering the service. These records shall be kept on the premises and
shall be open to inspection by officials charged with enforcement of this
chapter, including the chief of police and his/her designee and the city
attorney. These records shall be retained for a period of at least two (2)
years.
   G.   Advertising: No services shall be offered in signs, posters, fliers,
newspapers or other printed advertisements, or in verbal or recorded
announcements or messages, other than those lawfully permitted and posted as
required in subsection C of this section. Photographs, drawings, written or
verbal statements used in any advertising shall not explicitly or implicitly
communicate that services offered are for the purpose of sexual stimulation or
gratification.
   H.   Compliance With SB 577: Massage establishments and massage therapists
shall comply with the requirements of Business And Professions Code sections
2053.5 and 2053.6 pertaining to disclosure and acknowledgment that massage
services are not being provided by a licensed physician, are not licensed
services by the state, the qualifications of the person providing the massage
services, and those other matters as set forth in the statutes.
   I.   Compliance With AB 1147: Massage establishments and massage therapists
shall comply with the requirements of the massage therapy act, chapter 10.5
(commencing with section 4600) of division 2 of the California Business And
Professions Code pertaining to certification of massage therapists and massage
practitioners. (Ord. 2017-01, 2-7-2017)
4-7-20: INSPECTION BY OFFICIALS:
As a condition of the massage establishment permit, any and all investigating
officials of the city of Lemoore, the county of Kings, and the state of
California, shall have the right to enter massage establishments during regular
business hours to conduct reasonable inspections to observe and enforce
compliance with the provisions of this chapter, as well as any other applicable
requirements, including, but not limited to, building, fire, planning and
health requirements. (Ord. 2017-01, 2-7-2017)
4-7-21: HOT TUB, SAUNA, AND TANNING ESTABLISHMENTS:
Massage services shall not be made available to clients at hot tub, sauna, or
tanning establishments unless the establishment holds a valid massage
establishment permit. Hot tub, sauna, or tanning establishments, which offer
massage services, must comply with all provisions of this chapter. Massage
services shall not be given in any room or areas in which a hot tub, sauna,
shower or jacuzzi is located, or in wet and dry heating rooms, tanning rooms,
steam or vapor rooms, cabinets or bathrooms. (Ord. 2017-01, 2-7-2017)
4-7-22: OUTCALL MASSAGE BUSINESSES:
   A.   Permit: No person shall provide outcall massage services without an
outcall massage business permit as required by this chapter.
   B.   Recordkeeping: Any person performing outcall massage services shall
maintain written records, at the massage therapist's principal place of
business, of all outcall massage services performed. These records shall be
retained for at least two (2) years beyond the date services were provided.
Record shall be made of each appointment at which massage services were
provided and shall include:
      1.   Date and time;
      2.   Patron's full name and address;
      3.   Address where services were provided;
      4.   Name of the massage therapist providing services.
   C.   Inspection Of Records: These records shall be open to inspection upon
request only by officials charged with enforcement of this chapter or emergency
medical personnel. Information within these records shall only be used to
ensure compliance with this chapter, or any other applicable state or federal
laws, or as necessary in providing emergency medical treatment, and shall
remain confidential.
   D.   No Outcall Services On Premises Owned By Therapist: Outcall massage
services shall not be provided at any location owned, leased, rented or under
the control of the massage therapist, including residential dwellings and
business offices, unless that location is licensed as a massage establishment
or is otherwise exempted as provided in this chapter. (Ord. 2017-01, 2-7-2017)
4-7-23: PENALTIES FOR VIOLATION:
   A.   Criminal Proceedings: Any person who violates a provision of this
chapter shall be guilty of a misdemeanor unless the city attorney elects to
prosecute the violation as an infraction.
   B.   Injunction And Abatement: Nothing in this chapter shall be deemed to
prevent the city of Lemoore from commencing a civil action to enjoin the
continued violation of any provision of this chapter or to abate a nuisance, as
an alternative, or in conjunction with any other civil or criminal proceeding.
(Ord. 2017-01, 2-7-2017)
CHAPTER 8
CANNABIS
SECTION:
4-8-1: Purpose And Intent
4-8-2: Definitions
4-8-3: Regulations Applicable To The Cultivation And Consumption Of Personal
Use Cannabis
4-8-4: Limited Commercial Cannabis Operations Pursuant To Regulatory Permit And
Project Development Agreement
4-8-5: Applications For Regulatory Permits And Responsible Party Designation
4-8-6: Employee Permits
4-8-7: Investigation And Action On Permit Applications
4-8-8: Smoking Lounges
4-8-9: Fees And Taxes
4-8-10: Violation And Penalty
4-8-11: Judicial Review
4-8-1: PURPOSE AND INTENT:
It is the purpose and intent of this chapter to promote the health, safety,
morals, and general welfare of the residents and businesses within the City by
regulating the cultivation, processing, extraction, manufacturing, testing,
distribution, transportation, sale, and consumption of cannabis, whether for
medical purposes or recreational use. This chapter does not authorize conduct
or acts that violate Federal law and does not protect any person from arrest or
prosecution under Federal law. Persons engaged in cannabis activities assume
any and all risk and any and all liability that may arise or result under State
and Federal laws. (Ord. 2019-03, 7-2-2019)
4-8-2: DEFINITIONS:
For purposes of this chapter, unless otherwise specified, the following
definitions shall apply:
ACT: Means the Medicinal and Adult Use Cannabis Regulation and Safety Act
("MAUCRSA"), California Business and Professions Code section 26000 et seq.,
including implementing regulations, as the Act and implementing regulations may
be amended from time to time. Definitions in this section incorporating
provisions of the Act shall also include amendments to the Act and implementing
regulations.
APPLICANT: Means a person who is required to file an application for a
regulatory permit or employee permit under this chapter.
BUSINESS OWNER OR OWNER: Means the owner(s) of a commercial cannabis operation
and includes the following:
   A.   A person with an aggregate ownership interest of ten percent (10%) or
more in the person applying for a license or a licensee, unless the interest is
solely a security, lien, or encumbrance.
   B.   The chief executive officer, president, and vice president of a
nonprofit or other corporate entity.
   C.   A member of the board of directors of a nonprofit entity.
   D.   All general partners and managing partners of a partnership.
CANNABIS: Shall be as defined in the Act. "Cannabis" and "marijuana" may be
used interchangeably, but shall have the same meaning.
CANNABIS DISPENSARY OR DISPENSARY: Shall mean any facility or location, whether
fixed or mobile, and any building or structure, where cannabis is made
available to, distributed by, or distributed to more than two (2) persons.
CANNABIS PRODUCTS: Means cannabis that has undergone a process whereby the
plant material has been transformed into a concentrate, including, but not
limited to, concentrated cannabis, cannabidiol (CBD), or an edible or topical
product containing cannabis or concentrated cannabis and other ingredients.
COLLECTIVE OR COOPERATIVE CULTIVATION: Means the association within California
of qualified patients, persons with valid identification cards, and designated
primary caregivers to cultivate cannabis for medical purposes as may be allowed
under State law.
COMMERCIAL CANNABIS OPERATION: Means any commercial cannabis activity, and all
facilities and equipment that support that activity, as set forth in the Act.
COMMERCIAL CANNABIS REGULATORY PERMIT OR REGULATORY PERMIT: Means the permit
required under this chapter to operate a commercial cannabis operation within
the City of Lemoore.
CULTIVATE OR CULTIVATION: Shall be as defined in the Act and shall also include
nurseries and the storage of one or more cannabis plants or any part thereof in
any location.
DELIVERY: Means the commercial transfer of medical or recreational use cannabis
and cannabis products from a dispensary to a customer as well as the use of any
technology platform that enables persons, whether qualified patients,
caregivers, or recreational users, to arrange for or facilitate the transfer.
DISTRIBUTION: Shall be as defined in the Act and includes the procurement,
sale, and transport of cannabis and cannabis products between licensees.
EMPLOYEE PERMIT: Means the permit required under this chapter for every
employee or independent contractor working at a commercial cannabis operation
or involved in transportation/delivery-related services for a commercial
cannabis operation.
LICENSED SMOKING LOUNGE: Means those facilities licensed pursuant to section
26050 of the Business and Professions Code, or a licensed retailer with a
specified consumption cafe/lounge designation, pursuant to section 26070 of the
Business and Professions Code.
MANUFACTURE: Shall be as defined in the Act and includes means to compound,
blend, extract, infuse, or otherwise make or prepare a cannabis product.
MEDICAL CANNABIS OR MEDICAL CANNABIS USE: Means the use of cannabis for the
purposes set forth in the Compassionate Use Act and the Medical Marijuana
Program Act, California Health and Safety Code sections 11362.5 and 11362.7 et
seq.
NURSERY: Shall be as defined in the Act.
OPERATOR: Means the business owner and any other person designated by the
business owner as responsible for the day-to- day commercial cannabis
operation.
ORDINANCE: Means the ordinance enacting this chapter, which may be commonly
referred to as the City's "Cannabis Ordinance".
POLICE CHIEF: Means the Police Chief of the City of Lemoore or his or her
designee.
PREMISES OR PROPERTY OWNER: Means the fee owner(s) of the premises where
commercial cannabis operations are occurring.
PREMISES OR SITE: Means the actual building(s), and/or designated units/suites,
as well as any accessory structures, parking areas, or other immediate
surroundings, and includes the entire parcel of property used by the business
owner in connection with the commercial cannabis operation.
PRIMARY CAREGIVER: Shall have the same definition as set forth in California
Health and Safety Code sections 11362.5 and 11362.7, et seq.
PROJECT DEVELOPMENT AGREEMENT: Shall be as set forth in section
4-8-4 of this chapter.
QUALIFIED PATIENT: Shall have the same definition as set forth in California
Health and Safety Code sections 11362.5 and 11362.7, et seq.
RECREATIONAL CANNABIS, RECREATIONAL CANNABIS USE, OR ADULT USE CANNABIS: Means
cannabis not included within the definition of medical cannabis use.
RESPONSIBLE PARTY: Means the business owner, operator, manager(s), and any
employee having significant control over the commercial cannabis operations.
SMOKING LOUNGE: Means a licensed premises where cannabis may be purchased (for
on-site consumption only) and consumed by persons twenty one (21) years of age
and over. A cannabis consumption area must be limited to one of the following
uses: a) consumption of cannabis by smoking, vaping, and ingesting edible
products; b) consumption of cannabis edible products by ingestion only.
SPECIAL CANNABIS EVENT: Means those temporary events held on premises within
the City at which cannabis and/or cannabis products are sold and/or consumed
under a temporary use permit pursuant to section
9-2B-4 of this Code.
SPECIAL CANNABIS EVENT ORGANIZER: Means any person who organizes a special
cannabis event within the City. (Ord. 2019-03, 7-2-2019)
4-8-3: REGULATIONS APPLICABLE TO THE CULTIVATION AND CONSUMPTION OF PERSONAL
USE CANNABIS:
To the extent that the City is required to allow the cultivation and
consumption of personal use cannabis, whether for medical or recreational use,
under State law, the rules set forth herein shall apply, subject to the limits
set forth in any applicable State law.
   A.   Cultivation: An individual that has a right to cultivate marijuana for
personal use shall be allowed to cultivate cannabis within his/her private
residence, in an attached garage, or in an accessory building if the property
is detached single-family residential. No outdoor cultivation is allowed within
the City. Cannabis cultivation for personal use shall be subject to the
following requirements:
      1.   Area: The cannabis cultivation area shall not exceed thirty two (32)
square feet measured by the canopy and not exceed ten feet (10') in height per
residence. This limit applies regardless of the number of individuals residing
in the residence. The cultivation area shall be a single designated area.
      2.   Lighting: Cannabis cultivation lighting shall not exceed a total of
twelve hundred watts (1,200 W).
      3.   Building Code Requirements: Any alterations or additions to the
residence, including garages and accessory buildings, shall be subject to
applicable Building and Fire Codes, including Plumbing and Electrical, and all
applicable Zoning Codes, including lot coverage, setback, height requirements,
and parking requirements.
      4.   Gas Products: The use of gas products (CO2, butane, etc.) for
marijuana cultivation or processing is prohibited.
      5.   Evidence Of Cultivation: From a public right-of-way, there shall be
no exterior evidence of cannabis cultivation occurring on the site.
      6.   Residence: The qualified individual shall reside in the residence
where the cannabis cultivation occurs.
      7.   Cultivation Elsewhere In City: The qualified individual shall not
participate in cannabis cultivation in any other location within the City of
Lemoore.
      8.   Incidental Use: The residence shall maintain kitchen, bathrooms, and
primary bedrooms for their intended use and not be used primarily for cannabis
cultivation.
      9.   Ventilation: The cannabis cultivation area shall include a
ventilation and filtration system designed to ensure that odors from the
cultivation are not detectable beyond the residence, or property line for
detached single-family residential, and designed to prevent mold and moisture
and otherwise protect the health and safety of persons residing in the
residence and cultivating the marijuana. This shall include at a minimum, a
system meeting the requirements of the current, adopted edition of the
California Building Code section 1203.4 natural ventilation or section 402.3
mechanical ventilation (or their equivalent(s)).
      10.   Storage Of Chemicals: Any chemicals used for cannabis cultivation
shall be stored outside of the habitable areas of the residence and outside of
public view from neighboring properties and public rights-of-way.
      11.   Nuisance: The cannabis cultivation area shall not: a) adversely
affect the health or safety of the nearby residents by creating dust, glare,
heat, noise, noxious gasses, odor, smoke, traffic, vibration, or other impacts,
and b) not be hazardous due to the use or storage of materials, processes,
products or wastes, or from other actions related to the cultivation.
      12.   Property Owner Authorization: For rental property, the lessee shall
obtain written authorization from the property owner or property management
company to cultivate cannabis.
      13.   Notification: The owner and any lessee of the residence upon which
cultivation will occur shall inform the Police Department of the intent to
cultivate cannabis and shall acquire from the Police Department a handout
setting forth the owner and lessee responsibilities under this section. This
notification shall be provided prior to the commencement of the cultivation,
except that for existing cultivation, the information shall be provided within
ten (10) days of the effective date of this chapter. The Police Department may
direct the owner and lessee to the Department of Planning and Development
Services for more information about Building Code and permit requirements that
may be applicable if alterations or additions to the residence are
contemplated. The Police Department and Department of Planning and Development
Services shall keep patient information confidential to the extent required by
law.
      14.   Additional Requirements For Garages And Accessory Buildings: The
following additional requirements shall apply for personal use cultivation that
occurs in a garage or accessory building. The garage or accessory building
shall be secure, locked, and fully enclosed, with a ceiling, roof or top, and
entirely opaque. The garage or building shall include a burglar alarm monitored
by an alarm company or private security company. The garage or building,
including all walls, doors, and the roof, shall be constructed with a firewall
assembly of green board meeting the minimum Building Code requirements for
residential structures and include material strong enough to prevent entry
except through an open door.
      15.   Collective Or Cooperative Cultivation: The collective or
cooperative cultivation of cannabis shall be prohibited in the City except to
the extent the cultivation is considered a commercial cannabis operation
subject to a regulatory permit under this chapter.
   B.   Consumption: No person shall smoke, ingest, or otherwise consume
cannabis or cannabis products in the City unless such smoking, ingesting or
consumption occurs entirely within a private residence or a licensed smoking
lounge.
   "Within a private residence" shall mean inside habitable areas and shall not
include garages, whether attached or detached, and other accessory buildings
unless those buildings are at all times fully enclosed during the consumption.
   All consumption shall be done in a manner so as to not cause a nuisance to
nearby residents and businesses with noxious odors or other adverse health and
safety impacts and shall be in accordance with applicable law including, but
not limited to, section 11362.3 of the Health and Safety Code. (Ord. 2019-03,
7-2-2019)
4-8-4: LIMITED COMMERCIAL CANNABIS OPERATIONS PURSUANT TO REGULATORY PERMIT AND
PROJECT DEVELOPMENT AGREEMENT:
   A.   Permitted Uses And Zoning: Business owners meeting the requirements of
this section shall be allowed to conduct the following commercial cannabis
operations in the zones designated:
      1.   Cultivation - Light Industrial (ML), Heavy Industrial (MH) and
Neighborhood Commercial (NC) Zones.
      2.   Manufacturing - Light Industrial (ML) and Heavy Industrial (MH)
Zones; Professional Office (PO), subject to a conditional use permit.
      3.   Testing - Light Industrial (ML) and Heavy Industrial (MH) Zones.
      4.   Distribution - Light Industrial (ML) and Heavy Industrial (MH)
Zones.
      5.   Dispensaries - Downtown Mixed Use, Core (DMX-1), Downtown Mixed Use,
Auto Oriented (DMX-2), Mixed Use (MU), Neighborhood Commercial (NC), Regional
Commercial (RC), and Light Industrial (ML) Zones.
      6.    Deliveries - As allowed by this chapter or State laws.
   B.   Regulatory Permit And Project Development Agreement: No person or
entity shall operate a commercial cannabis operation within the City of Lemoore
without first obtaining a regulatory permit and entering into a Project
Development Agreement as set forth in this chapter. The commercial cannabis
operation shall at all times be in compliance with this section and any other
applicable sections of this chapter, as they may be amended from time to time
or repealed and replaced by another section governing the commercial cannabis
operation, or State or Federal law.
Other than for deliveries as defined herein, the regulatory permit shall be
site-specific and shall specifically identify the commercial cannabis activity
that will be allowed at that site. No commercial cannabis activity will be
allowed unless specifically identified in the regulatory permit. A fifty
percent (50%) or more changing of the ownership interest of any business owner
shall require the business owner to seek a new regulatory permit. The issuance
of a regulatory permit shall be at the discretion of the City Council.
   C.   Minimum Operational Requirements And Restrictions For All Commercial
Cannabis Operations: The following operational requirements and restrictions
shall apply to all commercial cannabis operations:
      1.   The Act And Other State Laws: Commercial cannabis operations shall
at all times be in compliance with State law and the implementing regulations,
as they may be amended from time to time, as well as all required State license
(s). The operator shall obtain all required State licenses prior to opening for
business.
      2.   Register Of Employees: The operator shall maintain a current
register of the names of persons required to have employee permits. The
register shall be made available to the Police Chief at all times immediately
upon request.
      3.   Signage: There shall be no signage or markings on the premises or
off-site that in any way evidences that commercial cannabis operations are
occurring on the property. Interior building signage is permissible provided
the signage is not visible outside of the building.
      4.   Cannabis Consumption: No cannabis or cannabis product shall be
smoked, ingested or otherwise consumed on the premises. Prominent signage of
this prohibition shall be displayed throughout the facility.
      5.   Alcoholic Beverages: No commercial cannabis operation shall hold or
maintain a retail license from the State Department of Alcohol Beverage Control
to sell alcoholic beverages, or to operate a business that sells alcoholic
beverages. In addition, alcohol for personal consumption shall not be provided,
stored, kept, located, sold, dispensed, or used on the premises.
      6.   Transportation: Transportation shall only be conducted as permitted
by State law.
      7.   Deliveries: There shall be no deliveries of cannabis or cannabis-
containing products from the premises, except to another state or locally
licensed or permitted cannabis business. Deliveries are expressly allowed as
set forth in subsection E of this section.
      8.   Non-Commercial Cannabis Activity: No non-commercial or recreational
cannabis activity shall occur on the premises except as allowed by section
4-8-8 of this chapter.
      9.   Retail Sales: The retail sale of cannabis is only allowed as set
forth in subsection B of this section and other related provisions of this
chapter.
      10.   Public Access: There shall be no public access to the premises
except as allowed for dispensaries approved under this chapter.
      11.   Minors: It shall be unlawful for any operator to employ or allow
any person who is not at least twenty one (21) years of age on the premises of
a commercial cannabis operation.
      12.   Distance Separation From Schools, Daycare Centers and Youth
Centers: A commercial cannabis operation shall not be located within six
hundred feet (600'), or a distance otherwise approved by the City Police Chief,
from any existing school, daycare center or youth center as defined by state
law. Measurements shall be from property boundary to property boundary. For
purposes of this section, "school" means any public or private school providing
instruction in kindergarten or grades 1-12, inclusive, but does not include any
private school in which education is primarily conducted in private homes.
      13.   Hours Of Operation: Commercial cannabis operations shall be allowed
to operate per the requirements of the underlying zone district and subject to
the City's Noise and Nuisance Ordinances.
      14.   Building And Related Codes: The commercial cannabis operation shall
be subject to the following requirements:
         a.   The premises in which the commercial cannabis operations occur
shall comply with all applicable local, State, and Federal laws, rules, and
regulations including, but not limited to, Building Codes and the Americans
With Disabilities Act. The operator shall obtain all required building permits
and comply with all applicable City standards.
         b.   The responsible party shall ensure that the premises have
sufficient electrical load for the commercial cannabis operations.
         c.   To the extent permitted by State law, butane and other flammable
materials are permitted to be used for extraction and processing provided the
operator complies with all applicable Fire and Building Codes, and any other
laws and regulations relating to the use of those products, to ensure the
safety of that operation. The Lemoore Fire Department, or other qualified
agency retained by the City, shall inspect and approve the premises for use of
the products prior to City's issuance of a certificate of occupancy, or
otherwise prior to opening for business, to ensure compliance with this
requirement. Such inspection shall be at the business owner's expense.
         d.   The operator shall comply with all laws and regulations
pertaining to use of commercial kitchen facilities for the commercial cannabis
operations.
         e.   The operator shall comply with all environmental laws and
regulations pertaining to the commercial cannabis operations, including the
storage, use and disposal of water and pesticides, and shall otherwise use best
practices to avoid environmental harm.
      15.   Odor Control: The business owner shall provide an odor- absorbing
ventilation and exhaust system, so that odor generated inside the facility that
is distinctive to its commercial cannabis operations is not detected outside
the premises, outside the building housing the commercial cannabis operations,
or anywhere on adjacent property or public rights-of-way. Accordingly, the
business owner must install and maintain the following equipment or any other
equipment which the City's building official determines has the same or better
effectiveness:
         a.   An exhaust air filtration system with odor control that prevents
internal odors and pollen from being emitted externally; or
         b.   An air system that creates negative air pressure between the
cannabis facility's interior and exterior so that the odors generated inside
the cannabis facility are not detectable outside the cannabis facility.
      16.   Consumable Products: Commercial cannabis operations that
manufacture products in the form of food or other comestibles shall obtain and
maintain all appropriate approvals from the State and County Departments of
Public Health for the provision of food or other comestibles, unless otherwise
governed by State law and licensed by the State.
      17.   Secure Building: All commercial cannabis operations shall occur
entirely inside of a building or temporary greenhouse that shall be secure,
locked, and fully enclosed, with a ceiling, roof or top, and entirely opaque
except that a temporary greenhouse may be constructed of all non-opaque
materials as set forth in the regulatory permit and Project Development
Agreement. Notwithstanding the foregoing, the roof may be of solid non- opaque
material, provided other security measures exist to ensure that the commercial
cannabis operation cannot be seen, heard or smelled beyond the property line.
The building shall include a burglar alarm monitored by an alarm company or
private security company. The building or temporary greenhouse, including all
walls, doors, and the roof, shall be of solid construction meeting the minimum
Building Code requirements for industrial structures (including, without
limitation, commercial greenhouse structures). The precise building
construction parameters and materials to be used shall be identified and
provided with the application to the City prior to construction.
      18.   Premises Security: The following security conditions shall apply:
         a.   Alarm system (including perimeter, fire and panic).
         b.   Remote monitoring of alarm systems.
         c.   Perimeter lighting systems (motion sensor) for after-hours
security.
         d.   Perimeter security and lighting as approved by the Police Chief.
         e.   Use of drive gates with card key access or similar to access the
facility.
         f.   Entrance areas to be locked at all times, and under the control
of a designated responsible party.
         g.   Use of access-control systems to limit access to inventory, grow
and processing areas.
         h.   Exterior and interior camera systems approved by the Police
Chief. The camera systems shall meet the minimum requirements of State law,
include interior monitoring of all access points to the site from the interior,
and be of a minimum five (5) mega- pixel resolution.
         i.   All security systems at the site are attached to an
uninterruptable power supply providing 24-hour power.
         j.   24-hour security patrols by a recognized security company
licensed by the California Department of Consumer Affairs or otherwise
acceptable to the Police Chief. All current contact information regarding the
security company shall be provided to the Police Chief.
         k.   Lemoore Police Department or department designee shall have
access to all security systems.
         l.   Internet protocol ("IP") access for remote monitoring of security
cameras by the Lemoore Police Department or a department designee upon request.
         m.   Any and all video or audio tape recordings made for security
purposes shall be marked with the date and time made and shall be kept, in an
unaltered state, for a period of at least thirty (30) days and must be made
available to the Lemoore Police Department or department designee for
duplication upon demand. In addition, upon request by the Lemoore Police
Department, the responsible party shall duplicate the records for the Lemoore
Police Department or the department designee.
         n.   Hardened bullet-resistant windows for exterior windows as part of
any new or existing construction.
         o.   Accounting software systems need to be in place to provide audit
trails of both product and cash, where applicable.
         p.   Electronic track-and-trace systems for cannabis products as
required by State law and regulations.
         q.   The City may inspect the premises and audit the records of the
commercial cannabis operations for compliance on a quarterly basis, or in the
event of a suspected violation with twenty four (24) hours' notice or as
allowed by a court order or search warrant.
         r.   Security protocols and equipment need to be in place to protect
computer information.
         s.   The foregoing premises security requirements shall be approved by
the Police Chief prior to commencing operations. The Police Chief may
supplement these security requirements once operations begin, subject to review
by the City Council if requested by the business owner.
      19.   Shipments Of Supplies And Transportation Of Product: The following
rules apply to deliveries, shipments and transportation:
         a.   Shipments of supplies to the premises shall only occur as
provided for in diagram and floor plans on file with the City as part of the
application process. Vehicles delivering to the premises shall not have any
markings indicating that deliveries are being made to a commercial cannabis
operation.
         b.   The transportation of cannabis samples and/or products to and
from the premises shall be in unmarked vehicles with no indication that the
vehicles are transporting cannabis samples and/or products. The responsible
party shall stagger transportation times, vary routes from the facility, and
take other security measures as requested by the Police Chief.
      20.   Premises Maintenance: The business owner, operator, and all
responsible parties shall continually maintain the premises and its
infrastructure so that it is visually attractive and not dangerous to the
health, safety, and general welfare of employees, patrons, surrounding
properties, and the general public. The premises or commercial cannabis
operation shall not be maintained in a manner that causes a public or private
nuisance.
      21.   Location Of Uses: Except for deliveries as defined in section
4-8-2 of this chapter, the commercial cannabis operation permitted by this
section shall only be allowed in the locations designated on the diagram and
floor plans of the premises submitted with the application for a regulatory
permit. Other than for deliveries as defined in this chapter, commercial
cannabis operations shall not operate at any location other than as stated in
the regulatory permit. The City may allow "special cannabis events" as defined
in this chapter without a regulatory permit but will instead require a
temporary use permit pursuant to section
9-2B-4 of this Code.
   D.   Dispensaries: No more than one cannabis dispensary may be permitted for
every 12,000 residents of the City.
   E.   Deliveries: Once a dispensary opens in the City, the delivery of
cannabis is allowed within the City of Lemoore only from dispensaries operating
in the City that have obtained the required regulatory permit and entered into
the required Project Development Agreement. Notwithstanding the foregoing, any
State licensed or permitted commercial cannabis operator that delivers within
the City of Lemoore boundaries from a business outside of the City shall be
obligated to collect and remit to the City of Lemoore any and all taxes and
fees that apply to City of Lemoore dispensaries, of whatever kind, that are
legally effective at the time of the delivery. The taxes and fees shall be
remitted within thirty (30) days of the transaction. A failure to timely remit
the fees and taxes shall be a separate violation from the unlawful delivery of
cannabis into the City.
   F.   Project Development Agreement:
      1.   Purpose: The purposes of a Project Development Agreement are as
follows: a) to allow the City Council to select the desired business owner and
operator to ensure that the business owner and operator will conform to
community norms; b) to determine the precise type of commercial cannabis
operation and whether the operation will be limited to medicinal cannabis; c)
to allow the precise project details, including building design and elevations,
to be negotiated with the City to ensure compatibility with the surrounding
area; and d) to guarantee that the City will receive the revenue raising fee
set forth in this chapter.
      2.   Form: The Project Development Agreement shall be in a form approved
by the City Attorney. Depending on the relationship between the premises owner
and business owner, the City Council may require that the commercial cannabis
operator be selected through an RFP process or by negotiation. City staff shall
develop guidelines for the selection of an operator and a checklist for the
terms to be included in the Project Development Agreement. Those documents
shall be made available to the public.
      3.   Approval: The Project Development Agreement shall be negotiated at
the staff level and processed concurrently with the regulatory permit, as
further set forth in this chapter. (Ord. 2019-03, 7-2-2019; amd. Ord. 2020-08,
9-1-2020; Ord. 2021-01, 3-16-2021)
4-8-5: APPLICATIONS FOR REGULATORY PERMITS AND RESPONSIBLE PARTY DESIGNATION:
   A.   Application: Applications for regulatory permits shall be filed by the
proposed business owner(s) with the Police Chief and include the information
set forth herein. The Police Chief may request such information he or she deems
necessary to determine who the applicant is. The applicant shall certify under
penalty of perjury that all of the information contained in the application is
true and correct. The application shall contain the following items for the
business owner, operator and all responsible parties known at the time (if
different than the business owner), and any other party designated below, to
the extent the same shall apply:
      1.   The full name, present address, and telephone number, including such
information for the premises owner.
      2.   Date of birth.
      3.   Tax identification number.
      4.   The address to which notices relating to the application are to be
mailed.
      5.   Previous addresses for the five (5) years immediately preceding the
present.
      6.   The height, weight, color of eyes and hair.
      7.   Photographs for identification purposes (photographs shall be taken
by the Police Department).
      8.   All business, occupation, or employment for the five (5) years
immediately preceding the date of submittal of the application form.
      9.   The cannabis operation business history, including whether the
business owner and responsible parties while previously operating in this or
another city, county or state has had a marijuana related license revoked or
suspended, the reason therefor, and the business or activity or occupation
subsequent to such action of suspension or revocation.
      10.   Complete property ownership and lease details, where applicable. If
the business owner is not the premises owner, the application form must be
accompanied with a notarized acknowledgment from the premises owner that
cannabis operations will occur on its property.
      11.   A descriptive business plan for the cannabis operation, including a
detailed list of all cannabis operations proposed to occur on the premises.
      12.   A diagram and floor plan of the entire premises, denoting all the
use of areas proposed for cannabis operations, including, but not necessarily
limited to, cultivation, processing, manufacturing, testing, transportation,
deliveries, and storage. The diagram and floor plan need not be professionally
prepared, but must be drawn to a designated scale or drawn with marked
dimensions of the interior of the premises to an accuracy of plus or minus six
inches (±6").
      13.   The name or names of the operator. The operator shall designate one
or more responsible parties, one of which shall at all times be available as a
point of contact for the City, twenty four (24) hours per day. The contact
information and schedule of the operator and responsible parties shall be
provided to the Police Chief and updated within twenty four (24) hours of any
changes.
      14.   The proposed security arrangements for insuring the safety of
persons and to protect the premises from theft.
      15.   An accurate straight-line drawing prepared within thirty (30) days
prior to the application depicting the building and the portion thereof to be
occupied by the marijuana operation and the property line of any school as set
forth in the operational requirements.
      16.   Authorization for the City, its agents and employees to seek
verification of the information submitted.
   B.   Improper Or Incomplete Application: If the applicant has completed the
application improperly, or if the application is incomplete, the Police Chief
shall, within thirty (30) days of receipt of the original application, notify
the applicant of such fact.
   C.   Changes In Information: Except as may otherwise be provided, the
information provided in this subsection shall be updated to the Police Chief
upon any change within ten (10) days.
   D.   Other Permits Or Licenses: The fact that an applicant possesses other
types of State or City permits or licenses does not exempt the applicant from
the requirement of obtaining a regulatory permit. (Ord. 2019-03, 7-2-2019)
4-8-6: EMPLOYEE PERMITS:
   A.   Permit Required: Every employee or independent contractor working at a
commercial marijuana operation or involved in transportation/delivery related
services for a marijuana operation shall obtain an employee permit. It shall be
the duty of the operator to ensure that employee permits are obtained from the
Police Department prior to the employee or independent contractor commencing
work. Persons who are listed as a business owner on a regulatory permit shall
not be required to obtain an employee permit if such person also serves as an
employee or contractor. All responsible parties, except the business owner,
shall be required to obtain an employee permit.
   B.   Application: Each employee and independent contractor shall be required
to provide the following information under penalty of perjury, so that the
Police Department can perform a background check:
      1.   Name, current resident address, and telephone number.
      2.   Date of birth.
      3.   Tax identification number.
      4.   Height, weight, color of eyes, and hair.
      5.   Photographs for identification purposes (photographs shall be taken
by the Police Department).
      6.   Be fingerprinted by the Police Department.
      7.   Such other identification and information as deemed necessary by the
Police Chief and pertinent to the employee permit.
      8.   Authorization for the City, its agents and employees to seek
verification of the information contained within the application.
      9.   The name of the business owner holding the regulatory permit and the
operator for which such person is proposed to work. (Ord. 2019-03, 7-2-2019)
4-8-7: INVESTIGATION AND ACTION ON PERMIT APPLICATIONS:
   A.   Application Fees: Every application for a regulatory permit, employee
permit, or renewal shall be accompanied by a nonrefundable fee, as established
by resolution of City Council. This fee shall be in addition to any other
business license fee or permit fee imposed by this Code or other governmental
agencies. The fee shall include an amount to cover the costs of fingerprinting,
photographing, background checks as well as general review and processing of
the application.
   B.   Investigation:
      1.   Upon the filing of a properly completed application and the payment
of the fee, the Police Chief shall conduct an investigation of the application,
including a background check of the applicant and all employees and independent
contractors. All applicants for a regulatory permit and employee permit shall
be required to submit to a fingerprint-based criminal history records check
conducted by the Lemoore Police Department.
      2.   For regulatory permits, after the background checks and
investigation are complete, and in no case later than ninety (90) days after
receipt of a properly completed application, the Police Chief shall issue a
recommendation that the City Council approve or deny a regulatory permit in
accordance with the provisions of this section. The recommendation for approval
shall include conditions the Police Chief deems reasonable under the
circumstances to protect the public health, safety, and welfare of the
community. The recommendation shall be forwarded to the City Council for action
following any required noticing and public hearings, and may be processed
concurrently with any other entitlements necessary for the cannabis operation.
      3.   For employee permits, after the background checks and investigation
are complete, and in no case later than thirty (30) days after receipt of a
properly completed application, the Police Chief shall either approve or deny
an employee permit. At the discretion of the Police Chief, employee permits may
be conditionally approved pending the background investigation.
   C.   Term Of Permits And Renewals:
      1.   Regulatory Permits: Provided the business owner is current on all
fees and taxes set forth in this chapter and in the Project Development
Agreement, regulatory permits issued under this chapter shall remain in effect
until revoked, one year following the date of issuance, or as outlined in the
Project Development Agreement, whichever occurs first. Applications for renewal
shall be made at least forty five (45) days prior to the expiration date of the
permit and shall be accompanied by the nonrefundable fee referenced in this
section. When made less than forty five (45) days before the expiration date,
the expiration of the permit will not be stayed. Applications for renewal shall
be acted on similar to applications for permits except that the Police Chief
shall renew annual permits for additional one year periods if the circumstances
and information provided with the initial application have not materially
changed.
      2.   Employee Permits: Employee permits issued under this chapter shall
expire one year following the date of issuance. Applications for renewal shall
be made at least forty five (45) days prior to the expiration date of the
permit and shall be accompanied by the nonrefundable fee referenced in this
section. When made less than forty five (45) days before the expiration date,
the expiration of the permit will not be stayed. Applications for renewal shall
be acted on similar to applications for permits except that the Police Chief
shall renew annual permits for additional one year periods if the circumstances
and information provided with the initial application have not materially
changed.
   D.   Grounds For Denial Of Regulatory Permit: Regulatory permits are issued
at the discretion of the City Council in conjunction with a Project Development
Agreement with the applicant. No regulatory permit will be considered by the
City Council until a draft Project Development Agreement has been completed.
The City Council will generally consider as grounds for denial of a regulatory
permit the same reasons that are grounds for denial of a conditional use
permit. The City Council will also consider the prior cannabis business
history, both within and outside of California, and criminal background of the
applicant. No regulatory permit shall be issued if the applicant cannot
demonstrate that it can fully comply with this chapter.
   E.   Grounds For Denial Of Employee Permit: The grounds for denial of an
employee permit shall be one or more of the following:
      1.   The applicant has been issued a local or State permit related to
cannabis operations at any other location in California, or another state, and
that permit was suspended or revoked, or the applicant has had disciplinary
action relating to the permit.
      2.   The applicant has been convicted of any crime that would disqualify
the applicant from working at a commercial cannabis operation under the Act.
      3.   The applicant has been convicted of a serious or violent offense as
listed under California Penal Code sections 667.5 and 1192.7(c); convicted of a
misdemeanor involving moral turpitude as defined under State law (generally
crimes relating to theft and dishonesty) within the five (5) years preceding
the date of the application; or convicted of a crime involving the illegal use,
possession, transportation, distribution or similar activities related to
controlled substances, as defined in the Federal Controlled Substances Act,
with the exception of marijuana related offenses for which the conviction
occurred prior to passage of the California Compassionate Use Act. A conviction
would include a plea or verdict of guilty or a conviction following a plea of
nolo contendere (i.e. "no contest").
      4.   The applicant has engaged in misconduct related to the
qualifications, functions or duties of a permittee.
      5.   The applicant has committed any act, which, if done by a permittee,
would be grounds for suspension or revocation of a permit.
   F.   Notice Of Decision And Final Action:
      1.   Regulatory Permit: Following a noticed public hearing before the
City Council, the Council may grant the regulatory permit subject to such
conditions it deems reasonable under the circumstances to protect the public
health, safety, and welfare of the community, or it may deny the issuance of
the regulatory permit for any of the grounds specified in this section. The
Council shall not issue a regulatory permit until the applicant has entered
into a Project Development Agreement. The Project Development Agreement shall
be considered by the City Council concurrently with the regulatory permit. The
decision of the Council shall be final, subject to judicial review below.
      2.   Employee Permit: The Police Chief shall cause a written notice of
his or her determination on the issuance or denial of an employee permit to be
personally delivered or mailed to the applicant by certified U.S. mail, postage
prepaid. The Police Chief's decision on an employee permit shall be final.
   G.   Suspension And Revocation Of Regulatory Permit Or Employee Permit:
      1.   Regulatory Permit: The City Council may suspend or revoke the
regulatory permit of a commercial cannabis operation when any of the following
occur:
         a.   The cannabis operation is conducted in violation of any provision
of this section, the Act, or any other applicable law.
         b.   The cannabis operation is conducted in such a manner as to create
a public or private nuisance.
         c.   A failure to pay the regulatory fee or revenue raising fee
required by this chapter.
         d.   A material breach of the Project Development Agreement.
         e.   A failure to take reasonable measures to control patron conduct,
where applicable, resulting in disturbances, vandalism, or crowd control
problems occurring inside of or outside the premises, traffic control problems,
or obstruction of the operation of another business.
         f.   A failure to comply with the terms and conditions of the
regulatory permit.
         g.   Any act which would be considered grounds for denial of the
regulatory permit in the first instance.
      2.   Employee Permit: The Police Chief may suspend or revoke an employee
permit when the permittee or the employee has committed any one or more of the
following acts:
         a.   Any act which would be considered a ground for denial of the
permit in the first instance.
         b.   Violates any provision of this section, the Act, or any other
applicable law relating to the marijuana operation.
         c.   Violates or fails to comply with the terms and conditions of the
employee permit.
   H.   Procedures For Revoking Regulatory Permits: For regulatory permits, the
procedures for revoking conditional use permits shall be utilized except that
the matter shall be heard by the City Council in the first instance.
   I.   Procedures For Revoking Employee Permits: Prior to suspension or
revocation of an employee permit, the Police Chief shall conduct a hearing.
Written notice of the time and place of such hearing shall be served upon the
permittee at least five (5) calendar days prior to the date set for such
hearing. The notice shall contain a brief statement of the grounds to be relied
upon for revoking or suspending the permit. Notice may be given either by
personal delivery or by certified U.S. mail, postage prepaid. Any permittee
aggrieved by the decision of the Police Chief in suspending or revoking an
employee permit shall have no appeal rights and the Police Chief's decision
shall be final, subject to judicial review as set forth in this section.
   J.   Immediate Suspension: The Police Chief may immediately suspend or
revoke a regulatory permit and an employee permit without notice or a hearing,
subject to the appeal rights set forth herein, under the following
circumstances:
      1.   The business owner or operator is convicted of a public offense in
any court for the violation of any law which relates to the marijuana
operation, or in the case of an employee permit, the employee is convicted of a
public offense in any court for the violation of any law which relates to the
permit.
      2.   The Police Chief determines that immediate suspension is necessary
to protect the public health, safety, and welfare of the community. The Police
Chief shall articulate the grounds for the immediate suspension in writing and
the suspension shall only be for as long as necessary to address the
circumstances which led to the immediate suspension.
   K.   Effect Of Denial Or Revocation: When the City Council shall have denied
a regulatory permit or revoked a regulatory permit, or the Police Chief shall
have denied or revoked an employee permit, no new application for a regulatory
permit and no new application for an employee permit shall be accepted and no
regulatory permit or employee permit shall be issued to such person or to any
corporation in which he or she shall have any beneficial interest for a period
of one year after the action denying or revoking the regulatory permit or
employee permit. (Ord. 2019-03, 7-2-2019; amd. Ord. 2021-01, 3-16-2021)
4-8-8: SMOKING LOUNGES:
   A.   Smoking Lounge Facilities:
      1.   Facilities shall be subject to the following requirements:
         a.   Concurrent Commercial Uses: In the event that a smoking lounge
facility operates concurrent in a single premises with another commercial use,
the smoking lounge facility shall be a permitted use in accordance with this
chapter. In the absence of a concurrent commercial use, operation of a smoking
lounge facility shall require a conditional use permit.
         b.   Separate Premises: Smoking lounge facilities shall be located on
a separate parcel or within a tenant space that is segregated and apart from
any other use. A smoking lounge facility shall have a dedicated entrance from
the street or public sidewalk, and shall have no internal connections or
passage to any other tenant space or use.
         c.   Sale Of Cannabis And Cannabis Products: Medical or adult-use
cannabis and medical or adult-use cannabis products may be sold on the premises
of a smoking lounge, subject to the following:
            (1)   The operator must hold a regulatory permit for a dispensary
as provided in this chapter.
            (2)   Operators shall not permit patrons to bring their own
personal cannabis or cannabis products to the smoking lounge facility.
            (3)   All cannabis or cannabis products purchased and opened at the
facility must be smoked, inhaled, consumed or ingested on site, and shall not
be permitted to leave the facility unless repackaged in a container that is
compliant with all applicable State law and regulation.
            (4)   Operators shall only permit patrons to leave the smoking
lounge facility with cannabis and cannabis products that remain in originally
sealed and unopened packaging, or have been transferred by the operator for
repackaging in a container that is compliant with all applicable State law and
regulation.
         d.   Smoking Of Cannabis: The smoking of cannabis may be permitted at
a smoking lounge facility, as may be allowable under State law.
         e.   Alcohol And Tobacco Products: The sale or consumption of alcohol
or tobacco products is not allowed on the premises.
         f.   Minors: Access to the smoking lounge facility shall be restricted
to persons twenty one (21) years of age and older.
         g.   Visibility: The smoking, inhalation, consumption or ingestion of
cannabis or cannabis products shall not be visible from any public place or any
area where minors may be present. The smoking lounge shall be located within a
completely enclosed building.
         h.   Odor Control:
            (1)   The operator of each smoking lounge facility shall provide
adequate air filtration so as to prevent any detectable odor at the exterior of
the premises. Within twenty four (24) hours of any complaint concerning odors
emanating from or originating within the facility, the operator shall respond
to the complaint in question, and shall timely file a written disclosure to the
building official documenting any and all actions taken and planned to address
the odor complaints. The building official, upon a determination of the
continued existence of detectable odor from the facility, may require an
operator to submit an implementation plan and/or a performance schedule, above
and beyond this written disclosure filed within twenty four (24) hours, to
ensure the employment of measures to control the odor.
            (2)   Odors from a smoking lounge facility are identified as a
public nuisance pursuant to this Code. The City may pursue all administrative,
civil and criminal remedies identified in that chapter in relation to any
nuisance determined to exist with respect to the operation of a smoking lounge
facility. (Ord. 2019-03, 7-2-2019)
4-8-9: FEES AND TAXES:
All commercial cannabis operations in the City of Lemoore shall pay applicable
fees and taxes, which include the following.
   A.   Business License Fee: The business owner shall at all times maintain a
current and valid business certificate and pay all Business Taxes required by
title 3, chapter 1 of this Code pertaining to business licensing.
   B.   Regulatory Permit Fee: The business owner permitted to operate a
commercial cannabis operation within the City of Lemoore shall pay an annual
regulatory permit fee ("regulatory fee") to cover the costs of services,
including but not limited to, anticipated enforcement relating to the
commercial cannabis operation. The amount of the fee shall be set by resolution
of the City Council and be supported by the estimated additional service costs
associated with the commercial cannabis operation. The regulatory fee shall be
due and payable prior to opening for business and thereafter on or before the
anniversary date each year. The regulatory fee may be amended from time to time
based upon actual costs.
   C.   Revenue Raising Fee: An annual revenue raising fee ("revenue raising
fee") shall be applied for the privilege of having the right to operate in the
City and made a term of the Project Development Agreement.
      1.   Revenue Raising Fee Finding: The City Council specifically finds
that it is approving this chapter allowing commercial cannabis operations to
operate in the City with the express understanding that the business (exclusive
of cannabis special events and smoking lounges) will pay the revenue raising
fee to the City as set forth herein, and that without the revenue raising fee,
the City Council would not have adopted this chapter allowing commercial
cannabis operations to operate in the City. By opening a commercial cannabis
operation in the City, the premises owner, business owner, operator, and all
responsible parties agree that, if the revenue raising fee is challenged by any
one of them or a third party and set aside, the business must cease operation.
      2.   Amount Of Fee And Terms Of Payment: The revenue raising fee shall be
an annual fee for all commercial cannabis operations (exclusive of cannabis
special events and smoking lounges) in the City and will be set forth as a
condition of the Project Development Agreement. The revenue raising fee shall
be payable in advance, in not less than quarterly installments, with the first
quarterly payment due prior to issuance of a certificate of occupancy. The
first payment shall not be prorated, and in no event shall the first payment be
less that the equivalent of one full quarterly payment. All quarterly payments
shall be received by the City before the end of the quarter. The revenue
raising fee shall be as follows:
         a.   Non-Dispensary Commercial Cannabis Operations:
            (1)   Manufacturing: Fifteen dollars ($15.00) a square foot of the
commercial cannabis operation, with a minimum fee of forty five thousand
dollars ($45,000.00).
            (2)   Cultivation (excluding nurseries): Six dollars ($6.00) a
cubic foot of the cultivation.
            (3)   Nurseries: Two dollars ($2.00) per square foot of the
cultivation.
            (4)   Other non-dispensary commercial cannabis operations: Ten
dollars ($10.00) per square foot for the first three thousand (3,000) square
feet of the commercial cannabis operation, eight dollars ($8.00) a square foot
for additional square footage in the amount of three thousand one (3,001)
square feet to five thousand (5,000) square feet, and six dollars ($6.00) a
square foot for any additional square footage over five thousand (5,000) square
feet.
         b.   Dispensaries: Five percent (5%) of gross sales revenues.
         c.   Multiple Cannabis Operations: If more than one commercial
cannabis operation operates on the premises, whether within a single building
or multiple buildings, each regulatory permit holder shall be responsible for
paying the revenue raising fee.
      3.   Alternative Voter-Approved Tax: If the voters of the City approve a
tax on the applicable commercial cannabis operations, the business owner shall
pay that tax in lieu of the revenue raising fee that the tax is designed to
replace.
      4.   Other Taxes: In addition to any other business or license fees
required under this chapter, the business owner or State-licensed cannabis
permittee shall be responsible for collecting and remitting any and all taxes,
whatever their nature, that are legally in effect at the time of the sale or
transfer of cannabis or cannabis products. (Ord. 2019-03, 7-2-2019)
4-8-10: VIOLATION AND PENALTY:
The following remedies shall apply for violations of this chapter:
   A.   Criminal Enforcement: Violations for conduct that is not otherwise
considered lawful under State law, shall be considered misdemeanors and are
punishable by the maximum penalty of six (6) months' imprisonment in the County
Jail or a fine of one thousand dollars ($1,000.00), as well as the
administrative penalties as set forth below. Each and every day, or portion
thereof, that a violation exists is a separate offense.
Should a court of competent jurisdiction subsequently determine that the
criminal penalty provision renders this chapter unlawful, the City intends that
the misdemeanor provision be severable from the remaining penalty provisions
and the City will only pursue non-criminal remedies for violations of this
chapter.
   B.   Administrative Enforcement: The City may also pursue all applicable
civil and administrative remedies, including but not limited to injunctive
relief and administrative citations.
   C.   Nuisance: Any use or condition caused or permitted to exist in
violation of any of the provisions of this chapter shall be and is hereby
declared a public nuisance and may be summarily abated by the City pursuant to
this Code.
   D.   Civil Penalties: Any person who violates the provisions of this chapter
may be subject to an administrative fine of up to one thousand dollars
($1,000.00) for each violation and for each day the violation continues to
persist.
   E.   Nonexclusive Remedies: All remedies set forth in this section are not
exclusive and the exercise of any remedy does not preclude the exercise of any
other remedy that may now or subsequently exist in law or in equity or by
statute or otherwise. (Ord. 2019-03, 7-2-2019)
4-8-11: JUDICIAL REVIEW:
Judicial review of a decision made under this chapter may be had by filing a
petition for a writ of mandate with the Superior Court in accordance with the
provisions of the California Code of Civil Procedure section 1094.5. Any such
petition shall be filed within ninety (90) days after the day the decision
becomes final as provided in California Code of Civil Procedure section 1094.6,
which shall be applicable for such actions. (Ord. 2019-03, 7-2-2019)
CHAPTER 9
FIREWORKS
SECTION:
4-9-1: Definitions
4-9-2: Safe And Sane Fireworks
4-9-3: Dangerous Fireworks
4-9-4: Appeal
4-9-5: State Fireworks Law
4-9-6: Violation And Penalties
4-9-1: DEFINITIONS:
For the purposes of this chapter, unless otherwise apparent from the context,
certain words and phrases used in this chapter are defined as follows:
ILLEGAL OR DANGEROUS FIREWORKS: Any fireworks specified as such in the state
fireworks law, sections 12500 et seq., of the Health And Safety Code of the
state, and such other fireworks as may be determined to be dangerous by the
state fire marshal.
SAFE AND SANE FIREWORKS: Shall mean and include only unaltered fireworks
specified as such in section 12529 of the Health And Safety Code of the state.
(Ord. 2016-11, 9-20-2016)
4-9-2: SAFE AND SANE FIREWORKS:
   A.   Sale Of Safe And Sane Fireworks:
      1.   It shall be unlawful for any person to sell, offer for sale or
display for sale any safe and sane fireworks within the Lemoore city limits
without first obtaining a permit for such purpose from the city of Lemoore
business license division as provided herein.
      2.   Safe and sane fireworks may be sold for a period of one week; from
June 28 to July 4 of any year, unless July 4 falls on a Sunday, in which case
the period for the sale of fireworks ends on July 5. The hours of operation of
any stand shall be limited, allowing operation daily from nine o'clock (9:00)
A.M. to eleven o'clock (11:00) P.M. during the week of sale identified above
except for the last day, July 4, when sales must cease no later than twelve
o'clock (12:00) midnight. The construction and placement of said fireworks
stands shall commence no earlier than June 21 of any given year.
      3.   The sale of any safe and sane fireworks shall be made in strict
accordance with the provisions of this section and state law, and not
otherwise.
   B.   Discharge Of Safe And Sane Fireworks: It shall be unlawful for any
person to fire, set off, discharge, explode or use, or to cause or to permit to
be fired, set off, discharged, exploded or used, any safe and sane fireworks
within the city limits except from nine o'clock (9:00) A.M. on July 1 and
ending at twelve o'clock (12:00) midnight on July 5 of any year.
   C.   Applicants For Permit: Applicants for a permit under this section must
be a state recognized nonprofit organization or be an integral part of a
governmental or educational institution within the city limits of the city of
Lemoore. Each applicant must have had its principal place of operation and a
permanent meeting place within the city limits of the city of Lemoore for a
period of at least one year prior to the date of application for a permit.
Additionally, an applicant must provide a significant benefit to the citizens
of the city of Lemoore. Each applicant shall provide any and all documentation
that the Lemoore business license division, or designee, may request in order
to establish that all requirements of this section have been satisfied. Such
documentation which serves as proof of nonprofit status will include, but is
not limited to, a signed affidavit, a current notice from the state of
California declaring nonprofit status, and/or previous year's federal or state
tax identification form for nonprofit organizations.
   D.   Permit Requirements And Procedures: All applications for a fireworks
permit shall comply with the provisions of section 12500 et seq., of the
California Health And Safety Code and any and all rules and regulations
established by the state of California or the Lemoore fire department, and in
addition shall be governed by the following:
      1.   An application for a fireworks permit shall be filed no sooner than
beginning the first Monday of April and no later than June 1 with the city of
Lemoore business license division, along with payment of a nonrefundable fire
inspection fee and a nonrefundable business license fee established by
resolution of the city council of the city of Lemoore. A limit of fifteen (15)
permits will be issued per calendar year on a first come first approved basis.
First time applicants will also pay a background check fee, as set by
resolution. All applicants will submit a deposit, set by resolution, to be held
by the city, until such time that all fireworks stand materials and equipment
have been removed from the designated property, as required by this section. If
the organization, at the required time set by this section, does not have the
fireworks stand removed completely from public view, the deposit will be
forfeited to the city and a record will be made of the violation. Two (2)
consecutive years with the same violation will result in denial of any further
applications for a period of five (5) years. Fireworks permits are not
transferable.
      2.   No fireworks permit will be granted to the applicant if the
following items are not properly and completely prepared and presented to the
city of Lemoore business license division on or before June 1 of the calendar
year during which the fireworks will be sold:
         a.   State fire marshal's license;
         b.   Temporary seller's permit from the state board of equalization;
         c.   Property owner's permission form (original) signed and currently
dated;
         d.   A copy of workers' compensation (if you have employees operating
the stand);
         e.   Address of property where stand will be located;
         f.   Certificate of insurance naming the city of Lemoore as the
additional insured;
         g.   Affidavit of nonprofit organization plus the state of California
"statement by domestic nonprofit organization" and a copy of current state of
California tax return form 199.
      3.   The city of Lemoore reserves the right to further check the
validity, by normal and necessary means, of the documents presented as evidence
of nonprofit status.
      4.   The city of Lemoore business license division, or designee, may
extend the June 1 filing date if the city, or designee, determines, at their
discretion, that an applicant has attempted in good faith and with due
diligence to satisfy all of the requirements in subsections D1 through D3 of
this section and that as a result of action or inaction on the part of other
persons or entities, which are beyond the applicant's control, the applicant
has been unable to satisfy the requirements as stated in subsections D1 through
D3 of this section within the required time periods.
      5.   No change of stand locations will be permitted after an application
has been submitted, without the prior approval of the city of Lemoore, or
designee.
   E.   Conditions:
      1.   All fireworks stands, any remaining inventory and all building
materials and litter must be removed completely out of public view on or before
eight o'clock (8:00) A.M. on July 7 of each year.
      2.   No person shall sell, or offer for sale, any fireworks within a
distance of one hundred feet (100') of any pump or dispensing device of any
flammable liquids.
      3.   No fireworks stand shall be located within thirty feet (30') of any
adjacent buildings, burnable materials, grass, paper or like flammable
materials.
      4.   No fireworks stand shall be located closer than ten feet (10') from
any public roadway or back of curb, or in any location which does not otherwise
meet the approval of the city of Lemoore, or designee.
      5.   No sale or display of fireworks will be allowed inside any permanent
building.
      6.   Each fireworks stand shall have a minimum of two (2) exits, which
shall be located and provided on opposite sides. Each exit shall be at least
thirty two inches (32") wide. Fireworks stands with only three (3) sides and
open from the back will not require exits.
      7.   If stands are operated at night, only electric lights may be used.
      8.   "No Smoking" signs shall be located on all sides of the stand. Each
sign shall have the words "No Smoking" in red letters, not less than two inches
(2") in height, with the minimum one and one-half inch (11/2") stroke on white
background.
      9.   One approved two and one-half (21/2) gallon pressurized, water type
fire extinguisher and/or one 5-pound multipurpose ABC fire extinguisher or
garden hose fully charged with shutoff nozzle attached shall be provided in the
stand's sale area. There shall be no exceptions to this requirement. The fire
extinguisher must be in operating condition, with an up to date inspection tag
indicating that the fire extinguisher has been serviced within the past year.
      10.   Fireworks signs shall not create a traffic hazard and must be
approved by the Lemoore fire department, or designee.
      11.   All permittees shall instruct all employees and persons who handle
fireworks in any capacity of the hazards of said fireworks and with these rules
and safety precautions governing fireworks.
      12.   All persons selling fireworks shall be trained in emergency
procedures, including use of the fire extinguishers.
      13.   Persons employed for the sale of fireworks shall be at least
eighteen (18) years of age. Proof must be shown at any time when requested by
fire officials.
      14.   No person under sixteen (16) years of age shall purchase fireworks.
      15.   No sleeping inside the fireworks stand will be permitted at any
time.
      16.   The stand and surrounding area shall be maintained in a clean, neat
and orderly condition at all times and be free from any condition that would
create a "fire nuisance" or a "visual nuisance".
      17.   No person shall use or handle fireworks while under the influence
of intoxicating liquids or narcotics. Alcohol and narcotics are prohibited
within the fireworks stands.
      18.   Smoking shall be prohibited where fireworks are stored or handled.
      19.   No person, other than a member of the organization or a volunteer
who is associated with the organization, having a permit shall be permitted to
sell or otherwise participate in the sale of fireworks.
      20.   No permit issued or authorized shall be transferable or assignable.
      21.   No person shall light, or cause to be lighted, any fireworks or
other combustible article within any stand or within two hundred feet (200')
thereof.
      22.   The applicant's state license and county fireworks permit and
temporary sales permit issued by the state board of equalization and the city
ordinance related to allowed uses and penalties for violations shall be
displayed in a prominent place in the fireworks stand.
      23.   All permittees must obtain final written approval from the fire
marshal of the city of Lemoore, and shall be subject to any conditions imposed
by the fire marshal.
   F.   Insurance: Prior to issuance of a permit, the eligible organization
shall procure a certificate of insurance acceptable to the city of Lemoore. The
certificate shall name the city, its officers, agents and employees as
additional insureds in an amount of not less than two million dollars
($2,000,000.00) combined bodily injury and property damage for each occurrence.
The certificate must specify the time, location and dates to be covered by the
policy.
   G.   Revocation: Any violation of these provisions or any other city
ordinance, or the terms and conditions of the permit, or state law or
administrative regulations, or safety rules of the Lemoore fire department, or
designee, shall be grounds for immediate revocation of the permit. Any such
violation shall be determined by the sole discretion of the city of Lemoore, or
designee. The decision of the city of Lemoore, or designee, with regards to
revocation may be appealed to the city council of the city of Lemoore. (Ord.
2016-11, 9-20-2016)
4-9-3: DANGEROUS FIREWORKS:
It shall be unlawful for any person to possess, sell, use, or discharge illegal
or dangerous fireworks in the city. (Ord. 2016-11, 9-20-2016)
4-9-4: APPEAL:
Whenever the city disapproves an application or refuses to grant a permit
applied for, or when it is claimed that the provisions of this code do not
apply or that the true intent and meaning of this code have been misconstrued
or wrongly interpreted, the applicant may appeal from the decision of the city
to the Lemoore city council within thirty (30) days from the date of the
decision appealed. The appeal shall be in writing and shall be filed with the
city manager and shall be heard at the next regular meeting of the city
council. The determination of the city council upon such appeal shall be
conclusive and final. (Ord. 2016-11, 9-20-2016)
4-9-5: STATE FIREWORKS LAW:
The provisions of this chapter shall be construed so as not to conflict with
the state fireworks law. (Ord. 2016-11, 9-20-2016)
4-9-6: VIOLATION AND PENALTIES:
   A.   Any person who violates any of the provisions of this chapter shall be
guilty and punishable as set forth in title 1, chapter 4 of this code.
   B.   In addition, for violations of this code pertaining to the unlawful
sale of dangerous or safe and sane fireworks, or for the possession, use or
discharge of dangerous fireworks, all violators and responsible persons may be
assessed an administrative fine of one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) for each
violation.
      1.   Responsible person(s) for purposes of this section include:
         a.   The person(s) who rents, leases, or otherwise has possession of
the residence or other private property;
         b.   The person(s) in immediate control of the residence or other
private property; and
         c.   The person(s) who organizes, supervises, sponsors, conducts,
allows, controls, or controls access to the illegal discharge or illegal
possession of dangerous or illegal fireworks.
      2.   There is no requirement that the city provide advance notice to the
responsible person(s) prior to issuing an administrative citation. Responsible
person(s) shall be deemed to know the law as is the common standard for code
violations. Further, fireworks violations create an immediate danger to the
public health, safety and welfare for which immediate correction is required.
Additionally, fireworks violations are noncontinuing violations for which it is
not possible or practical to provide prior notice and an opportunity to
correct.
      3.   Upon identification of a violation of this subsection, city code
enforcement officers and any law enforcement or fire agency designated by the
police chief, may impose an administrative fine of one thousand dollars
($1,000.00).
      4.   Administrative fines shall be subject to the administrative appeal
and hearing procedures set forth in title 1, chapter 10 of this code. (Ord.
2016-11, 9-20-2016)
CHAPTER 10
UNSAFE CAMPING
SECTION:
4-10-1: Sitting, Lying, Or Sleeping Or Storing, Using Or Maintaining Or Placing
Personal Property In The Public Right Of Way
4-10-2: Utilizing Public Water Services
4-10-3: Defecation And Urination
4-10-4: Camping
4-10-5: Violations
4-10-1: SITTING, LYING, OR SLEEPING OR STORING, USING OR MAINTAINING OR PLACING
PERSONAL PROPERTY IN THE PUBLIC RIGHT OF WAY:
   A.   Sitting, Lying Or Sleeping: These activities are prohibited in the
public right-of-way when the intent is to occupy the space beyond what is
considered normal and reasonable use. This means that temporary, short-term use
such as resting briefly on a bench or sitting for a moment is permitted.
However, using the area for extended periods in a manner that obstructs or
impedes the normal flow of pedestrians or traffic is not allowed.
   B.   Storing, Using, Maintaining, Or Placing Personal Property: The storage,
use, maintenance, or placement of personal property in the public right-of-way
is prohibited when it extends beyond normal and reasonable use. This means that
personal property should not be left unattended, stored, or arranged in a way
that obstructs public access or creates a hazard. Unattended property may be
considered abandoned. Normal, brief use of personal items that does not impede
public access or safety is permitted.
   C.   No person shall obstruct a street, sidewalk, alleyway or other public
right-of-way:
      1.   By sitting, lying, or sleeping, or by storing, using, maintaining,
or placing personal property in a manner that impedes passage, as provided by
the Americans with Disabilities Act of 1990, as amended;
      2.   By sitting, lying, or sleeping, or by storing, using, maintaining,
or placing personal property within twenty-five (25) feet of any operational or
utilizable driveway or loading zone;
      3.   By sitting, lying, or sleeping, or by storing, using, maintaining,
or placing personal property within twenty-five (25) feet of any operational or
utilizable building entrance or exit;
      4.   By sitting, lying, or sleeping, or by storing, using, maintaining,
or placing personal property within ten (10) feet of any fire hydrant, fire
plug, or other fire department connection;
      5.   By sitting, lying, or sleeping, or by storing, using, maintaining,
or placing personal property within ten (10) feet of a utility meter, utility
connection or street light;
      6.   By sitting, lying, or sleeping, or by storing, using, maintaining,
or placing personal property within the public right-of-way in a manner that
obstructs or unreasonably interferes with the use of the right-of-way for any
activity for which the city has issued a permit.
   D.   No person shall obstruct any portion of any street or other public
right-of-way to use by motor vehicles, or any portion of a bike lane, bike
path, or other public right-of-way open to use by bicycles, by sitting, lying
or sleeping, or by storing, using, maintaining, or placing personal property,
anywhere within the street, alley, bike lane, bike path, or other public right-
of-way as specified.
   E.   Except as limited by subsection (d), no person shall:
      1.   Sit, lie, sleep, or store, use, maintain, or place personal property
in or upon any street, alley, sidewalk, or other public right-of-way within the
distance stated on the posted signage (up to a maximum of 1,000 feet) of a
property designated as sensitive use. For a property to be designated as
"sensitive use," the property must be a school (public or private), childcare
facility, public park, public library, warming center, cooling center, or City-
permitted shelter for the unhoused;
      2.   Sit, lie, sleep, or store, use, maintain, or place personal property
in or upon any street, alley, sidewalk, or other public right-of-way within the
distance stated on the posted signage (up to a maximum of 500 feet) of a bridge
or pedestrian bridge where the City Council determines, by Resolution, that the
public health, safety or welfare is served by the prohibition, including,
without limitation, by finding that sleeping or lodging within stated proximity
to the designated area is unhealthy, unsafe or incompatible with safe passage;
      3.   Sit, lie, sleep, or store, use, maintain, or place personal property
in or upon any street, alley, sidewalk, or other public right-of-way that has
been posted with signage prohibiting sitting, lying, sleeping, or storing,
using, maintaining, or placing personal property. In order to designate a
section of street, sidewalk, or other public right-of-way as prohibited under
this subdivision, the City Council shall determine, in a designating
resolution, and based on specific documentation, that the circumstances of
continued sitting, sleeping, lying or storing or personal property, or
otherwise obstructing the public right-of-way.
   F.   No person shall be found to be in violation of any prohibition set
forth in Subsection (c) unless and until (i) the City Council has taken action
by resolution to designate specified areas for enforcement against sitting,
lying, sleeping, or storing, using, maintaining, or placing personal property,
otherwise obstructing the public right-of-way; (ii) the City has posted signage
at the designated area or areas set forth in the resolution, with such signage
including reference to any required findings adopted in the resolution and
giving notice of the date after which no sitting, lying, sleeping, or storing,
using, maintaining, or placing personal property, or otherwise obstructing the
public right-of-way will be allowed; and (iii) at least fourteen (14) calendar
days have passed from the date on which the signage is posted at the designated
area or areas.
   G.   The City shall adhere to State law as it pertains to mobile and
sidewalk vendors. (Ord. 2024-06, 10-15-2024)
4-10-2: UTILIZING PUBLIC WATER SOURCES:
   A.   No person shall use a fountain or other public water feature for
bathing. (Ord. 2024-06, 10-15-2024)
4-10-3: DEFECATION AND URINATION:
   A.   It is unlawful for any person to defecate or urinate on public property
or in any public place.
   B.   A person who is found defecating or urinating in a public place in
violation of Section 4-10-3 shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. (Ord. 2024-06,
10-15-2024)
4-10-4: CAMPING:
   A.   No person shall camp, lodge, sleep or tarry overnight on any public
property or in any public place.
   B.   No person shall camp, lodge, sleep, or tarry overnight in a private
structure or place without permission of the owner.
   C.   Unless otherwise permitted in Section
9-4A-5 of the Code, the use of vehicles and other recreational vehicles for
human habitation is prohibited.
   D.   Unless otherwise permitted in Section
6-4-3 of the Code, long-term parking of recreational vehicles, boats and boat
trailers on city streets or public ways is prohibited.
   E.   Unless otherwise permitted in Section
7-11-5 of the Code, overnight camping is prohibited.
(Ord. 2024-06, 10-15-2024)
4-10-5: VIOLATIONS:
   A.   Notwithstanding any other provision within the Municipal Code,
violations of this Section may be prosecuted as criminal misdemeanors by the
District Attorney or the City Attorney per Govt C §36900(a).
(Ord. 2024-06, 10-15-2024)
CHAPTER 11
PUBLIC HAZARDS
SECTION:
4-11-1: Storage Of Personal Property
4-11-2: Definitions
4-11-3: Regulations And Impoundment Of Stored Personal Property; Discard Of
Certain Stored Personal Property
4-11-4: Notice
4-11-5: Storage And Disposal
4-11-6: Repossession
4-11-7: Power Of The City Manager To Make Rules And Regulations
4-11-1: STORAGE OF PERSONAL PROPERTY:
The city enacts this section to balance the needs of the residents and public
at large to access clean and sanitary public areas consistent with the intended
uses for the public areas with the needs of the individuals, who have no other
alternatives for the storage of personal property, to retain access to a
limited amount of personal property in public areas. This section attempts to
balance the needs of all of the city's residents. (Ord. 2024-06, 10-15-2024)
4-11-2: DEFINITIONS:
The definitions contained in this subsection shall govern the construction,
meaning, and application of words and phrases used in this article.
ABANDONED PROPERTY: Property that the owner voluntarily surrenders,
relinquishes, or disclaims, either expressly or impliedly. Property may be
implied to be abandoned when property is left unattended without an indication
of ownership or the whereabouts of the owner for a reasonable amount of time
under the circumstances.
ALLEY: Any roadway not exceeding twenty-five (25) feet in width which is
primarily for access to the rear or side entrances of abutting property.
BIKEWAY: All facilities that provide primarily for, and promote, bicycle
travel.
CITY EMPLOYEE: Any full or part-time employee of the City of Lemoore, or a
contractor retained by the city for the purpose of implementing this Section.
ESSENTIAL PERSONAL PROPERTY: Any and all personal property that cumulatively is
less than two (2) cubic feet in volume, which, by way of example, is the amount
of property capable of being carried within a backpack.
EXCESS PERSONAL PROPERTY: Any and all personal property that cumulatively
exceeds the amount of property that could fit in a sixty (60) gallon container
with lid closed.
HIGHWAY: A way of place of whatever nature, publicly maintained and open to the
use of the public for purposes of vehicular travel.
PARKWAY: The area of the street between the back of the curb and the sidewalk
that typically is planted and landscaped.
PERSON: Any individual.
PERSONAL PROPERTY: Any tangible property, and includes, but is not limited to,
goods, materials, merchandise, tents, tarpaulins, bedding, sleeping bags,
hammocks, sheds, structures, mattresses, couches, chairs, other furniture,
appliances, and personal items, such as household items, luggage, backpacks,
clothing, documents, and medication.
PUBLIC AREA OR PUBLIC AREAS: All property that is owned, managed by the city,
and shall include, but not be limited to, any street, medial strip, space,
ground, building or structure.
ROADWAY: The portion of a road or street improved, designed or ordinarily used
for vehicular travel.
SIDEWALK: A paved walkway at the side of the street or road, other than the
roadway, set apart by curbs, barriers, markings or delineation, for pedestrian
travel.
STORAGE FACILITY: Any facility, whether operated by a public, non-profit or
private provider, which allows and has capacity for voluntary storage, free of
charge, for a homeless person to store personal property up to the equivalent
of the amount of property that would fit into a single sixty (60) gallon
container with the lid closed.
STORE, STORED, STORING OR STORAGE: To put personal property aside or accumulate
for use when needed, to put for safekeeping, and/or to place or leave in a
public area. Moving personal property to another location in a public area or
returning personal property to the same block on a daily or regular basis shall
be considered storing and shall not be considered to be removing the personal
property from a public area.
This definition shall not include any personal property that, pursuant to
statute, ordinance, permit, regulation or other authorization by the city or
state, is stored with the permission of the city or state on real property that
is owned or controlled by the city.
STREET: Every highway, avenue, lane, alley, court, place, square, sidewalk,
parkway, curbs, bikeway or other public way in this city which has been or may
hereafter be dedicated and open to public use, or such other public property so
designated in any law of this state.
TENT: A collapsible shelter made of fabric, such as nylon or canvass or a tarp
stretched and sustained by supports, which in not open on all sides, and which
hinders an unobstructed view behind or into the area surrounded by the fabric.
In order to qualify as a tent for purposes of this subsection, a tent, when
deconstructed, must be able to fit within a sixty (60) gallon container with
the lid closed.
UNATTENDED: No person in present with the personal property who asserts or
claims ownership over the personal property. conversely, property is considered
"attended" if a person is present with the personal property and the person
claims ownership over the personal property. (Ord. 2024-06, 10-15-2024)
4-11-3: REGULATION AND IMPOUNDMENT OF STORED PERSONAL PROPERTY; DISCARD OF
CERTAIN STORED PERSONAL PROPERTY:
   A.   No person shall store any unattended personal property in a public
area, and in such case, the property shall be recognized as abandoned property.
Abandoned property may be seized immediately without notice and destroyed as
authorized by law.
   B.   No person shall store any attended excess personal property in a public
area. With pre-removal notice as specified in Section
4-11-4(a), the city may impound any attended excess personal property stored in
a public area. Post-removal notice shall be provided as set forth in Subsection
4-11-4(b).
   C.   No person shall store any personal property in a public area in such a
manner as to obstruct city operations, including a street or sidewalk
maintenance or cleaning. Without prior notice, the city may temporarily move
personal property which is obstructing city operations in a public area,
including a street or sidewalk maintenance or cleaning, during the time
necessary to conduct the city operations. The city may also impound personal
property that is obstructing city operations in a public area, pursuant to
Sections
4-11-3(a) or
4-11-3(b).
   D.   No person shall store any personal property in a public area in such a
manner that it does not allow for passage as provided by the Americans with
Disabilities Act of 1990, as amended. Without prior notice, the city may move
and may immediately impound any personal property stored in a public area in
such manner that it does not allow for the passage as required by the Americans
with Disabilities Act of 1990. Post-removal notice shall be provided as set
forth in Section
4-11-4(b). A violation of this section is governed by Section
4-10-1(f) of this Code.
   E.   No person shall store any personal Property within:
      1.   Twenty-five (25) feet of any operational or utilizable driveway or
loading dock;
      2.   Twenty-five (25) feet of any operational or utilizable building
entrance or exit;
      3.   Ten (10) feet of any fire hydrant, fire plug, or other fire
department connection;
      4.   Ten (10) feet of any utility meter, utility connection or street
light;
      5.   One thousand (1,000) feet of a property designated as sensitive use
pursuant to Section
4-10-1(c)(1);
      6.   Five hundred (500) feet of a bridge or pedestrian bridge; or
      7.   An area with posted signage pursuant to a Resolution adopted by
Lemoore City Council.
Without prior notice, the city may move or may immediately impound any personal
property store in a public area in violation of this section. Post-removal
notice shall be provided as set forth in Section
4-10-1(f) of this Code.
   F.   No person shall store any personal property in a public area that has a
clearly posted closure time. Any personal property located after that posted
closure time, and without prior notice, the city may remove and impound
personal property stored in a public area provided the personal property is
removed and impounded after the posted closure time.
   G.   No person shall store any personal property in a public area if the
personal property constitutes an immediate threat to the health or safety of
the public. Without prior notice, the city may remove and may discard any
personal property stored in a public area if the personal property poses an
immediate threat to the health or safety of the public.
   H.   No person shall store any personal property in a public area if the
personal property constitutes evidence of a crime or contraband. Without prior
notice, the city may remove and discard any personal property that constitutes
evidence of a crime or contraband, as permissible by law.
   I.   No person shall store any personal property in such a manner that
obstructs or interferes with any activity in a public area for which the city
has issued a permit. Without prior notice, the city may move any personal
property stored in a public area in violation of this section. With pre-removal
notice as specified in Section
4-11-4(a), the city may impound any personal property stored in violation of
this section. Post removal notice shall be provided as set forth in Section
4-11-4(b). A violation of this section is governed by Section
4-10-1(f) of this code.
   J.   No person shall store any personal property in such a manner as to
obstruct any portion of a street or other public right-of-way open to use by
motor vehicles, a designated bike lane or bike path, or other public right-of-
way open exclusively to use bicycles. Without prior notice, the city may move
and may immediately impound any personal property in violation of this section.
Post-removal notice shall be provided as set forth in Section
4-11-4(b). A violation of this section is governed by Section
4-10-1(f) of this Code.
   K.   No person shall store any personal property in violation of Section
4-10-1(c) of this Code. The city may move and may immediately impound any
personal property in violation of this section. Pre-removal notice and post-
removal will be provided by erecting signage providing notice that storage of
personal property is a violation of
4-10-1, which may result in removal or impoundment of personal property. This
signage must also provide information on retrieval of personal property and
provide notice that the personal property may be discarded, if not claimed
within 90 days. A violation of this section is governed by Section
4-10-1(f) of this code.
   L.   No person shall store any personal property in violation of Section
4-10-1(e) of this Code. With pre-removal notice as specified in Section
4-11-4(a) or posted signage, the city may impound any personal property in
violation of this section. If the city has not posed signage, a post-removal
notice shall be provided as set forth in Section
4-10-4(b). A violation of this section is governed by Section
4-10-1(f) of this Code. (Ord. 2024-06, 10-15-2024)
4-11-4: NOTICE:
   A.   Pre-Removal Notice: Pre-removal notice shall be deemed provided if a
written notice is provided to the person who is storing or claims ownership of
the personal property or is posted conspicuously on or near the personal
property or is posted conspicuously on or near the personal property and the
actual removal commences no more than forty-eight (48) hours after the pre-
removal notice is posted. The written notice shall contain the following:
      1.   A general description of the personal property to be removed.
      2.   The location from which the personal property will be removed.
      3.   The date and time the notice was posted.
      4.   A statement that the personal property has been stored in violation
of Section
4-11-3.
      5.   A statement that the personal property may be impounded if not
removed from public areas within twenty-four (24) hours.
      6.   A statement that moving personal property to another location in a
public area shall not be considered removal of personal property from a public
area.
      7.   The address where the removed public property will be located,
including a telephone number and the internet website of the city through which
a person may receive information as to impounded personal property as well as
information as to voluntary storage location(s).
      8.   A statement that impounded personal property may be discarded if not
claimed within sixty (60) days after impoundment.
   B.   Post-Removal Notice: Upon removal of stored personal property, written
notice shall be conspicuously posted in the area from which the personal
property was removed.
   The written notice shall contain the following:
      1.   A general description of the personal property removed.
      2.   The date and approximate time the personal property was removed.
      3.   A statement that the personal property has been stored in violation
of Section
4-11-3.
      4.   The address where the removed personal property will be located
including a telephone number and internet website of the city through which a
person may receive information as to the impounded personal property.
      5.   A statement that impounded personal property may be discarded if not
claimed within sixty (60) days after impoundment. (Ord. 2024-06, 10-15-2024)
4-11-5: STORAGE AND DISPOSAL:
   A.   Except as specified herein, the city shall move personal property to a
place of storage.
   B.   Except as specified herein, the city shall store impounded personal
property for sixty (60) days, after which time, if not claimed, may be
discarded or destroyed. The city shall not be required to undertake any search
for, or return, any impounded personal property stored for longer than sixty
(60) days.
   C.   The city shall maintain a record of the state any impounded personal
property was discarded. (Ord. 2024-06, 10-15-2024)
4-11-6: REPOSSESSION:
The owner of impounded personal property may repossess the personal property
prior to its disposal upon submitting satisfactory proof of ownership. A person
may establish proof of ownership by, among methods, describing the location
from and date when the personal property was impounded from a public area, and
providing a reasonably specific and detailed description of the personal
property. Valid, governmental-issued identification is not required to claim
impounded personal property. (Ord. 2024-06, 10-15-2024)
4-11-7: POWER OF THE CITY MANAGER TO MAKE RULES AND REGULATION:
The city Manager is hereby charged with serving as the Designated
Administrative Agency for the purpose of this ordinance. The Designated
Administrative Agency shall promulgate rules, protocols, and procedures for the
implementation and enforcement of this ordinance, consistent with the
provisions herein. (Ord. 2024-06, 10-15-2024)
TITLE 5
POLICE REGULATIONS
CHAPTER 1
ANIMAL CONTROL
ARTICLE I. IN GENERAL
SECTION:
5-1-1: Animal Control Officer
5-1-2: Short Title
5-1-3: Definitions
5-1-4: Inspection Of Animals; Penalty For Failure To Comply
5-1-5: Privileged Entry
5-1-6: Confinement Regulations
5-1-7: Interfering With Duties Of Animal Control Officer
5-1-8: Enforcement Provisions
5-1-9: Liability
5-1-10: Penalty
5-1-11: Written Notice To Appear
5-1-12: Violation Of Promise To Appear
5-1-13: Severable Provisions
5-1-14: Rates And Charges
5-1-15 - 5-1-20: Reserved
5-1-1: ANIMAL CONTROL OFFICER:
It shall be the duty of the animal control officer to enforce the provisions of
this chapter. (Ord. 2002-11, 8-6-2002)
5-1-2: SHORT TITLE:
This chapter shall be known as the ANIMAL CONTROL ORDINANCE. (Ord. 2002-11, 8-
6-2002)
5-1-3: DEFINITIONS:
As used in this chapter, all words shall have their usual meanings except that
the following words or terms as used in this chapter shall be defined as
follows:
AGENT: Any agency, society or other organization with which the city has
contracted to carry out the provisions of this chapter.
ANIMAL CONTROL OFFICER: The chief of police or his/her designee or any person
employed by the city or under the supervision of the animal control officer or
the police department for the purpose of enforcing the animal control laws and
regulations. When the city has contracted for the performance of such services,
animal control officer shall mean the party with whom the city has so
contracted.
ANIMAL LICENSE FEE COLLECTOR: The animal control officer or any person or
entity delegated by and under the supervision of the animal control officer for
the purpose of issuing animal licenses for the city of Lemoore.
CITY: The city of Lemoore.
COUNTY HEALTH OFFICER: The Kings County health officer, or his designee.
DANGEROUS ANIMAL: Any animal that has bitten, injured or aggressively pursued
any human being or other animal which the animal control officer, after
conducting an investigation pursuant to section 5-1-56 of this chapter or a
hearing officer, after an appeal hearing, finds that because of its behavior,
temperament and physical characteristics combined with the manner in which it
is maintained will probably cause great bodily harm to a human being or other
animal in the future. No animal shall be found to be a dangerous animal based
only on circumstances set forth in section 5-1-56 of this chapter.
DISEASED OR INJURED ANIMAL: Any animal not suspected of rabies which is
apparently either diseased, sick, injured, disabled, infirm or crippled.
DOG KENNEL: Any place or premises where four (4) or more dogs or cats or
combinations thereof, over the age of four (4) months, are kept. For the
purposes of this chapter, "keeping" includes boarding, grooming, breeding,
training, sale and related purposes other than places maintained by a licensed
veterinarian or society for the prevention of cruelty to animals.
FOWL: As used herein includes chickens, turkeys, emus, ostriches, and all other
domestic or domesticated fowl other than household pets.
GUIDE DOG: Any dog trained to lead a blind person.
HARBORING: A person "harbors" a dog within the meaning of this chapter when he
feeds or shelters a dog.
LIVESTOCK: As used herein includes horses, ponies, mules, burros, jack or
jennies, cows, bulls, calves, heifers, sheep, goats, swine, hogs, pigs, and all
other domestic or domesticated animals other than household pets.
OWNER: Any person, association, firm or corporation owning, having an interest
in, or having control, custody, or possession of any animal.
POTENTIALLY DANGEROUS ANIMAL: Any animal that has bitten, injured or
aggressively pursued any human being or other animal which the animal control
officer, after conducting an investigation pursuant to section
5-1-56 of this chapter or a hearing officer, after an appeal hearing finds that
because of its behavior, temperament and physical characteristics combined with
the manner in which it is maintained there is a substantial possibility that it
will cause injury or great bodily harm to a human being or other animal in the
future. No animal shall be found to be a potentially dangerous animal based
solely on circumstances set forth in section
5-1-56 of this chapter.
PUBLIC NUISANCE: For the purposes of this chapter:
   A.   Any animal or animals which:
      1.   Harass or annoy passersby or chases passing vehicles;
      2.   Attacks other animals;
      3.   Trespasses on school grounds;
      4.   Is at large three (3) or more times within a twelve (12) month
period;
      5.   Damages private or public property;
      6.   Barks, whines, or howls in an excessive or untimely fashion as
described in section
5-1-79 of this chapter.
   B.   An owner allowing his/her animal to: 1) defecate on property not owned
by the animal owner without immediately cleaning or removing the excrement to a
proper receptacle or 2) urinate on property not owned by an animal owner that
causes damage to such property, including, without limitation, damage to grass.
   C.   Unsanitary conditions on any premises where the animal is kept which
causes foul odor, attracts flies or vermin or otherwise threatens the public
safety or health.
   D.   Any other condition, act, omission or event not warranted by law or
which endanger the life, health, property, morals, or comfort of the public, or
obstructs the public in the exercise or enjoyment of rights common to all or as
otherwise defined as a nuisance in this section, code or by law.
RUNNING AT LARGE: A dog "runs at large" within the meaning of this chapter when
it is on private property without the permission of the person owning or
occupying the property, or when it is upon public property and is not upon a
leash or chain continuously held in the hand of a responsible person capable of
controlling such dog.
SIGNAL DOG: Any dog trained to lead or assist a deaf person. (Ord. 2014-07, 10-
21-2014)
5-1-4: INSPECTION OF ANIMALS; PENALTY FOR FAILURE TO COMPLY:
Any person who has an animal in his possession, custody, or control who
wilfully fails or refuses to exhibit such animal or any required license
therefor for inspection upon demand by the animal control officer or any peace
officer is guilty of an infraction. (Ord. 2002-11, 8-6-2002)
5-1-5: PRIVILEGED ENTRY:
For the purpose of discharging the duties imposed by this chapter or other
applicable law and to enforce the same, the animal control officer or any peace
officer may enter upon private property, except dwellings located thereon, as
follows:
   A.   During daylight:
      1.   When in pursuit of any animal which he has reasonable or probable
cause to believe is subject to impoundment pursuant hereto or other applicable
law.
      2.   To impound or place in isolation any animal thereon which he has any
cause whatsoever to believe or suspect has rabies or is a potentially dangerous
animal or dangerous animal.
      3.   To inspect or examine animals isolated thereon pursuant hereto or
other applicable law.
   B.   At night:
      1.   When in pursuit of an animal which he has reasonable or probable
cause to believe is subject to impoundment pursuant hereto or other applicable
law.
      2.   To impound or place in isolation any animal thereon which he has any
cause whatsoever to believe or suspect has rabies or is a potentially dangerous
animal or dangerous animal.
As a condition of the authority set forth in this section, except where time
does not permit in an emergency or when in fresh pursuit, before entering upon
private property a reasonable effort shall be made to locate the owner or
possessor thereof to request permission to enter upon such property and to
explain the purpose for such entry. (Ord. 2007-03, 5-15-2007)
5-1-6: CONFINEMENT REGULATIONS:
The animal control officer may make rules regulating the size and type of cage
or other means of confinement, the distance from the place of confinement, the
distance from the place of confinement to adjoining property, and any other
regulations deemed reasonably necessary by the animal control officer or the
county health officer to carry out the purpose of this chapter and to ensure
the maintenance of humane, sanitary conditions and the safety of persons and
property. A copy of the rules and regulations shall be furnished by the animal
control officer upon request. In applying the regulations to a given situation,
the animal control officer shall take into consideration the type, nature,
disposition and training of the animal involved. (Ord. 2002-11, 8-6-2002)
5-1-7: INTERFERING WITH DUTIES OF ANIMAL CONTROL OFFICER:
Every person who breaks open an animal shelter, temporary shelter or shelter
vehicle, or who wilfully resists, delays, or obstructs the animal control
officer in the discharge of, or attempt to discharge, any duty of his office,
is guilty of a misdemeanor. (Ord. 2002-11, 8-6-2002)
5-1-8: ENFORCEMENT PROVISIONS:
In addition to other authority provided by law for making arrests, the animal
control officer and his deputies are hereby designated as peace officers and
employees and are authorized to make arrests according to Penal Code section
836.5 for the purpose of enforcing and carrying out provisions of this chapter.
(Ord. 2007-03, 5-15-2007)
5-1-9: LIABILITY:
All animals impounded shall be kept at the risk of the owner, and neither the
city nor its officers, agents or employees shall be liable to the owner for the
delivery in good faith of any such animal to a person claiming to be, but not
in fact being, entitled to reclaim the same. Neither the city, nor its
officers, agents or employees shall be liable for injury or disease to any
animal incurred while said animal is being captured, transported, or impounded.
(Ord. 2002-11, 8-6-2002)
5-1-10: PENALTY:
Except as otherwise specifically provided in this chapter, any person violating
or failing to comply with any provision of this chapter or any rule or
regulation of the animal control officer or any peace officer shall be guilty
of an infraction punishable pursuant to the provisions of section
1-4-1 of this code. (Ord. 2002-11, 8-6-2002)
5-1-11: WRITTEN NOTICE TO APPEAR:
   A.   Any person arrested for violation of this chapter shall be given the
opportunity to sign a written notice to appear with his promise to appear
pursuant to section 836.5 of the Penal Code. Any person refusing to sign a
written notice to appear with his promise to appear may be taken into custody.
   B.   Any person who signs a written promise to appear with a false or
fictitious name is guilty of a misdemeanor regardless of the disposition of the
charge upon which he was originally arrested. (Ord. 2002-11, 8-6-2002)
5-1-12: VIOLATION OF PROMISE TO APPEAR:
   A.   Any person wilfully violating his written promise to appear in court or
before a person authorized to receive a deposit of bail is guilty of a
misdemeanor regardless of the disposition of the charge upon which he was
originally arrested.
   B.   Any person wilfully failing to pay a lawfully imposed fine for a
violation of any provision of this chapter within the time authorized by the
court and without lawful excuse having been presented to the court on or before
the date the fine is due is guilty of a misdemeanor regardless of the full
payment of the fine after such time. (Ord. 2002-11, 8-6-2002)
5-1-13: SEVERABLE PROVISIONS:
If any part of this chapter is found to be unconstitutional or invalid, the
city council hereby declares that it would have enacted the remainder of this
chapter regardless of the absence of any such invalid part. (Ord. 2002-11, 8-6-
2002)
5-1-14: RATES AND CHARGES:
The city council may, by resolution or order, establish rates or charges for
service provided or licenses issued under the provisions of this chapter. (Ord.
2002-11, 8-6-2002)
5-1-15 - 5-1-20: RESERVED:
(Ord. 2002-11, 8-6-2002)
ARTICLE II. DOG LICENSE REQUIREMENTS
5-1-21: Dog License Required
5-1-22: Exemption From License Fee
5-1-23: Exemption From Wearing Of License
5-1-24: Dog License Application
5-1-25: Dog License Period
5-1-26: Reserved
5-1-27: Due Date And Penalties
5-1-28: Issuance Of Dog License Tag
5-1-29: Microchip Identification And Spay/Neuter Compliance For Shelter Animals
5-1-30: Breeder Permit And Advertising
5-1-31: Breeder Permit Requirements
5-1-32: Violations
5-1-33 - 5-1-40: Reserved
5-1-21: DOG LICENSE REQUIRED:
Every person who owns, harbors, or keeps any dog in the city over the age of
four (4) months for thirty (30) days or longer shall obtain a license receipt
and license tag issued under the provisions of this chapter stamped with the
license number. The license tag obtained shall be worn by the dog at all times
except as provided in section
5-1-23 of this article. Any dog found without a current license tag may be
taken up and impounded by the animal control officer or any peace officer.
(Ord. 2002-11, 8-6-2002)
5-1-22: EXEMPTION FROM LICENSE FEE:
A dog license shall be issued free of charge in the following instances:
   A.   When the license is for a dog which will be used as a guide dog for a
blind person. An affidavit attesting to the fact that the dog will be used as a
guide dog shall be given to the official issuing the license.
   B.   When the license is for a dog which has been honorably discharged from
the armed services of the United States. Such discharge shall be established by
showing to the official issuing the license the discharge papers issued for
such dog.
   C.   When the license is for a dog which is currently used for law
enforcement agencies or has been retired from such services. (Ord. 2002-11, 8-
6-2002)
5-1-23: EXEMPTION FROM WEARING OF LICENSE:
The license tag need not be worn by the dog when the dog is contained within an
enclosure or confined to the premises of an animal hospital or licensed dog
kennel or state chartered benevolent organization for the care of animals, or
when the dog is participating in or training for sporting events, field trials,
obedience classes, dog shows or herding livestock, providing such dog is not
allowed to run at large. (Ord. 2002-11, 8-6-2002)
5-1-24: DOG LICENSE APPLICATION:
The dog license required by this chapter may be obtained by submitting proof of
the animal having been spayed or neutered, a current rabies vaccination
certificate, furnishing the information required herein and paying the proper
fee to the animal control officer or any person or entity delegated by and
under the supervision of the animal control officer. The information required
for a license shall include a brief description of the dog as to breed, age,
sex, color, rabies vaccination certificate number, date of issuance and
expiration thereof, and if the animal is altered or unaltered, and shall
include the name, address and telephone number of the licensee. The official
receiving such information shall record it on the receipt to be given for
payment of the license fee. The expiration date of the rabies vaccination shall
be recorded on the receipt. The license fee shall be collected at the time the
application is made and said license shall be issued to the applicant when an
acceptable rabies vaccination certificate and proof of the animal having been
spayed or neutered is displayed to the license collector. (Ord. 2015-03, 6-2-
2015)
5-1-25: DOG LICENSE PERIOD:
The license period for the license tag required by this chapter shall be one,
two (2), or three (3) years from the date of issuance. The fee for a spayed or
neutered dog will be set at fifteen dollars ($15.00) for a one year license in
compliance with California Government Code section 38792(b) and California Food
And Agricultural Code section 30804.5. (Ord. 2015-03, 6-2-2015)
5-1-26: RESERVED:
(Ord. 2002-11, 8-6-2002)
5-1-27: DUE DATE AND PENALTIES:
As to any dog not currently licensed in the city of Lemoore, the information
and fee shall be due within thirty (30) days after it is brought into the city,
or when such dog attains the age of four (4) months, whichever is later. For a
dog currently licensed in Lemoore, the information and fee required by this
chapter are due on or before the expiration date on the license receipt. Any
person purchasing a license shall do so within thirty (30) days after any
applicable due date as set forth above. Any person purchasing a license more
than thirty (30) days after any applicable due date shall be charged the late
licensing penalty which shall be one hundred percent (100%) of the regular one
year license fee, which penalty shall be in addition to any other regular
license fee. (Ord. 2002-11, 8-6-2002)
5-1-28: ISSUANCE OF DOG LICENSE TAG:
Upon receipt of the required information, accompanied by payment of the proper
fee and display of proof of the animal having been spayed or neutered, an
acceptable rabies vaccination certificate, a license tag and a written receipt
shall be issued to the applicant. Each tag shall be serially numbered and
stamped. The expiration date shall be noted on the license receipt. The license
collector shall endorse the number of the license tag so issued upon a copy of
the receipt, and all such copies so endorsed shall be kept on file in the
office of the animal control officer, open to public inspection at reasonable
times. Such tag shall be attached to a collar, harness, or other device
permanently worn by the dog except as provided in section
5-1-23 of this chapter. (Ord. 2015-03, 6-2-2015)
5-1-29: MICROCHIP IDENTIFICATION AND SPAY/NEUTER COMPLIANCE FOR SHELTER
ANIMALS:
   A.   Animal services shall implant each dog and cat impounded at the animal
shelter, not previously microchipped, with a microchip identification device.
The owner of such dog or cat shall be obligated to pay for the cost associated
with the implantation of the microchip identification device as part of the
impound fee. It shall be the owner's responsibility to have correct and current
information registered with the city or the city's designee at all times.
   B.   Except as otherwise provided herein, any dog or cat sold, given away or
released by the animal shelter or city designee shall be spayed or neutered in
accordance with Food And Agricultural Code section 30503, as may be amended.
Male and female animals shall be at least two (2) months of age and have a
weight of at least two (2) pounds. An extension of time to perform surgery may
be granted by the animal shelter if a veterinarian provides a medical
determination that the surgery cannot be performed as scheduled and must be
postponed. The facility performing the surgery may spay or neuter an animal
weighing less than two (2) pounds if by their determination it is safe to
perform said surgery. The city, the animal shelter, or the city's designee may
release an unspayed or unneutered animal if the party receiving the animal
possesses or obtains a breeder's permit and pays the required fees, including,
without limitation, the cost of boarding, licensing (in the case of a dog), and
state fees. (Ord. 2014-07, 10-21-2014)
5-1-30: BREEDER PERMIT AND ADVERTISING:
   A.   It is unlawful for any person to breed dogs and/or cats for sale or
profit or to advertise for the sale or adoption of such animals without first
obtaining a breeder permit.
   B.   The fees for a breeder permit shall be set by resolution of the city
council and must be submitted to the animal control officer for the breeding of
dogs or cats, as well as advertising for the sale or adoption of dogs and cats
that are bred within the city limits. Breeding permit requirements are as
follows:
      1.   No offspring can be sold or adopted until eight (8) weeks of age;
      2.   No offspring can be sold or adopted until vaccinated against common
diseases;
      3.   The breeder permit holder must identify his/her/its permit number
when advertising the animals for sale or adoption.
   C.   It is unlawful for any person to advertise for the sale or adoption of
a litter of dogs or cats in the city without including in the advertisement a
city breeder permit number.
   D.   A breeder permit shall be in addition to other requirements and
conditions that must be satisfied under this code in order to undertake animal
breeding operations within the city (e.g., city business permit, special use
permit, etc.). (Ord. 2014-07, 10-21-2014)
5-1-31: BREEDER PERMIT REQUIREMENTS:
   A.   Application for all breeder permits pursuant to this chapter shall be
filed with the animal control officer or city designee on a form prescribed by
the city. Fees charged for these permits shall be set by resolution of the city
council as recommended by the animal control officer or city designee. Permits
shall be issued for the calendar year or any part thereof and are effective
from January 1 of each year and expire on December 31 of that same year. If a
permit is issued during a month other than January, the permit fee shall be
prorated with respect to the month during which issuance occurs (e.g., the
permit fee for a permit issued in February will be 11/12 of the full annual
fee). Renewal and payment of the permit is due and payable on January 1 of each
year. The city designee shall collect a delinquent penalty in an amount equal
to the amount as established for license penalties.
   B.   The failure to obtain the appropriate permit is punishable as an
infraction as set forth herein.
   C.   Any or all of the permits within this code may be immediately suspended
for any violations of the conditions of this title. (Ord. 2014-07, 10-21-2014)
5-1-32: VIOLATIONS:
Every person who counterfeits a dog license tag, or who attaches a license tag
issued under the provisions of this chapter to any dog other than the one for
which such a tag was issued, or who obtains a dog license or dog kennel license
and in doing so, states as true any material matters which he knows to be
false, is guilty of an infraction. (Ord. 2002-11, 8-6-2002)
5-1-33 - 5-1-40: RESERVED:
(Ord. 2002-11, 8-6-2002)
ARTICLE III. KENNEL PERMIT; HEALTH PERMIT REQUIREMENTS
5-1-41: Permit Required
5-1-42: Kennel Permit Application; Contents, Due Date
5-1-43: Fees, Due Date
5-1-44: Vaccination Certificate; Individual License
5-1-45: Zoning
5-1-46: Revocation Or Suspension Of Kennel Permit
5-1-47: Penalty
5-1-48 - 5-1-50: Reserved
5-1-41: PERMIT REQUIRED:
Every person who owns, manages, or operates a dog kennel shall obtain a permit
issued under the provisions of this article. "Kennel" shall have and carry the
meaning contained in subsection
9-4A-5K of this code. (Ord. 2002-11, 8-6-2002)
5-1-42: KENNEL PERMIT APPLICATION; CONTENTS, DUE DATE:
The permit required by this article may be obtained by written application in
duplicate to the animal control officer on forms provided by the animal control
officer. The application shall contain a statement of the name and address and
location of the kennel, the name or names of the persons or responsible
corporate officers of a corporation owning, managing or operating such kennel,
the number and ages of the dogs currently kept therein, building plans for the
kennel conforming with minimum standards promulgated by the animal control
officer, and the purpose or purposes for which the dogs are kept (i.e.,
breeding, boarding, etc.), and any other information requested by the animal
control officer. Each application shall also include a letter of compliance
issued by the appropriate local building and planning official, indicating
conformity with the provisions of zoning and building ordinances of the city.
(Ord. 2002-11, 8-6-2002)
5-1-43: FEES, DUE DATE:
Application for a kennel permit shall be accompanied by the nonrefundable
annual fee which is in addition to, and not in limitation of, any other permit
license fee otherwise required. Upon approval of the application by the animal
control officer, the applicant shall be granted a kennel permit. The permit
shall be valid for one year from the date of issuance.
Renewal of the permit shall be made upon application, approval and payment of
the fee in the manner provided for the issuance of an original kennel permit.
The application and fee required by this section shall be due and payable on or
before the expiration date of the current permit. Any person purchasing a
kennel permit after the due date shall be charged a fifty percent (50%) late
fee which shall be paid in addition to the regular kennel permit fee. (Ord.
2002-11, 8-6-2002)
5-1-44: VACCINATION CERTIFICATE; INDIVIDUAL LICENSE:
An acceptable rabies vaccination certificate or an individual license for each
dog in the kennel above the age of four (4) months shall be kept on file for
inspectional review at the kennel. (Ord. 2002-11, 8-6-2002)
5-1-45: ZONING:
The requirements of this chapter shall be deemed to be in addition to, and not
in limitation of, the requirement of any applicable zoning laws or ordinances.
A kennel permit issued under the provisions of this chapter shall cease to be
valid if the operation of a kennel should become a prohibited use for the zone
in which it is then located. (Ord. 2002-11, 8-6-2002)
5-1-46: REVOCATION OR SUSPENSION OF KENNEL PERMIT:
Any kennel permit issued under the provisions of this chapter may be revoked or
suspended by the animal control officer whenever, in his opinion, the kennel
for which such permit was issued is not being maintained in a sanitary or
healthful condition or is not provided with adequate care and supervision for
the animals confined therein. The revocation or suspension shall become
effective seven (7) days after written notice that such defective condition is
found to exist, has been served by the inspecting animal control officer or
seven (7) days after such notice is deposited in the mail, addressed to the
person owning, managing or operating the kennel, by first class mail. The
written notice shall advise the permittee of a right to a hearing in accordance
with the city's administrative hearing procedures ordinance. (Ord. 2007-03, 5-
15-2007)
5-1-47: PENALTY:
Any person violating or failing to comply with any provision of this chapter,
pertaining to kennel permits, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor punishable
pursuant to the provisions of section
1-4-1 of this code. (Ord. 2002-11, 8-6-2002)
5-1-48 - 5-1-50: RESERVED:
(Ord. 2002-11, 8-6-2002)
ARTICLE IV. RABIES CONTROL
5-1-51: Vaccination Required
5-1-52: Rabies Vaccination Facilities; Certificates
5-1-53: Isolation Of Dogs Suspected Of Having Rabies
5-1-54: Responsibilities Of Veterinarians
5-1-55: Reporting Of Bite Cases
5-1-56: Impoundment; Biting Or Attacking Animal
5-1-57: Violation Of Isolation Requirements
5-1-58: Redemption Of Isolated Animals
5-1-59: Dangerous Or Potentially Dangerous Animal; Procedures
5-1-60: Public Nuisance
5-1-61: Animals At Large; Biting Or Attacking Animal
5-1-62 - 5-1-65: Reserved
5-1-51: VACCINATION REQUIRED:
   A.   Primary Immunization: Every person owning, harboring, or keeping any
dog shall, within thirty (30) days after such dog attains the age of four (4)
months, cause it to be vaccinated against rabies. This immunization shall be
known as the "primary immunization".
   B.   Revaccination Intervals: Dogs shall be revaccinated one year after the
primary immunization. Such dogs shall then be revaccinated at least every three
(3) years thereafter.
   C.   Approval Of Vaccine: All rabies vaccines shall be approved by the
California department of health. (Ord. 2002-11, 8-6-2002)
5-1-52: RABIES VACCINATION FACILITIES; CERTIFICATES:
The animal control officer may provide facilities for the rabies vaccination of
dogs or may arrange for such vaccination at low cost public clinics. Blank
forms shall be provided for the vaccination certificates required by this
chapter. Failure to display a valid rabies vaccination certificate upon
reasonable demand by the animal control officer is prima facie evidence of
nonvaccination. The vaccination required herein may be obtained either at such
facilities or clinics or from a licensed veterinarian of the owner's choice.
(Ord. 2002-11, 8-6-2002)
5-1-53: ISOLATION OF DOGS SUSPECTED OF HAVING RABIES:
The animal control officer shall have authority to place in isolation any dog,
licensed or not, which in the opinion of a licensed veterinarian or the county
health officer, displays symptoms suggestive of rabies. Such isolation shall be
at an animal pound unless the owner of such dog, with the approval of the
county health officer, arranges with a licensed veterinarian for such isolation
in a private animal hospital or clinic. Any dog placed in such isolation shall
be kept strictly confined and under such observation as may be required by the
county health officer. Such isolation shall continue for at least ten (10) days
from the date the symptoms suggestive of rabies were first observed. Such
isolation may be continued for a period longer than ten (10) days if, in the
opinion of any licensed veterinarian or the county health officer, such longer
period is necessary. At the expiration of such confinement, any dog confined at
an animal pound shall be released upon payment of the fees set forth in section
5-1-75 of this chapter, if, in the opinion of any licensed veterinarian or the
county health officer, such dog does not have rabies. (Ord. 2007-03, 5-15-2007)
5-1-54: RESPONSIBILITIES OF VETERINARIANS:
It shall be the duty of every licensed veterinarian to report immediately to
the county health officer any animal observed by him which is diagnosed by him
as having rabies or is suspected of having rabies. (Ord. 2002-11, 8-6-2002)
5-1-55: REPORTING OF BITE CASES:
It shall be the duty of every physician, or other person, to report to the
county health officer the name and address of any person treated for a bite
inflicted by any animal, and report the biting of any animal of a species
subject to rabies which has been bitten by a known or suspected rabid animal or
has been in intimate contact with a rabid or suspected rabid animal, together
with such other information as will be helpful in rabies control. The county
health officer may follow the "Guidelines For Investigation Of Animal Bites"
established by the California department of health. (Ord. 2002-11, 8-6-2002)
5-1-56: IMPOUNDMENT; BITING OR ATTACKING ANIMAL:
   A.   The animal control officer shall have the power to summarily and
immediately impound a dog or other animal where there is evidence it has
attacked, bitten or injured any human being or other animal pending any court,
dog license, or animal permit revocation proceeding arising from the attack,
bite or injury. The animal control officer or his duly authorized
representative may enter and inspect private property to enforce the provisions
of this section.
Failure to surrender to the animal control officer, upon demand, a dog or other
animal which is subject to being impounded pursuant to this section is a
misdemeanor.
A dog or other animal, impounded pursuant to the authority of this section,
shall be returned to the owner or custodian as provided in section
5-1-59 of this chapter or when it is no longer required as evidence, or if a
notice of an investigation to determine if an animal is dangerous or
potentially dangerous pursuant to section
5-1-59 of this chapter has not been served on the owner or custodian within
seven (7) days after the impoundment.
   B.   In lieu of impoundment pursuant to this section, the animal control
officer may permit the dog or other animal to be confined at the owner's or
custodian's expense in a dog kennel or veterinary facility within the city or
at the owner's or custodian's residence in an enclosure described in subsection
D of this section, provided that the owner or custodian agrees to all of the
following conditions:
      1.   Shall not remove the dog or other animal from the kennel, veterinary
facility or residence without the prior written approval of the animal control
officer or his authorized representative; and
      2.   Shall make the dog or other animal available for observation and
inspection by the animal control officer and members of law enforcement or
their authorized representatives; and
      3.   Shall verify to the animal control officer that the dog or other
animal will be confined in such a way as to prevent its coming into contact
with members of the public other than the immediate family of the owner or
custodian.
   C.   The animal control officer or his designated representative may have a
dog or other animal impounded or confined as provided in subsection A or B of
this section, identified by means of permanent marking prior to release from
impoundment or confinement.
   D.   For purposes of this section, "enclosure" shall mean a fence or
structure of at least six feet (6') in height, forming a confined area
sufficient to prevent the entry of young children, and effective in containing
the dog or other animal. Such enclosure shall be securely enclosed and locked
and equipped with secure sides, top and bottom, and shall be designed to
prevent the dog or other animal from escaping the enclosure. (Ord. 2007-03, 5-
15-2007)
5-1-57: VIOLATION OF ISOLATION REQUIREMENTS:
Every person who, after requesting and obtaining approval for the keeping of a
biting animal confined and isolated upon his private premises, as provided in
section 5-1-56 of this chapter, fails for any reason whatsoever to keep such
animal continuously confined and isolated upon his premises, either indoors or
inside some enclosure, for a period of ten (10) days after the day such written
request is presented to the county health officer, is guilty of an infraction.
Any such animal, whether licensed or unlicensed, not continuously confined and
isolated as required herein shall be taken up forthwith by the animal control
officer and isolated as provided in section
5-1-53 of this chapter. (Ord. 2002-11, 8-6-2002)
5-1-58: REDEMPTION OF ISOLATED ANIMALS:
Any animal isolated at the animal pound as provided in section 5-1-53, 5-1-56,
or 5-1-57 of this chapter and found not to have rabies may be redeemed by the
owner by paying to the animal control officer all applicable fees and by
obtaining any necessary license. Any animal which is not so redeemed within
seventy two (72) hours after the expiration of the isolation period shall be
deemed to have been abandoned and shall be disposed of as provided in section
5-1-73 of this chapter. (Ord. 2002-11, 8-6-2002)
5-1-59: DANGEROUS OR POTENTIALLY DANGEROUS ANIMAL; PROCEDURES:
   A.   Investigation And Declaration: The animal control officer shall conduct
an investigation to determine whether or not a dog or other animal confined or
impounded pursuant to section 5-1-56 of this chapter is a dangerous or
potentially dangerous animal. Within seven (7) days of the date of impounding
the dog or other animal pursuant to section 5-1-56 of this chapter the animal
control officer shall serve upon the owner or custodian of the dog or other
animal by regular and certified mail a notice of investigation to determine if
the animal is dangerous or potentially dangerous. This notice shall describe
the purpose of the investigation, how the investigation will be conducted, the
factors the animal control officer will consider in making a finding and a
deadline for completing the investigation. The investigation may include
interviewing the owner(s) of the dog or other animal, witnesses, reviewing
records of citations and reports of previous incidents involving the dog or
other animal and evaluating the temperament of the dog or other animal through
behavioral testing. In making a finding regarding whether the dog or other
animal is dangerous or potentially dangerous, the animal control officer shall
consider the factors set forth in subsection C of this section. If after
completing the investigation the animal control officer finds that the dog or
other animal is dangerous or potentially dangerous, the animal control officer
shall serve by regular mail and certified mail a notice of declaration as
described in subsection B of this section. If after completing the
investigation the animal control officer determines that the dog or other
animal is not dangerous or potentially dangerous, the animal control officer
shall inform the owner of the dog or other animal of this finding and release
the dog or other animal to the owner. The investigation shall be completed and
any declaration served within twenty one (21) calendar days of the date the dog
or other animal was impounded pursuant to section
5-1-56 of this chapter.
   B.   Dangerous Or Potentially Dangerous Animal; Notice Of Declaration: The
notice of declaration finding that a dog or other animal is dangerous or
potentially dangerous shall contain:
      1.   A physical description of the animal, including the breed, if known,
and the animal's license number, if any;
      2.   A statement informing the owner of the animal that the animal
control officer has declared the animal a "dangerous animal" or a "potentially
dangerous animal", including a brief and concise description of the facts that
form the basis for the declaration of the animal as a dangerous animal or a
potentially dangerous animal;
      3.   A statement informing the owner of the animal of the possible
consequences should a declaration of dangerous animal or potentially dangerous
animal become final;
      4.   A statement informing that the owner or custodian of the animal may
appeal the declaration, provided that the appeal is made in writing as provided
in subsection F of this section;
      5.   A statement that the appeal request must be in writing and filed
with the city clerk's office within five (5) calendar days of service of the
notice of declaration;
      6.   If the animal is declared dangerous, an order that the animal be
humanely destroyed as provided for in subsection D of this section;
      7.   If the animal is declared potentially dangerous, an order setting
forth any or all of the conditions set forth in subsection E of this section;
      8.   A statement that failure to appeal the notice of declaration will
constitute a waiver of all rights to an administrative hearing and will be a
final determination of the matter, and if after ten (10) days from the date of
the issuance of the notice of declaration, the owner or custodian has failed to
inform the animal control officer of an intent to comply with the conditions
set forth in the notice of declaration, the animal will be deemed abandoned and
may be humanely destroyed or otherwise disposed of;
      9.   A statement that failure to comply with all of the conditions set
forth in the notice of declaration will result in the animal control officer
proceeding with impounding and destroying or otherwise disposing of the animal.
   C.   Determination Of Dangerous Or Potentially Dangerous Animal; Evidence:
In making a determination that a dog or other animal is or is not dangerous,
evidence of the following shall be considered:
      1.   Any previous history of the dog or other animal attacking, biting or
causing injury to a human or other animal;
      2.   The nature and extent of injuries inflicted and the number of
victims involved;
      3.   The place where the bite, attack or injury occurred;
      4.   The presence or absence of any provocation for the bite, attack or
injury;
      5.   The extent to which property has been damaged or destroyed;
      6.   Whether the dog or other animal exhibits any characteristics of
being trained for fighting or attack or other evidence to show such training or
fighting;
      7.   Whether the dog or other animal exhibits characteristics of
aggressive or unpredictable temperament or behavior in the presence of human
beings or dogs or other animals;
      8.   Whether the dog or other animal can be effectively trained or
retrained to change its temperament or behavior;
      9.   The manner in which the dog or other animal had been maintained by
its owner or custodian;
      10.   Any other relevant evidence concerning the maintenance of the dog
or other animal; and
      11.   Any other relevant evidence regarding the ability of the owner or
custodian, or the animal control officer, to protect the public safety in the
future if the dog or other animal is permitted to remain in the city.
   D.   Disposition Of Dangerous Animal:
      1.   It shall be unlawful for any person to own, possess, harbor or keep
any dog or other animal declared by the hearing officer, after a hearing, to be
dangerous.
      2.   Any dog or other animal declared to be dangerous, if not already
impounded by the animal control officer, shall be immediately surrendered to
the animal control officer, and it is the duty of the animal control officer to
take and impound any such dog or other animal.
      3.   Any dog or other animal declared to be a dangerous animal shall be
humanely destroyed.
   E.   Dog Or Other Animal Found Potentially Dangerous; Procedure: If the
notice of declaration states that the dog or other animal is potentially
dangerous, in the notice of declaration the animal control officer may set
forth any or all of the following as conditions to owning, possessing,
controlling or being in charge of the animal declared to be potentially
dangerous:
      1.   The animal shall be confined on the owner's premises in an enclosure
approved by the animal control officer;
      2.   The animal shall be kept securely muzzled, leashed and under the
control of a person eighteen (18) years of age or older, and who is physically
capable of restraining the animal when the animal is off the owner's property;
      3.   The owner shall submit evidence to the animal control officer within
seventy two (72) hours that the animal has been photographed and microchipped
by the owner for purposes of identification;
      4.   The animal shall be altered to prevent reproduction;
      5.   The owner of the animal shall notify in writing any public or
corporate entity, including, but not limited to, the city of Lemoore, county of
Kings, the postmaster, utility companies, or any other organization that sends
out employees to the residence, that a potentially dangerous animal resides at
that property. The animal control officer may also set a time period by which
such notices must be given, and when copies of such notices must be provided to
the animal control officer;
      6.   The owner shall post signs on the premises where the animal is being
kept that are clearly visible from points of entry to the property which state
that an animal which has been declared to be potentially dangerous is on the
property. The language of such signs shall be determined by the animal control
officer and may be required to be in a language other than English. The animal
control officer may require that such signs are posted before an impounded
animal is returned to its owner or within ten (10) days from the date the
animal was declared to be a potentially dangerous animal;
      7.   An animal which has been declared potentially dangerous may not be
transferred to reside either temporarily or permanently at another location
within the city of Lemoore without prior written authorization of the animal
control officer. Said authorization shall not be issued unless every term set
forth in the notice of declaration can be met at the proposed new location;
      8.   The owner shall allow inspections of the animal and its enclosure by
the animal control officer or any law enforcement agency and produce upon
demand proof of compliance with all conditions set forth in the final notice of
declaration;
      9.   In the event of the animal's death, the owner shall notify the
animal control officer within forty eight (48) hours and, upon request, produce
evidence of the animal's death;
      10.   In the event that the animal escapes, the owner shall immediately
notify the animal control officer. In addition, the owner and animal control
officer shall make every reasonable effort to recapture the animal;
      11.   The animal shall be permanently removed from the city of Lemoore
and the owner shall provide proof of said removal to the satisfaction of the
animal control officer; and
      12.   The owner shall pay all impound and shelter fees incurred by the
animal control officer to impound the animal during the investigation to
determine whether the animal is dangerous or potentially dangerous.
If the owner fails to comply with all of the conditions ordered by the animal
control officer or the hearing officer through the appeal process described in
this chapter, the animal control officer shall proceed to impound and destroy
or otherwise dispose of the animal.
   F.   Appeal Of Notice Of Declaration:
      1.   The owner of the animal may appeal the notice of declaration by
filing a written appeal with the city clerk within five (5) days from the date
of service of such notice. The written appeal shall contain all of the
following:
         a.    A brief statement setting forth the legal interest of each of
the appellants regarding the animal involved in the notice of declaration;
         b.    A brief statement in ordinary and concise language of the relief
sought, and the reasons why it is claimed the protested notice of declaration
should be reversed, modified, or otherwise set aside;
         c.    The signatures of all parties named as appellants and their
official mailing addresses, with statement from each appellant that each agrees
to accept service of the written notice of the time and place of the appeal
hearing and the decision of the city hearing officer at such address; and
         d.    The declaration under penalty of perjury of at least one
appellant as to the truth of the matters stated in the appeal.
If the owner fails to file an appeal of the notice of declaration within five
(5) days of service of the notice of declaration, the notice of declaration
shall become final and fully enforceable.
      2.   An owner appealing a notice of declaration finding an animal
dangerous or potentially dangerous shall be required to pay the office of the
city hearing officer, at the time the written notice of appeal is filed, an
appeal fee set forth in the master user's fee resolution. Such fee shall be
refunded to the appellant if the hearing officer determines that imposition of
the fee is not warranted or is not in the interest of justice. No notice of
appeal is valid unless accompanied by the appeal fee.
      3.   If an appeal is filed, the appeal hearing shall be noticed and
conducted under this section and the city's administrative hearing procedures
ordinance.
   G.   Limitation On Ownership: Any person whose dog or other animal has been
declared dangerous or potentially dangerous shall not own, possess, control or
be in charge of another animal of the species declared to be dangerous or
potentially dangerous for a period of three (3) years from the date of the
final notice of declaration of order after appeal. The controller shall not
issue or renew any license or permit for said species of animal, except that
upon the written request of the person whose dog or other animal has been
declared dangerous or potentially dangerous, the animal control officer may in
his discretion authorize the issuance of a dog license.
   H.   Exceptions: No dog or other animal may be declared dangerous that
inflicts injury or damage on a person committing a wilful trespass or other
tort upon premises occupied by the owner of the dog or other animal, or
teasing, tormenting, abusing or assaulting the dog or other animal, or
committing or attempting to commit a crime.
No dog or other animal may be declared dangerous if it inflicts injury or
damage on a domestic animal that was teasing, tormenting, abusing or assaulting
the dog or other animal.
No dog or other animal may be declared dangerous for taking any action to
defend or protect a human being within the immediate vicinity of the dog or
other animal from an unjustified attack or assault. (Ord. 2007-03, 5-15-2007)
5-1-60: PUBLIC NUISANCE:
The council finds that dangerous animals and potentially dangerous animals are
a public nuisance because of the potential threats to the public's health,
safety and welfare resulting from these animals attacking, biting, injuring or
killing other persons or animals. (Ord. 2007-03, 5-15-2007)
5-1-61: ANIMALS AT LARGE; BITING OR ATTACKING ANIMAL:
A person who owns or is in charge of or controls or who possesses a dog or
other animal, other than a dog used in law enforcement or a guide, signal, or
service dog, who permits, allows or causes the dog or other animal to be at
large is guilty of a misdemeanor if said dog or other animal bites, attacks or
causes injury to any human being or other animal. The minimum fine imposed for
such misdemeanor shall be one hundred dollars ($100.00). Any person convicted
under this section shall not own, possess, control or be in charge of any
animal of the species which caused the bite, attack or injury for a period of
three (3) years from the date of conviction. The controller shall not issue or
renew any license or permit for said species of animal, except that upon the
written request of the person so convicted, the controller, in his discretion,
may authorize the issuance of a dog license. (Ord. 2007-03, 5-15-2007)
5-1-62 - 5-1-65: RESERVED:
(Ord. 2002-11, 8-6-2002)
ARTICLE V. ANIMAL CONTROL GENERALLY
5-1-66: Leash Law
5-1-67: Animals At Large Generally
5-1-68: Livestock Running At Large
5-1-69: Keeping Of Stallions
5-1-70: Impounding Animals
5-1-71: Temporary Animal Pound
5-1-72: Notice Of Impoundment
5-1-73: Disposing Of Impounded Dogs
5-1-74: Disposal Of Impounded Livestock
5-1-75: Fines And Charges Upon Impounded Animals
5-1-76: Diseased Or Injured Animals
5-1-77: Vicious Or Chasing Dog Or Other Animal Deemed Nuisance
5-1-78: Destruction Of Wild Dogs
5-1-79: Noisy Animals
5-1-80: Public Nuisance
5-1-81 - 5-1-90: Reserved
5-1-66: LEASH LAW:
It is unlawful for any person to permit any dog owned, harbored or controlled
by him to be on any public street, alley, lane, or place of whatever nature
open to and used by the public in any area of the city, except a park or park
area designated by the council to be a dog park, unless such dog is securely
leashed and the leash is held continuously in the hands of a responsible person
capable of controlling such dog, or unless the dog is securely confined in a
vehicle.
It is unlawful for any person to suffer or permit any dog owned, harbored, or
controlled by him to be on any private property in any area of the city without
the permission of the person owning or occupying said private property. (Ord.
2008-01, 2-5-2008)
5-1-67: ANIMALS AT LARGE GENERALLY:
It shall be unlawful for any person owning or having possession of any animal
to permit it to be at large without reasonable control or to be pastured or
kept upon any street or other public place or upon any private property against
the wishes of the owner or occupant thereof or in any manner or place to the
injury of the owner or occupant of any other property. (Ord. 2002-11, 8-6-2002)
5-1-68: LIVESTOCK RUNNING AT LARGE:
It is unlawful for any person owning, harboring, or controlling any livestock
to permit such livestock to run at large upon the private property of another
without the permission of the person owning or occupying said private property,
or upon the streets or public places in the city of Lemoore. The animal control
officer is authorized, whenever he deems it necessary, to deputize individuals,
who are properly equipped, to capture and transport livestock which is running
at large in violation of this section. Each animal captured or transported
pursuant hereto shall be impounded at the risk of the owner and the owner or
keeper of such animal is liable for all fees set forth in section
5-1-75 of this chapter. (Ord. 2002-11, 8-6-2002)
5-1-69: KEEPING OF STALLIONS:
Upon approval of the animal control officer, a stallion may be kept, when
authorized by land use regulations, in a substantial corral of wood or other
construction six feet (6') in height and under conditions to prevent escape and
protect people or other animals. A "minimum substantial corral" is defined as
being constructed of four inch by four inch (4" x 4") posts, eight feet (8') on
center, anchored twenty four inches (24") in Portland cement with two inch by
six inch (2" x 6") rails set two inches (2") apart. (Ord. 2002-11, 8-6-2002)
5-1-70: IMPOUNDING ANIMALS:
Any animal found under conditions or in areas prohibited by section 5-1-66 or
5-1-67 of this chapter shall be taken by the animal control officer and
impounded, provided that no such animal is staked or tied for the purpose of
grazing upon private property, and no fowl at large upon private property shall
be impounded except upon complaint of the owner, occupant, or person in charge
of said property who claims to be injured thereby. (Ord. 2002-11, 8-6-2002)
5-1-71: TEMPORARY ANIMAL POUND:
The animal control officer is authorized, whenever he deems it necessary, to
temporarily impound animals within an enclosure other than the city animal
shelter and such an enclosure shall constitute a temporary animal shelter.
Notice that an enclosure is an animal shelter shall be given by placing a sign
to that effect on the gate or other entrance thereto. (Ord. 2002-11, 8-6-2002)
5-1-72: NOTICE OF IMPOUNDMENT:
Any animal control officer shall immediately notify the owner or person
entitled to possession of such animal or fowl, other than livestock, of the
impounding thereof, if known, or if unknown by posting a notice of impounding
containing a description of the animal, and the time and place of apprehension
for three (3) days at the animal pound. After the expiration of this period,
any unredeemed animal or fowl mentioned in such notice may be disposed of as
provided for in this chapter. Upon the impounding of any livestock, the animal
control officer shall notify the owner thereof, if the name of such owner is
known to him, of such impounding. If the name of the owner is not known, the
animal control officer shall publish a notice once in one or more newspapers
published in the city describing the animal, stating that it has been
impounded, and if not reclaimed it will be sold to the highest bidder at the
time and place therein fixed, not less than ten (10) nor more than fifteen (15)
days after the publication of such notice. (Ord. 2002-11, 8-6-2002)
5-1-73: DISPOSING OF IMPOUNDED DOGS:
The animal control officer shall feed and care for any dog impounded as
provided in this chapter until it is disposed of as provided by law. If such
dog is not a "diseased or injured dog" and is not suspected of having rabies,
the person owning such impounded dog may redeem it at any time within five (5)
working days if the dog wears a current license tag or within three (3) working
days for impounded dogs not wearing license tags after it is taken up by
describing it, proving ownership to the satisfaction of the animal control
officer, by paying all applicable fees and by obtaining any necessary license.
The five (5) days for redemption shall begin when written notice of such
impounding is given as provided in section
5-1-72 of this chapter. However, an owner may waive the five (5) day redemption
period in writing. If the impounded dog wears a license tag at the time of
impounding issued under the provisions of this chapter, such notice shall be
mailed to the address shown on the copy of the receipt for such license on
file. If the dog impounded as provided in this chapter is not so redeemed
within the above specified number of days, or if the owner of such dog fails or
refuses to comply with any of the requirements of redemption as provided
herein, or if the owner has waived the redemption period in writing, the animal
control officer shall dispose of such dogs according to the provisions of this
section. In disposing of an impounded dog, the animal control officer may, in
his discretion, destroy the dog in a humane manner or he may deliver such dog
for a pet to any person who redeems the dog as otherwise required by this
chapter, together with signing a written agreement to feed the dog and provide
it with a good home, or he may sell such dog to a state chartered humane
society. When a dog is returned to the pound within ten (10) days of such
delivery as a pet, the person returning the dog shall not be given the
discretion to determine what disposition shall be made of the dog. There shall
be no refunds for any redemption and board fees so charged. (Ord. 2002-11, 8-6-
2002)
5-1-74: DISPOSAL OF IMPOUNDED LIVESTOCK:
All livestock impounded may be reclaimed by the owner thereof at any time prior
to its disposal by the animal control officer, upon:
   A.   Furnishing proof of ownership satisfactory to the animal control
officer, and
   B.   Paying the fees set forth in section
5-1-75 of this chapter.
Any animal not reclaimed may be sold at the time set forth in the notice given
pursuant to section
5-1-72 of this chapter. At such sale, the animal control officer may bid, on
behalf of the county, the amount required to reclaim, and if such be the
highest bid, the animal control officer shall direct the manner of disposal.
The sale of any animal by the animal control officer in conformity with the
provisions of this chapter shall vest title thereof in the purchaser. (Ord.
2002-11, 8-6-2002)
5-1-75: FINES AND CHARGES UPON IMPOUNDED ANIMALS:
The animal control officer shall charge, receive and collect all fees, fines
and charges as set by the city council on impounded animals provided, however,
no fees whatsoever shall be charged or collected for or on account of any
animal which has been unlawfully taken up or impounded. When requested by the
owner or person entitled to custody of the animal, a hearing shall be held as
soon as practical after such seizure upon the question of whether the animal
has been legally taken up or impounded. Any animal found to have been
unlawfully taken up or impounded shall be immediately delivered to the owner or
person entitled to the custody thereof. (Ord. 2002-11, 8-6-2002)
5-1-76: DISEASED OR INJURED ANIMALS:
The animal control officer shall, at the time of impounding any animal,
determine whether it is a "diseased or injured animal" as defined herein. When
a diseased or injured animal is impounded, the animal control officer is
required to procure any necessary emergency medical treatment or dispose of
such animal in accordance with section 597(f) of the California Penal Code.
(Ord. 2002-11, 8-6-2002)
5-1-77: VICIOUS OR CHASING DOG OR OTHER ANIMAL DEEMED NUISANCE:
The keeping or harboring of any animal which is by reason of vicious
disposition a menace to persons or other animals, or which is a continual
hazard or annoyance to persons or vehicles passing by the premises where it is
kept, shall be an infraction and such animal shall be deemed a public nuisance.
Any person may file a complaint with the animal control officer in writing,
signed by, and bearing the address of the person complaining. The complaint
shall state the place where such nuisance exists, describe such animal and its
conduct and give the name and address of its owner or keeper, if known. The
animal control officer upon complaint or his own knowledge shall investigate,
and if a violation exists, may cause notice of abatement to be issued, make an
arrest in accordance with section
5-1-8 of this chapter, or take such other action as is necessary.
Any animal (except cats) permitted to be at large or trespassing upon private
premises or public property in violation of this section shall be deemed prima
facie to be under the control of the owner and declared to be a public nuisance
and menace to public health and safety, and shall be seized and impounded as
provided in this chapter.
Owners shall exercise proper care and control of their animals (except cats)
and will prevent them from becoming a public nuisance, harassing or annoying
passersby, chasing vehicles, attacking other domestic animals, and trespassing
upon private property in such manner as to damage property. Failure to comply
shall be deemed a public nuisance.
A public nuisance will exist as a result of the keeping or maintaining, or
permitting to be kept or maintained, upon any premises owned, occupied, or
controlled by any person of any animal or animals, which by any frequent or
long continued noise shall cause annoyance or discomfort to two (2) or more
reasonable persons of normal sensitiveness who reside in separate residences
(including apartments and condominiums). However, an animal control officer may
proceed on the basis of a complaint of only one person, if circumstances are
determined to exist whereby a noise disturbance caused by an animal affects
only one individual. Any noise caused by an animal which is audible
continuously for ten (10) minutes, or intermittently for thirty (30) minutes,
shall be prima facie evidence of such annoyance or discomfort. Factors which
can be used to evaluate excessive animal noise include, but are not limited to:
a) pitch; b) pattern; c) frequency of occurrence; and d) loudness. (Ord. 2014-
07, 10-21-2014)
5-1-78: DESTRUCTION OF WILD DOGS:
Any dog which is running at large and which is by reason of its vicious
disposition dangerous to persons or property may be shot by any peace officer
or animal control officer or shall be taken up and destroyed in a humane manner
by the animal control officer. (Ord. 2002-11, 8-6-2002)
5-1-79: NOISY ANIMALS:
Any person who keeps or permits to remain upon any property under his ownership
or control, other than in an appropriately zoned and licensed kennel or animal
hospital, any dog or other animal which by continuous barking, whining, or
other noise unreasonably disturbs the peace, comfort, or quiet of any resident
of the neighborhood shall be guilty of an infraction. (Ord. 2002-11, 8-6-2002)
5-1-80: PUBLIC NUISANCE:
   A.   Wherever any animal control officer or peace officer finds a public
nuisance to exist within the meaning of this chapter, they shall notify the
owner of the animal by registered mail or in person that the owner shall either
abate said nuisance within ten (10) days or show cause why said nuisance should
not be summarily abated.
   B.   If said nuisance is not abated and no show of cause is made, the animal
control officer may then issue a citation to the owner of the animal or may
impound the animal which is creating the nuisance. Any animal so impounded
shall be taken to the animal shelter designated by the city. (Ord. 2014-07, 10-
21-2014)
5-1-81 - 5-1-90: RESERVED:
(Ord. 2002-11, 8-6-2002; amd. Ord. 2014-07, 10-21-2014)
ARTICLE VI. WILD ANIMAL CONTROL
5-1-91: Prohibition
5-1-92: Wild Animal Defined
5-1-93: Notice Of Escape
5-1-94: Disposition
5-1-95: Release Of Wild Animals
5-1-91: PROHIBITION:
No person shall have, keep or maintain any wild animal or reptile unless
adequate provisions are made for its confinement and control to ensure the
maintenance of public peace, health and safety. (Ord. 2002-11, 8-6-2002)
5-1-92: WILD ANIMAL DEFINED:
A "wild animal" is an animal or reptile which is wild by nature and not
customarily domesticated in the city of Lemoore. This definition does not
include birds, small rodents or small, nonpoisonous reptiles commonly used for
educational or experimental purposes or for pets. (Ord. 2002-11, 8-6-2002)
5-1-93: NOTICE OF ESCAPE:
Any person keeping or maintaining a wild animal that escapes from its
confinement shall immediately notify the animal control officer of such escape.
(Ord. 2002-11, 8-6-2002)
5-1-94: DISPOSITION:
Wild animals found running loose may be impounded in accordance with the
provisions of section
5-1-68 of this chapter. Wild animals, when found to be at large and injuring,
damaging or threatening to injure or damage any person or property, may be
summarily destroyed without liability resulting to the city, its officers,
agents or employees. (Ord. 2002-11, 8-6-2002)
5-1-95: RELEASE OF WILD ANIMALS:
No person, organization, society, association or corporation shall import or
release into the city of Lemoore any wild animal, whether indigenous to the
city or not, without a permit from the animal control officer. The animal
released shall be identified by an indelible number tattooed on the animal and
filed with the animal control officer, and the person, organization, society,
association or corporation shall be responsible for damage inflicted by said
animal. (Ord. 2002-11, 8-6-2002)
CHAPTER 2
MISCELLANEOUS OFFENSES
SECTION:
5-2-1: Drinking Alcoholic Beverages In Public
5-2-2: Loitering
5-2-3: Discharge Of Firearms
5-2-4: Protection Of Police Canine Units
5-2-5: Selling Liquor At A Limited Duration Event In A Public Park
5-2-6: Graffiti
5-2-6-1:Intent And Purpose
5-2-6-2:Definitions
5-2-6-3:Prohibition Of Graffiti
5-2-6-4:Possession By Minors
5-2-6-5:Sale, Gift Of Aerosol Paint And Indelible Markers
5-2-6-6:Signs And Displays Of Aerosol Paint And Indelible Markers
5-2-6-7:Removal Of Graffiti
5-2-6-8:Reward
5-2-6-9:Criminal Action
5-2-6-10:Nonliability
5-2-6-11:Administrative Fee
5-2-7: Public Indecency
5-2-7-1:Indecent Conduct
5-2-7-2:Exceptions
5-2-7-3:Definitions
5-2-1: DRINKING ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES IN PUBLIC:
   A.   No person shall drink any beer, wine or other intoxicating beverage on
or within any street, sidewalk, alley, highway or playground within the city.
   B.   No person shall bring into any park or recreation area, or possess or
consume in any park or recreation area, any alcoholic beverage, without a valid
alcohol use permit.
      1.   Alcohol use permits for public park areas may be obtained, upon
request, from the director.
         a.    Applications for permits must be submitted forty eight (48)
hours before the desired date.
      2.   The possession and/or consumption of alcoholic beverages may be
authorized by the director for persons and groups within the below mentioned
park areas:
         a.    Heritage park pavilion.
         b.    Lions park pavilion on nonschool days.
         c.    Areas within public parks which may be reserved, such as
individual barbecue areas together with tables and benches.
      3.   Said permit shall not allow the use or consumption of any alcoholic
beverage after dusk, beyond twenty feet (20') of the reserved area, or in any
parking area.
         a.    For special occasions, the director may extend the permissible
hours of consumption after dusk.
      4.   The director may deny issuance of a permit in the event he or she
makes a finding adverse to the applicant with respect to any of the following
factors:
         a.    Failure to submit a complete application.
         b.    Making a false statement of fact required to be revealed in the
permit application.
         c.    The applicant has been convicted of a crime involving moral
turpitude.
         d.    The applicant has any prior revocation of facility use
privileges in the past year.
         e.    Failure to pay reservation/permit fees.
      5.   If a permit is denied, the director shall give the applicant prompt
written notice of such decision, including a statement of the specific reasons
for denial and the right to appeal the decision under the city's administrative
hearing procedures ordinance.
      6.   The rights granted by the permit may be revoked by any city police
officer and/or parks and recreation administrative staff if the permittee
causes a public inconvenience or annoyance.
   C.   Subsection A of this section shall not be deemed to make punishable any
act or acts which are prohibited by any statute of the state of California.
   D.   Any person or entity violating any of the provisions of this section
shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction thereof shall be
punished by a fine in a sum not exceeding five hundred dollars ($500.00) or by
imprisonment in the county jail for a period not exceeding six (6) months or by
both such fine and imprisonment. (Ord. 2008-10, 11-4-2008)
   E.   Notwithstanding subsection A of this section, the city council may
authorize the consumption of beer or wine, or both, during an event of limited
duration held in a park owned and operated by the city held pursuant to section
5-2-5 of this chapter. Such authorization shall be limited to an area within
the park designated by the city manager or chief of police. In connection with
the granting of any such authorization, the city council may impose such
reasonable conditions as it deems appropriate in each instance. (Ord. 8906, 9-
19-1989; amd. Ord. 2008-10, 11-4-2008)
5-2-2: LOITERING:
   A.   Definition Of Loitering: For purposes of this section, "loitering"
means entering and remaining on any premises, public way or other area
specified by this section under such circumstances that a reasonable person
would conclude that the person who has entered and remains on such premises,
public way or other area:
      1.   Does not have a purpose legitimately connected with the business,
activity or function of the premises, public way or other area; and
      2.   Does not have a bona fide intent to exercise a constitutional right;
and
      3.   Is causing a public inconvenience or annoyance.
   B.   Loitering Prohibited: It shall be unlawful and a violation of this
section if any person:
      1.   Loiters in or on any private property open for public use, public
sidewalks or other public ways; and
      2.   Such person refuses to comply with the lawful order of the police,
owner, occupant or agent thereof to leave the hereinbefore designated areas or,
after complying with such lawful order, such person returns within forty eight
(48) hours and resumes "loitering" as defined above. (1975 Code §7-6.01)
   C.   Penalties: Any person violating any of the provisions of this section
shall be guilty of an infraction and shall be punishable as set forth in
sections 19c and 19d of the Penal Code of the State of California. (1975 Code
§7-6.02)
5-2-3: DISCHARGE OF FIREARMS:
   A.   It shall be unlawful for any person to fire or discharge any pistol,
gun, airgun or firearm of any kind within the City except upon special permit
issued by the Chief of Police.
   B.   This Section shall not apply to any peace officer engaged in the
discharge of his duties or at an authorized or established shooting range.
   C.   Each violation shall be deemed to be a separate violation and
chargeable as such. (Ord. 9215, 12-15-92)
5-2-4: PROTECTION OF POLICE CANINE UNITS:
   A.   It is unlawful for any person to wilfully or maliciously torture,
tease, torment, beat, kick, strike, mutilate, injure, disable or kill any dog
used by the City Police Department or in the custody of the said Department or
its designated handlers while any such dog is in the performance of the
functions or duties of the Police Department or to wilfully interfere with any
such dog while it is being used in the performance of any of the functions or
duties of the Department.
   B.   This Section shall not be deemed to make punishable any act or acts
which are prohibited by any law of the State of California. (1975 Code §7-7.01)
   C.   Any person violating any of the provisions of this Section shall be
deemed guilty of an infraction. (1975 Code §7-7.02)
5-2-5: SELLING LIQUOR AT A LIMITED DURATION EVENT IN A PUBLIC PARK:
   A.   No person or entity shall sell, cause to be sold, trade, barter,
exchange, donate or otherwise give to any other person any beer, wine or other
intoxicating beverage within any park within the City.
   B.   Any person or entity violating any of the provisions of this Section
shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction thereof shall be
punished by a fine in a sum not exceeding five hundred dollars ($500.00) or by
imprisonment in the County jail for a period not exceeding six (6) months or by
both such fine and imprisonment.
   C.   Notwithstanding subsection A of this Section, the City Council may
authorize the selling of beer or wine, or both, during an event of limited
duration held in a park owned and operated by the City. Such authorization
shall be limited to an area within the park designated by the City Manager or
Chief of Police. In connection with the granting of any such authorization, the
City Council may impose such reasonable conditions as it deems appropriate in
each instance.
   D.   No permit shall be granted pursuant to subsection C of this Section
except upon written application therefor, which application shall indicate: 1)
the applicant's full, legal name; 2) the applicant's full residence or business
address; 3) the name and address of the park in which the event shall take
place; 4) the date or dates on which the event is proposed to take place; and
5) the hours during which the applicant proposes to conduct such activity or
activities. (Ord. 8906, 9-19-89)
5-2-6: GRAFFITI:
5-2-6-1: INTENT AND PURPOSE:
   A.   Section 53069.3 of the California Government Code authorizes cities and
counties to provide for the removal of graffiti and other inscribed material
from public and privately owned permanent structures located on public or
privately owned real property within such city or county. The City Council
finds that graffiti on public and privately owned property is obnoxious in that
it furthers blight, encourages acts of vandalism, depreciates the value of
surrounding properties, and is inconsistent with the City's property
maintenance goals and aesthetic standards.
   B.   The Council further finds and determines that unless graffiti is
quickly removed, other properties soon become the target of graffiti. The
existence of graffiti tends to begin community discontent and contempt for the
law. (Ord. 9308, 9-7-93)
5-2-6-2: DEFINITIONS:
The following words and phrases when used in this Chapter shall, for the
purpose of this Chapter, have the meanings respectively ascribed to them in
this Section:
GRAFFITI OR OTHER INSCRIPTION: Any unauthorized inscription, word, figure or
design that is indelibly marked, etched, scratched, drawn or painted on any
component of any building, structure or other facility, regardless of the
nature of the material of that component, structure, or facility.
INDELIBLE MARKER: Any marker, pen or similar implement containing anything
other than a solution which can be removed with water after it dries and having
a flat, pointed or angled writing surface of a width of four (4) millimeters or
greater.
PRESSURIZED CONTAINER: Any can, bottle, spray device or other mechanism
designed to propel liquid which contains ink, paint, dye or other similar
substance which is expelled under pressure, either through the use of aerosol
devices, pumps, or similar propulsion devices.
RESPONSIBLE ADULT: The parent or legal guardian of a minor under the age of
eighteen (18) years. (Ord. 9308, 9-7-93)
5-2-6-3: PROHIBITION OF GRAFFITI:
   A.   It shall be unlawful for any person to apply graffiti or other
inscription upon any wall, street, sidewalk, bridge, building, fence, gate,
structure, signs, or other facility within the City.
   B.   Persons convicted of violating this Section, in addition to any other
penalties imposed by this Code, shall pay restitution to the property owner. If
the violator is a minor, the parent or guardian shall be responsible for the
payment of restitution. (Ord. 9308, 9-7-93)
5-2-6-4: POSSESSION BY MINORS:
It shall be unlawful for any minor under the age of eighteen (18) years, not
accompanied by a responsible adult, to possess an aerosol or pressurized
container of paint or an indelible marker. (Ord. 9308, 9-7-93)
5-2-6-5: SALE, GIFT OR AEROSOL PAINT AND INDELIBLE MARKERS:
No person shall sell, offer to sell, cause to be sold, give or lend any aerosol
or pressurized container of paint or any indelible marker to any minor under
the age of eighteen (18) years. (Ord. 9308, 9-7-93)
5-2-6-6: SIGNS AND DISPLAYS OF AEROSOL PAINT AND INDELIBLE MARKERS:
   A.   Any person offering for sale pressurized containers shall restrict
access to those items from the public either: 1) by placing them behind a
locked counter, cabinet or other storage facility so that access to them cannot
be gained without their being unlocked by an authorized employee, agent or
other authorized representative of said person, or 2) by placing them in a
location where they shall be in constant, uninterrupted view of an authorized
employee, agent or other authorized representative of said person.
   B.   All persons offering for sale indelible markers shall keep such markers
in a location where they can be in constant view of the employee, agent or
other authorized representatives of the person selling the markers.
   C.   Persons engaged in the retail sale of aerosol or pressurized containers
of paint and/or indelible markers shall display, at the location of retail
sale, a sign clearly visible and legible to employees and customers reading:
      It is unlawful for any person to sell, lend or give to any minor under
the age of eighteen (18) years, an aerosol or pressurized container of paint or
an indelible marker.
   This sign will be displayed in addition to the sign required by section
594.1(c) of the California Penal Code. (Ord. 9308, 9-7-93)
5-2-6-7: REMOVAL OF GRAFFITI:
   A.   Graffiti on property owned by the City shall be removed as soon as
practicable.
   B.   Whenever graffiti exists upon the property owned by another public
agency, or a private property owner, the City may remove it with the consent of
the public entity or private property owner owning said property.
   C.   Private property owners shall remove graffiti from their property
within twenty (20) calendar days after notification to the property owners by
the city to remove such graffiti. Failure to remove the graffiti within the
time allowed shall constitute a violation of this chapter.
      1.   Notice to private property owners by the city shall be addressed to
the name and address as it appears on the last tax assessment roll or in other
records maintained by public agencies, by depositing a copy of the notice in
the United States mail, certified with full postage affixed, or personally
delivering a copy of the notice to the owner of the property. The service is
complete at the time of deposit in the mail or when personal device is
effectuated. The failure of any person to receive such notice shall not affect
the validity of any legal proceedings regarding removal of the graffiti.
Notification to property owners shall be under the direction of the department
of public works.
      2.   In the event that the owner fails to remove the graffiti after
notice has been sent, the city may, at its option, abate the graffiti as a
nuisance. (Ord. 9308, 9-7-1993)
5-2-6-8: REWARD:
The city may pay to any person who provides information which leads to the
arrest and conviction of any person who applies any drawing, inscription,
figure, or mark, commonly known as graffiti, to a surface of real or personal
property, a reward as established by council resolution. (Ord. 9308, 9-7-1993)
5-2-6-9: CRIMINAL ACTION:
   A.   The violation of any provision of this chapter may be prosecuted as
either an infraction or a misdemeanor at the discretion of the city attorney.
   B.   Community service in the city may be imposed in lieu of any penalties
and punishments where there has been a conviction or guilty or nolo contendere
plea to a misdemeanor.
   C.   If a minor is personally unable to pay any fine or restitution levied
for violating any provision of this chapter, the parent or legal guardian shall
be liable for the payment of this fine or restitution for any intentional acts
of the minor. (Ord. 9308, 9-7-1993)
5-2-6-10: NONLIABILITY:
Prior to entry onto private property by city personnel or authorized contractor
for the purpose of graffiti removal, a specified and assigned written consent
form shall be obtained from the private property owner or designated agent for
such authorization of entry and release of liability. (Ord. 9308, 9-7-1993)
5-2-6-11: ADMINISTRATIVE FEE:
As a part of any abatement, a ten percent (10%) administrative fee will be
charged against the party responsible for violation of any provision of this
chapter. (Ord. 9308, 9-7-1993)
5-2-7: PUBLIC INDECENCY:
5-2-7-1: INDECENT CONDUCT:
A person commits public indecency, a misdemeanor, who knowingly or
intentionally, in a public place:
   A.   Engages in sexual intercourse; or
   B.   Appears in a state of nudity; or
   C.   Fondles the genitals of himself, herself or another person. (Ord. 2000-
11, 11-21-2000)
5-2-7-2: EXCEPTIONS:
The prohibition set forth in subsection
5-2-7-1B of this chapter shall not apply to:
   A.   Any child under ten (10) years of age; or
   B.   Any individual exposing a breast in the process of breastfeeding an
infant under two (2) years of age. (Ord. 2000-11, 11-21-2000)
5-2-7-3: DEFINITIONS:
The following words and phrases when used in this section
5-2-7 shall have the meanings respectively ascribed to them in this section:
NUDITY: The showing of the human male or female genitals, pubic hair or
cleavage of the buttocks with less than a fully opaque covering; the showing of
the female breast with less than a fully opaque covering of any part of the
nipple; the exposure of any device, costume, or covering which gives the
appearance of or simulates the genitals, pubic hair, natal cleft, perineum anal
region or pubic hair region; or the exposure of any device worn as a cover over
the nipples and/or areola of the female breast, which device simulates and
gives the realistic appearance of nipples and/or areola.
PUBLIC PLACE: Includes all outdoor places owned by or open to the general
public, and all buildings and enclosed places owned by or open to the general
public, including such places of entertainment, taverns, restaurants, clubs,
theaters, dance halls, banquet halls, party rooms or halls limited to specific
members, restricted to adults or to patrons invited to attend, whether or not
an admission charge is levied. (Ord. 2000-11, 11-21-2000)
CHAPTER 3
MINORS
SECTION:
5-3-1: Curfew
5-3-1: CURFEW:
   A.   Age and Hour Restrictions: Every person under the age of eighteen (18)
years who loiters about the public streets, avenues, alleys, parks or other
public places between the hours of ten o'clock (10:00) P.M., Pacific standard
time, or eleven o'clock (11:00) P.M., daylight savings time, and the time of
sunrise of the following day when not accompanied by his parent or legal
guardian having legal custody and control of such person is guilty of a
misdemeanor. (1975 Code §7-3.01)
   B.   Definition of Loiter: The words "to loiter" as used in this Section are
defined to mean to idle, to loaf, to stand idly by or to walk, drive or ride
about aimlessly without lawful purpose. (1975 Code §7-3.02)
   C.   Responsibility of Parents and Guardians: Every parent, guardian or
other person having the legal care, custody or control of any person under the
age of eighteen (18) years who knowingly aids, abets or encourages such person
described in subsection A hereof to violate any provision of this Section is
guilty of a misdemeanor. (1975 Code §7-3.03)
   D.   Penalty: Any minor violating the provisions of subsection A hereof
shall be dealt with in accordance with juvenile court law and procedure. (1975
Code §7-3.04)
CHAPTER 4
FORTUNETELLING
SECTION:
5-4-1: Purpose
5-4-2: Definitions
5-4-3: Permit Required
5-4-4: Filing And Fee Provisions
5-4-5: Applications
5-4-6: Referral Of Application To Other Departments
5-4-7: Issuance Of Permit
5-4-8: Denial Of Permit
5-4-9: Term Of Permit
5-4-10: Sale, Transfer Or Change Of Location
5-4-11: Operating Requirements
5-4-12: Display Of Permit And Identification Cards
5-4-13: Employment Of Individuals Under The Age Of Eighteen Prohibited
5-4-14: Services And Rate Sign
5-4-15: Inspection Sign
5-4-16: Inspection
5-4-17: Employment Of Individuals Without Permits Unlawful
5-4-18: Suspension Or Revocation Of Permit
5-4-19: Appeal From Suspension Or Revocation
5-4-20: Reapplication Of Denied Or Revoked Permit
5-4-21: Exemptions
5-4-1: PURPOSE:
The purpose of this chapter is to protect the health, welfare and safety of the
public at large and patrons of fortunetelling establishments by ensuring that
the services provided by those establishments are, to the greatest extent
possible, free from fraud, corruption, vice, trickery and other criminal
influences. It is also the purpose of this chapter to minimize the impact upon
local neighborhoods caused by concentrations of fortunetelling establishments
in localized areas and to provide that such establishments are located in areas
designated to serve broader portions of the community. (Ord. 2002-10, 8-6-2002)
5-4-2: DEFINITIONS:
For the purpose of this chapter, certain terms are defined as follows:
APPLICANT: An individual who is required to file an application for a permit
under this chapter, including a fortuneteller, individual, owner, managing
partner, managing officer of a corporation, or any other operator, manager, or
employee of a fortunetelling establishment.
FOR PAY: A fee, reward, donation, loan or receipt of anything of value.
FORTUNETELLER: Any individual who, for any consideration whatsoever, engages in
the practice of "fortunetelling" as herein defined unless otherwise excepted.
FORTUNETELLING: Telling of fortunes, forecasting of futures, or furnishing of
any information by means of any occult, psychic power, faculty, force,
chiromancy, clairvoyance, clairaudience, cartomancy, psychology, psychometry,
phrenology, spirits, tea leaves or other such reading, mediumship, telepathy,
or other craft art, science, cards, talisman, charm, potion, magnetism,
magnetized article or substance, gypsy cunning or foresight, crystal gazing,
oriental mysteries, or magic, of any kind or nature, or other means beyond the
ordinary process of knowledge.
FORTUNETELLING ESTABLISHMENTS: Any establishment having a fixed place of
business where any individual or entity engages in, or carries on, or permits
to be engaged in or carried on any activities defined in this section. (Ord.
2002-10, 8-6-2002)
5-4-3: PERMIT REQUIRED:
   A.   It is unlawful and a misdemeanor for any individual to engage in,
conduct or carry on, or to permit to be engaged in, conducted or carried on, in
or upon any premises in the city, the operation of a fortunetelling
establishment without first having obtained a permit from the city as herein
required. A fortunetelling establishment permit shall include the right of the
individual permittee to practice fortunetelling at such establishment.
   B.   It is unlawful and a misdemeanor for any individual to act as a
fortuneteller in the city without first having obtained a permit from the city
as required.
   C.   It is unlawful and a misdemeanor for any individual to act as a
fortuneteller in other than a duly licensed fortunetelling establishment. (Ord.
2002-10, 8-6-2002)
5-4-4: FILING AND FEE PROVISIONS:
   A.   Every individual or entity that proposes to maintain, operate or
conduct a fortunetelling establishment in the city shall file an application
with the director of finance upon a form provided by the city, together with a
nonrefundable filing fee. Said filing fee shall be established by the city
council, and may be revised from time to time. This fee is separate from and in
addition to the business tax as required by section
3-1A-2-9 of this code.
   B.   A permit, when issued, shall state whether it is for a fortunetelling
establishment or for a fortuneteller.
   C.   Fortunetelling establishment applicant(s) must post, with the city
manager, a surety bond in the principal sum amount of ten thousand dollars
($10,000.00) executed by a good and sufficient corporate surety authorized to
do surety business in the state of California. This form of bond shall be
approved by the city attorney and shall be given to insure good faith and fair
dealing on the part of the applicant and as a guarantee of indemnity for any
and all loss, damage, theft, or other injury suffered by any patrons of the
applicant during the term of the permit. (Ord. 2002-10, 8-6-2002)
5-4-5: APPLICATIONS:
To obtain the permit required by this chapter, the applicant shall submit an
application to the city manager on a form provided by the city manager and
shall include such information as may be required by the chief of police to
complete his/her investigation. (Ord. 2002-10, 8-6-2002)
5-4-6: REFERRAL OF APPLICATION TO OTHER DEPARTMENTS:
   A.   All applications for permits for fortunetelling establishments shall be
referred by the city manager to the planning department, which shall make
written recommendations to the city manager concerning compliance with the laws
and ordinances that he/she administers and enforces.
   B.   All applications for permits for fortunetelling establishments or for
the practice of fortunetelling shall be referred by the city manager to the
chief of police, who shall cause an investigation to be conducted to verify the
facts contained in the application. To this effect, the chief of police shall
require the applicant to have his/her fingerprints taken and may require such
additional information as may be necessary to establish the identification of
the applicant. When the investigation is completed a report and recommendation
shall be made in writing to the city manager. (Ord. 2002-10, 8-6-2002)
5-4-7: ISSUANCE OF PERMIT:
The city manager shall issue the permit if, based upon the investigation, it is
found:
   A.   That the operation, as proposed by the applicant, would comply with all
applicable laws;
   B.   That the applicant has not been convicted in a court of competent
jurisdiction of any of the following offenses:
      1.   An offense involving use of force or violence upon another
individual,
      2.   An offense involving the element of fraud or theft,
      3.   A crime requiring registration under section 290 of the California
Penal Code, or of any violation of sections 311 through 311.7, 314, 315, 316,
318, or 647 (a), (b) or (d) of the California Penal Code,
      4.   A crime requiring registration under section 11590 of the California
Health and Safety Code, or violations of section 11360, 11366, 11377, 11352, or
11379 of the Health and Safety Code,
      5.   Any other crime involving moral turpitude,
      6.   Any of the above substantive offenses as defined in the laws of any
jurisdiction other than the state of California or as defined by any law of the
state of California in effect before the above sections were adopted;
   C.   That the applicant has not knowingly and with intent to deceive made
any false, misleading, or fraudulent statements of fact in the license
application or any other document required by the city in conjunction
therewith. (Ord. 2002-10, 8-6-2002)
5-4-8: DENIAL OF PERMIT:
   A.   If one or more of the findings set forth in section
5-4-7 of this chapter cannot be made, the permit shall be denied. In the event
of denial, notification and reasons for denial shall be communicated by the
city manager to the applicant. The denied applicant shall, upon submission of
his/her written request, have the right to receive a hearing before the city
council. If such a hearing is not requested within ten (10) days of the date of
notification of denial of permit by the city manager, the denial shall be
final.
   B.   Any individual who operates a fortunetelling establishment or practices
fortunetelling after denial of an application, is guilty of a misdemeanor.
(Ord. 2002-10, 8-6-2002)
5-4-9: TERM OF PERMIT:
Permits issued under the provisions of section
5-4-7 of this chapter shall be valid until January 1 of the next year and may
be renewable annually. Initial permit application fees will not be prorated;
however, application submitted on or after October 1 will be valid until
January 1 of the second successive year. All applications for renewal of
fortunetelling establishment permits and fortuneteller permits shall be filed
with the city manager on forms provided by the city.
   A.   An application for renewal of a fortunetelling establishment permit
shall be accompanied by a nonrefundable filing fee. The amount of the fee shall
be established by the city council.
   B.   An application for renewal of a fortuneteller permit shall be
accompanied by a nonrefundable filing fee. The amount of the fee shall be
established by the city council.
   C.   All applications for renewal shall be referred to the chief of police,
who may require an applicant to have his/her fingerprints taken and to furnish
such additional information as may be necessary to establish the identification
of the applicant. (Ord. 2002-10, 8-6-2002)
5-4-10: SALE, TRANSFER OR CHANGE OF LOCATION:
Upon the sale, transfer or relocation of a fortunetelling establishment, the
permit therefor shall be null and void; provided, however, that upon death or
incapacity of the permittee, a fortunetelling establishment may continue in
business for a reasonable period of time, not to exceed three (3) months, to
allow for an orderly transfer of the business. No permittee shall operate under
the name or conduct his/her business under any designation or at any location
not specified in the permit. Any fortuneteller may have a valid permit
transferred for use at any other fortunetelling establishment upon written
application to the city manager accompanied by a nonrefundable transfer fee.
Said transfer fee shall be established by the city council. (Ord. 2002-10, 8-6-
2002)
5-4-11: OPERATING REQUIREMENTS:
   A.   No fortunetelling establishment or any portion of a building in which
the fortunetelling establishment is located shall be used for residential or
sleeping purposes.
   B.   Fortunetelling establishments may be open for operation only between
the hours of seven o'clock (7:00) A.M. and twelve o'clock (12:00) midnight,
inclusive of each day, or as otherwise permitted by applicable zoning
regulations.
   C.   No fortunetelling establishment shall be located closer than one
thousand feet (1,000') to any other licensed fortunetelling establishment.
   D.   No fortunetelling establishment shall provide service of any kind to
any person under the age of eighteen (18) years. It shall be the responsibility
of the fortunetelling establishment to verify the customer's age by requiring
proper identification. (Ord. 2002-14, 11-5-2002)
5-4-12: DISPLAY OF PERMIT AND IDENTIFICATION CARDS:
   A.   Every fortunetelling establishment shall display at all times during
business hours the permit issued pursuant to the provisions of this chapter for
such establishment in a conspicuous place so that the same may be readily seen
by all individuals entering this establishment.
   B.   The city manager shall provide each fortuneteller, or other employee
granted a permit, with an identification card which shall contain a photograph
and the name and permit number of said fortuneteller or employee which must be
displayed at all times during the hours of employment. The chief of police or
his/her designee shall be responsible for providing the photograph for the
identification card. (Ord. 2002-10, 8-6-2002)
5-4-13: EMPLOYMENT OF INDIVIDUALS UNDER THE AGE OF EIGHTEEN PROHIBITED:
It is unlawful for any individual owner, managing partner, managing officer, or
other individual in charge of any fortunetelling establishment to employ any
individual who is not at least eighteen (18) years of age. (Ord. 2002-10, 8-6-
2002)
5-4-14: SERVICES AND RATE SIGN:
Every permittee of a fortunetelling establishment shall post a sign in a
conspicuous place so that the same may be readily seen by all individuals
entering the fortunetelling establishment, printed in bold letters not less
than one inch (1") in height, listing the services available and the rate to be
charged therefor. No services shall be performed and no sums shall be charged
for such services other than those shown on the sign posted. (Ord. 2002-10, 8-
6-2002)
5-4-15: INSPECTION SIGN:
Every permittee of a fortunetelling establishment shall post a sign in a
conspicuous place so that the same may be readily seen by all individuals
entering the fortunetelling establishment, printed in bold letters not less
than one inch (1") in height, with the following thereon:
   These premises are subject to inspection without notice by authorized
officials of the city.
(Ord. 2002-10, 8-6-2002)
5-4-16: INSPECTION:
The chief of police shall from time to time cause an inspection to be made of
the premises of each fortunetelling establishment in the city for the purpose
of determining compliance with the provisions of this chapter. (Ord. 2002-10,
8-6-2002)
5-4-17: EMPLOYMENT OF INDIVIDUALS WITHOUT PERMITS UNLAWFUL:
It is unlawful for any owner, operator, manager, or permittee in charge of or
in control of a fortunetelling establishment to employ any individual who is
not in possession of a valid, nonrevoked permit to practice fortunetelling
within a fortunetelling establishment. (Ord. 2002-10, 8-6-2002)
5-4-18: SUSPENSION OR REVOCATION OF PERMIT:
Any permit issued under this chapter shall be subject to suspension or
revocation by the director of finance for violation of any provision of this
chapter or for grounds that would warrant denial of the issuance of such permit
in the first instance. (Ord. 2002-10, 8-6-2002)
5-4-19: APPEAL FROM SUSPENSION OR REVOCATION:
   A.   Within ten (10) days after any denial, suspension, or revocation of a
permit, the individual aggrieved may appeal such action to the city manager by
filing a written request for a hearing with the city council. Upon the filing
of such a request, the city manager shall set a time and place for the hearing
and shall notify the appellant thereof. The hearing shall be set within thirty
(30) days after the request is filed. At the hearing, any individual may
present evidence in opposition to or in support of the appellants case. The
suspension or revocation of the permit shall be stayed pending a decision of
the city council on the appeal.
   B.   Any individual who operates a fortunetelling establishment or practices
fortunetelling after suspension of a permit or after revocation of a permit is
guilty of a misdemeanor. (Ord. 2002-10, 8-6-2002)
5-4-20: REAPPLICATION OF DENIED OR REVOKED PERMIT:
Any individual whose permit is denied or revoked may not apply for a permit to
operate a fortunetelling establishment or practice fortunetelling in the city
for a period of one year from the date of such revocation. (Ord. 2002-10, 8-6-
2002)
5-4-21: EXEMPTIONS:
   A.   The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to any individual solely
by reason that he/she is engaged in the business of entertaining the public by
demonstrations of mind reading, mental telepathy, thought conveyance, or the
giving of horoscopic readings, at public places and in the presence of and
within the hearing of other individuals and at which no questions are answered,
as part of such entertainment, except in a manner to permit all individuals
present at such public place to hear such answers.
   B.   No individual shall be required to pay any fee or take out any permit
for conducting or participating in any religious ceremony or service when such
individual holds a certificate of ordination as a minister, missionary,
hereinafter collectively referred to as a minister, medium, healer, or
clairvoyant, from any bona fide church or religious association maintaining a
church and holding regular services and having a creed or set of religious
principles that is recognized by all churches of like faith; provided that:
      1.   Except as provided in subsection B3 of this section, the fees,
gratuities, emolument and profits thereof shall be regularly accounted for and
paid solely to or for the benefit of the bona fide church or religious
association, as defined in this section.
      2.   The minister holding a certificate of ordination from such bona fide
church or religious association, as defined in this section, shall file with
the city manager a certified copy of the minister's certificate or ordination
with the minister's name, age, street address, and phone number in this city
where the activity set forth in this section is to be conducted.
      3.   Such bona fide church or religious association, as defined in this
section, may pay to its ministers a salary or compensation based upon a
percentage basis, pursuant to an agreement between the church and the minister
which is embodied in a resolution and transcribed in the minutes of such church
or religious association. (Ord. 2002-10, 8-6-2002)
CHAPTER 5
AUTOMOBILE TOWING
SECTION:
5-5-1: Automobile Towing Regulations
5-5-1: AUTOMOBILE TOWING REGULATIONS:
The Lemoore police department shall not use towing services of any towing
company that does not have an agreement with the city of Lemoore to provide
such service. The agreement between the city and the towing company providing
towing service shall require the towing company to comply with all California
highway patrol regulations and to provide adequate maintenance of towing
vehicles, a certificate of liability insurance, and to secure a business
license from the city of Lemoore. The agreement may also include other matters
required by the city council or city attorney. (Ord. 2009-06, 7-7-2009)
CHAPTER 6
NOISE
SECTION:
5-6-1: Purpose, Intent, And Applicability
5-6-2: Definitions
5-6-3: Enforcement, Violations, And Penalties
5-6-4: Sound Amplifiers
5-6-1: PURPOSE, INTENT, AND APPLICABILITY:
   A.   Purpose And Intent: The purpose and intent of this chapter is to
establish regulations and enforcement procedures for noise generated in the
city. In adopting this chapter, the city council declares that:
      1.   The making, creation, or maintenance of loud, unnecessary,
unnatural, or unusual noises which are prolonged, unusual, and unnatural in
their time, place, and use affect and are a detriment to the public health,
comfort, convenience, safety, welfare, and prosperity of the residents of the
city; and
      2.   The necessity in the public interest for the provisions and
prohibitions set forth in this chapter is declared as a matter of legislative
determination and public policy, and it is further declared that the provisions
of this chapter are in pursuance of, and for the purpose of, securing and
promoting the public health, comfort, convenience, safety, welfare, and
prosperity and the peace and quiet of the city and its inhabitants.
   B.   Applicability: This chapter shall be applicable to all uses and
activities conducted within the city except as provided in subsection C,
"Exceptions", of this section.
   C.   Exceptions: The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to the
following:
      1.   The operation of "emergency machinery", as defined in section
5-6-2, "Definitions", of this chapter.
      2.   The operation of an "emergency vehicle", as defined in section
5-6-2, "Definitions", of this chapter.
      3.   The conducting of "emergency work", as defined in section
5-6-2, "Definitions", of this chapter.
      4.   The operation on days other than Sunday of construction equipment or
of a construction vehicle, or the performance on days other than Sunday of
construction work, between the hours of seven o'clock (7:00) A.M. and eight
o'clock (8:00) P.M., provided that all required permits for the operation of
such construction equipment or construction vehicle or the performance of such
construction work have been obtained from the appropriate city department.
      5.   Activities conducted on the grounds of any public or private nursery
school, elementary school, intermediate school, secondary school, or college.
      6.   Outdoor gatherings, public dances, and shows, provided said events
are conducted pursuant to a license/permit issued by the city.
      7.   Activities conducted on any park or playground, provided such park
or playground is owned and operated by a public entity and the activity
complies with that public entity's noise regulations.
      8.   All mechanical devices, apparatus, or equipment which is utilized
for the protection or salvage of agricultural crops during periods of potential
or actual frost damage or other adverse weather conditions.
      9.   Mobile noise sources associated with agricultural operations
provided such operations do not take place between the hours of eight o'clock
(8:00) P.M. and seven o'clock (7:00) A.M. on weekdays, including Saturday, or
at any time on Sunday or a federal holiday.
      10.   Mobile noise sources associated with agricultural pest control
through pesticide application, provided that the application is made in
accordance with restricted material permits issued by or regulations enforced
by the agricultural commissioner.
      11.   Any activity to the extent regulation thereof has been preempted by
state or federal law.
      12.   Industrial uses and activities conducted in industrial zones.
      13.   Any act or activity prohibited by this code or any law of the state
of California or the United States. (Ord. 2012-01, 4-17-2012)
5-6-2: DEFINITIONS:
The following words, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings
ascribed to them in this section:
CHIEF: The chief of police of the city of Lemoore, or his/her designee.
DECIBEL (dB): A unit of sound level when the base of the logarithm is the tenth
root of ten (10) and the quantities concerned are proportional to power.
EMERGENCY MACHINERY: Machinery used or employed in an effort to protect,
provide, or restore safe conditions in the community or for the citizenry.
EMERGENCY VEHICLE: A vehicle used or employed to transport people or machinery
while engaged in an effort to protect, provide, or restore safe conditions in
the community or for the citizenry, or in the conduct of work by private or
public utilities when restoring utility service.
EMERGENCY WORK: Work or labor performed in an effort to protect, provide, or
restore safe conditions in the community or for the citizenry, or work by
private or public utilities when restoring utility service.
FREQUENCY: "Frequency" of a function periodic in time means the reciprocal of
the primitive period. The unit is the hertz and shall be specified.
HERTZ: The complete sequence of values of a periodic quantity which occurs
during a period.
LAWFULLY CONDUCTED ACTIVITIES: Any and all activities conducted by the city for
public health, safety, or welfare reasons.
LOUD OR UNRULY GATHERING: A gathering of two (2) or more persons on private
property or a permitted gathering of two (2) or more persons on public property
whose loud or unruly conduct constitutes a threat to public health, safety, or
general welfare. This term excludes incidents of domestic violence.
OFFENSIVE NOISE: Any sound or vibration caused by sound which occurs with such
intensity, frequency, or in such a manner as to annoy, disturb, injure, or
endanger the comfort, health, repose, peace, or safety of other persons within
the city, and includes, but is not limited to, noise produced by pets and
livestock, by an individual alone or by a group of people engaged in any
business, meeting, gathering, game, dance, or amusement, or by industrial
equipment, construction, motor vehicles, home appliances, electrical motors,
combustion engines, and any other noise producing objects. It shall
specifically mean any noise exceeding the ambient noise level at the property
line of any person offended thereby by more than ten decibels (10 dB).
PERIOD: The smallest increment of time for which the function repeats itself.
RESPONSIBLE PERSON(S): A person(s) with a right of possession in the property
on which a loud or unruly gathering is conducted, including, but not limited
to, an owner or tenant of the property if the gathering is on private property,
or a permittee if the gathering is a permitted gathering on public property, or
any person(s) accepting responsibility for such a gathering.
SOUND LEVEL: Sound level (noise level), in decibels (dB), is the sound pressure
level as measured with the "A" weighting and slow response by a sound level
meter.
SOUND LEVEL METER: An instrument including a microphone, an amplifier, an
output meter, and frequency weighting networks for the measurement of sound
levels which satisfies the pertinent specifications published by the American
National Standards Institute, New York, New York, in "American Standard Sound
Level Meters For Measurement Of Noise And Other Sounds", S1.4-1971, or the most
recent revision thereof.
SPECIAL SECURITY SERVICES: The provision of any police, fire, or other
emergency response to a loud or unruly gathering within twelve (12) hours of
the initial response as provided in this chapter. (Ord. 2012-01, 4-17-2012)
5-6-3: ENFORCEMENT, VIOLATIONS, AND PENALTIES:
   A.   Enforcement: The provisions of this chapter shall be enforced
consistent with the provision of title 1, chapter 4 of this code. Any city
official charged with enforcement of this chapter shall provide written notice
of violations to the party causing the violation, which shall include the
following information. A violation may be issued where no noise measurement has
been conducted if other documentation is prepared demonstrating a violation of
this chapter.
      1.   A description of the violation and citations of applicable
provisions being violated; and
      2.   A statement that the property owner may request an administrative
hearing on the matter, pursuant to the provisions of title 1, chapter 10 of
this code.
   B.   Noise Measurement: The following procedures shall be employed for
monitoring and evaluating noise in the community unless otherwise specified in
this chapter:
      1.   The evaluation shall be conducted any time of the day or night when
the offending noise source is being operated.
      2.   For outside measurements, the location selected for monitoring shall
be at a point at least ten feet (10') from any building, wall, or obstruction
(trees, bushes, etc.) whenever possible. In cases where no point on the
property line satisfies this criteria, readings will be taken as far as
possible from the nearest obstruction and such distance will be noted. For
inside measurements, the monitoring location shall be at least three feet (3')
from any wall.
      3.   The sound level meter shall be equipped with an omnidirectional
microphone.
      4.   No individual other than the operator shall be within ten feet (10')
of the sound level meter during the sample period.
      5.   The ambient noise level shall be determined with the offending noise
source not in operation, in the following manner:
         a.    Calibrate the sound level meter in accordance with the
manufacturer's instructions.
         b.    Set the sound level meter on the "A" weighted network at slow
response.
         c.    Without the offending noise source in operation, set the
microphone in a vertical position on the complaining party's property with the
microphone head approximately four feet (4') above the ground or floor. The
operator shall face the noise source and record the meter's instantaneous
response (reading) observed at fifteen (15) second intervals for a period of
fifteen (15) minutes. The arithmetical average (mean) reading is interpreted as
the ambient noise level of that sampling point.
      6.   With the offending noise source in operation, the operator shall
again record the instantaneous response at the same location at fifteen (15)
second intervals for a fifteen (15) minute period, or, for a noise source of
less than fifteen (15) minutes, the operator shall record the instantaneous
response at fifteen (15) second intervals for the time the offending noise
source is in operation. The arithmetical average (mean) response level recorded
while the offending noise source is in operation is interpreted as the
offending noise level.
   C.   Violations And Penalties:
      1.   No person shall make, cause, suffer, or permit to be made any
offensive noises that disturb or annoy people of ordinary sensitiveness or
which are so harsh or so prolonged or unnatural or unusual in their use, time,
or place as to cause physical discomfort to any person, and which are not
necessary in connection with any lawfully conducted activities.
      2.   No person shall, between the hours of eight o'clock (8:00) P.M. and
seven o'clock (7:00) A.M., make, cause, suffer, or permit to be made any
offensive noise within the vicinity of any building or place regularly used for
sleeping purposes.
      3.   Except as provided hereinafter, a violation of this chapter shall be
an infraction. Any person who violates any section of this chapter and is cited
for such a violation, and who within forty eight (48) hours after receiving
such a citation again violates the same section, shall be guilty of a
misdemeanor. A person is cited for a violation when he or she is issued and
signs an infraction or misdemeanor citation, or when he or she is arrested and
booked, or when a complaint is filed and the person is notified of the filing
of such a complaint. (Ord. 2012-01, 4-17-2012)
5-6-4: SOUND AMPLIFIERS:
   A.   Permit Required: No person shall use or cause to be used at any place
in the city whether on public property or private property any sound amplifying
device or equipment without first having secured a permit to do so from the
city.
      1.   Application For Permit: Any person desiring to obtain an
amplification permit shall submit a written application to the city. The
application shall describe in detail the activity proposed to be conducted for
which the sound amplification permit is requested, shall describe the
amplification equipment or devices to be used, shall set forth the steps that
the applicant will take to ensure that the sound amplification will not
unreasonably disturb other people within the vicinity, shall describe the
location where the sound amplification is to take place, shall describe the
neighborhood surrounding the location where the sound amplification is to take
place, shall include the name of the person who shall be responsible for
monitoring and ensuring compliance with the terms of any permit that is
granted, and shall include such other information as the city may require.
      2.   Granting Or Denial Of Permit: The chief may conditionally grant the
sound amplification permit only if: a) he/she determines that the sound
amplification will be conducted in such a manner as not to unreasonably disturb
neighbors or other persons in the vicinity of the sound amplification, and b)
that if actually implemented, the steps to be taken by the applicant to
minimize or avoid such disturbances will be adequate. In making the
determination whether to grant the permit, the chief may impose such conditions
as may be appropriate or necessary in order to protect the public peace and
safety.
      3.   Revocation Of Permit: Any permit granted pursuant to this section
shall be revocable at any time by the chief for a violation of the conditions
of the permit or a violation of this chapter.
      4.   Appeal: Any person aggrieved by any decision rendered by the chief
pursuant to this chapter shall have the right to appeal the decision to the
city council.
   B.   Exceptions To Permit Requirements: The sound amplifier permit required
by this chapter shall not be required for sound amplifying equipment or devices
under the following circumstances:
      1.   Sound amplification equipment or devices used on privately owned
property, whether indoors or outdoors, where the sound produced does not carry
beyond the property line or does not unreasonably disturb the person outside
the property where the sound is generated.
      2.   Sound amplification equipment or devices used in conformity with an
entertainment permit issued by the city.
      3.   Radios, record players, televisions, tape players, CD players, and
MP3 players, wherever used, when the volume does not exceed the level of normal
conversational speech.
      4.   Sound amplification equipment or devices used on emergency vehicles
or by government employees in connection with any activity undertaken for the
protection of the public welfare or safety.
      5.   When a permit has been issued by the city for sound amplification in
a city park.
   C.   Violations: Any person who uses or causes to be used any sound
amplifying equipment or device in violation of the provisions of this chapter,
whether by failing to obtain a permit when required or by failing to comply
with the terms and conditions of a permit when issued, is guilty of an
infraction. (Ord. 2012-01, 4-17-2012)
CHAPTER 2
MISCELLANEOUS OFFENSES
SECTION:
5-2-1: Drinking Alcoholic Beverages In Public
5-2-2: Loitering
5-2-3: Discharge Of Firearms
5-2-4: Protection Of Police Canine Units
5-2-5: Selling Liquor At A Limited Duration Event In A Public Park
5-2-6: Graffiti
5-2-6-1:    Intent And Purpose
5-2-6-2:    Definitions
5-2-6-3:    Prohibition Of Graffiti
5-2-6-4:    Possession By Minors
5-2-6-5:    Sale, Gift Of Aerosol Paint And Indelible Markers
5-2-6-6:    Signs And Displays Of Aerosol Paint And Indelible Markers
5-2-6-7:    Removal Of Graffiti
5-2-6-8:    Reward
5-2-6-9:    Criminal Action
5-2-6-10:    Nonliability
5-2-6-11:    Administrative Fee
5-2-7: Public Indecency
5-2-7-1:    Indecent Conduct
5-2-7-2:    Exceptions
5-2-7-3:    Definitions
5-2-1: DRINKING ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES IN PUBLIC:
   A.   No person shall drink any beer, wine or other intoxicating beverage on
or within any street, sidewalk, alley, highway or playground within the city.
   B.   No person shall bring into any park or recreation area, or possess or
consume in any park or recreation area, any alcoholic beverage, without a valid
alcohol use permit.
      1.   Alcohol use permits for public park areas may be obtained, upon
request, from the director.
         a.   Applications for permits must be submitted forty eight (48) hours
before the desired date.
      2.   The possession and/or consumption of alcoholic beverages may be
authorized by the director for persons and groups within the below mentioned
park areas:
         a.   Heritage park pavilion.
         b.   Lions park pavilion on nonschool days.
         c.   Areas within public parks which may be reserved, such as
individual barbecue areas together with tables and benches.
      3.   Said permit shall not allow the use or consumption of any alcoholic
beverage after dusk, beyond twenty feet (20') of the reserved area, or in any
parking area.
         a.   For special occasions, the director may extend the permissible
hours of consumption after dusk.
      4.   The director may deny issuance of a permit in the event he or she
makes a finding adverse to the applicant with respect to any of the following
factors:
         a.   Failure to submit a complete application.
         b.   Making a false statement of fact required to be revealed in the
permit application.
         c.   The applicant has been convicted of a crime involving moral
turpitude.
         d.   The applicant has any prior revocation of facility use privileges
in the past year.
         e.   Failure to pay reservation/permit fees.
      5.   If a permit is denied, the director shall give the applicant prompt
written notice of such decision, including a statement of the specific reasons
for denial and the right to appeal the decision under the city's administrative
hearing procedures ordinance.
      6.   The rights granted by the permit may be revoked by any city police
officer and/or parks and recreation administrative staff if the permittee
causes a public inconvenience or annoyance.
   C.   Subsection A of this section shall not be deemed to make punishable any
act or acts which are prohibited by any statute of the state of California.
   D.   Any person or entity violating any of the provisions of this section
shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction thereof shall be
punished by a fine in a sum not exceeding five hundred dollars ($500.00) or by
imprisonment in the county jail for a period not exceeding six (6) months or by
both such fine and imprisonment. (Ord. 2008-10, 11-4-2008)
   E.   Notwithstanding subsection A of this section, the city council may
authorize the consumption of beer or wine, or both, during an event of limited
duration held in a park owned and operated by the city held pursuant to section
5-2-5 of this chapter. Such authorization shall be limited to an area within
the park designated by the city manager or chief of police. In connection with
the granting of any such authorization, the city council may impose such
reasonable conditions as it deems appropriate in each instance. (Ord. 8906, 9-
19-1989; amd. Ord. 2008-10, 11-4-2008)
5-2-2: LOITERING:
   A.   Definition Of Loitering: For purposes of this section, "loitering"
means entering and remaining on any premises, public way or other area
specified by this section under such circumstances that a reasonable person
would conclude that the person who has entered and remains on such premises,
public way or other area:
      1.   Does not have a purpose legitimately connected with the business,
activity or function of the premises, public way or other area; and
      2.   Does not have a bona fide intent to exercise a constitutional right;
and
      3.   Is causing a public inconvenience or annoyance.
   B.   Loitering Prohibited: It shall be unlawful and a violation of this
section if any person:
      1.   Loiters in or on any private property open for public use, public
sidewalks or other public ways; and
      2.   Such person refuses to comply with the lawful order of the police,
owner, occupant or agent thereof to leave the hereinbefore designated areas or,
after complying with such lawful order, such person returns within forty eight
(48) hours and resumes "loitering" as defined above. (1975 Code §7-6.01)
   C.   Penalties: Any person violating any of the provisions of this section
shall be guilty of an infraction and shall be punishable as set forth in
sections 19c and 19d of the Penal Code of the State of California. (1975 Code
§7-6.02)
5-2-3: DISCHARGE OF FIREARMS:
   A.   It shall be unlawful for any person to fire or discharge any pistol,
gun, airgun or firearm of any kind within the City except upon special permit
issued by the Chief of Police.
   B.   This Section shall not apply to any peace officer engaged in the
discharge of his duties or at an authorized or established shooting range.
   C.   Each violation shall be deemed to be a separate violation and
chargeable as such. (Ord. 9215, 12-15-92)
5-2-4: PROTECTION OF POLICE CANINE UNITS:
   A.   It is unlawful for any person to wilfully or maliciously torture,
tease, torment, beat, kick, strike, mutilate, injure, disable or kill any dog
used by the City Police Department or in the custody of the said Department or
its designated handlers while any such dog is in the performance of the
functions or duties of the Police Department or to wilfully interfere with any
such dog while it is being used in the performance of any of the functions or
duties of the Department.
   B.   This Section shall not be deemed to make punishable any act or acts
which are prohibited by any law of the State of California. (1975 Code §7-7.01)
   C.   Any person violating any of the provisions of this Section shall be
deemed guilty of an infraction. (1975 Code §7-7.02)
5-2-5: SELLING LIQUOR AT A LIMITED DURATION EVENT IN A PUBLIC PARK:
   A.   No person or entity shall sell, cause to be sold, trade, barter,
exchange, donate or otherwise give to any other person any beer, wine or other
intoxicating beverage within any park within the City.
   B.   Any person or entity violating any of the provisions of this Section
shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction thereof shall be
punished by a fine in a sum not exceeding five hundred dollars ($500.00) or by
imprisonment in the County jail for a period not exceeding six (6) months or by
both such fine and imprisonment.
   C.   Notwithstanding subsection A of this Section, the City Council may
authorize the selling of beer or wine, or both, during an event of limited
duration held in a park owned and operated by the City. Such authorization
shall be limited to an area within the park designated by the City Manager or
Chief of Police. In connection with the granting of any such authorization, the
City Council may impose such reasonable conditions as it deems appropriate in
each instance.
   D.   No permit shall be granted pursuant to subsection C of this Section
except upon written application therefor, which application shall indicate: 1)
the applicant's full, legal name; 2) the applicant's full residence or business
address; 3) the name and address of the park in which the event shall take
place; 4) the date or dates on which the event is proposed to take place; and
5) the hours during which the applicant proposes to conduct such activity or
activities. (Ord. 8906, 9-19-89)
5-2-6: GRAFFITI:
5-2-6-1: INTENT AND PURPOSE:
   A.   Section 53069.3 of the California Government Code authorizes cities and
counties to provide for the removal of graffiti and other inscribed material
from public and privately owned permanent structures located on public or
privately owned real property within such city or county. The City Council
finds that graffiti on public and privately owned property is obnoxious in that
it furthers blight, encourages acts of vandalism, depreciates the value of
surrounding properties, and is inconsistent with the City's property
maintenance goals and aesthetic standards.
   B.   The Council further finds and determines that unless graffiti is
quickly removed, other properties soon become the target of graffiti. The
existence of graffiti tends to begin community discontent and contempt for the
law. (Ord. 9308, 9-7-93)
5-2-6-2: DEFINITIONS:
The following words and phrases when used in this Chapter shall, for the
purpose of this Chapter, have the meanings respectively ascribed to them in
this Section:
GRAFFITI OR OTHER INSCRIPTION: Any unauthorized inscription, word, figure or
design that is indelibly marked, etched, scratched, drawn or painted on any
component of any building, structure or other facility, regardless of the
nature of the material of that component, structure, or facility.
INDELIBLE MARKER: Any marker, pen or similar implement containing anything
other than a solution which can be removed with water after it dries and having
a flat, pointed or angled writing surface of a width of four (4) millimeters or
greater.
PRESSURIZED CONTAINER: Any can, bottle, spray device or other mechanism
designed to propel liquid which contains ink, paint, dye or other similar
substance which is expelled under pressure, either through the use of aerosol
devices, pumps, or similar propulsion devices.
RESPONSIBLE ADULT: The parent or legal guardian of a minor under the age of
eighteen (18) years. (Ord. 9308, 9-7-93)
5-2-6-3: PROHIBITION OF GRAFFITI:
   A.   It shall be unlawful for any person to apply graffiti or other
inscription upon any wall, street, sidewalk, bridge, building, fence, gate,
structure, signs, or other facility within the City.
   B.   Persons convicted of violating this Section, in addition to any other
penalties imposed by this Code, shall pay restitution to the property owner. If
the violator is a minor, the parent or guardian shall be responsible for the
payment of restitution. (Ord. 9308, 9-7-93)
5-2-6-4: POSSESSION BY MINORS:
It shall be unlawful for any minor under the age of eighteen (18) years, not
accompanied by a responsible adult, to possess an aerosol or pressurized
container of paint or an indelible marker. (Ord. 9308, 9-7-93)
5-2-6-5: SALE, GIFT OR AEROSOL PAINT AND INDELIBLE MARKERS:
No person shall sell, offer to sell, cause to be sold, give or lend any aerosol
or pressurized container of paint or any indelible marker to any minor under
the age of eighteen (18) years. (Ord. 9308, 9-7-93)
5-2-6-6: SIGNS AND DISPLAYS OF AEROSOL PAINT AND INDELIBLE MARKERS:
   A.   Any person offering for sale pressurized containers shall restrict
access to those items from the public either: 1) by placing them behind a
locked counter, cabinet or other storage facility so that access to them cannot
be gained without their being unlocked by an authorized employee, agent or
other authorized representative of said person, or 2) by placing them in a
location where they shall be in constant, uninterrupted view of an authorized
employee, agent or other authorized representative of said person.
   B.   All persons offering for sale indelible markers shall keep such markers
in a location where they can be in constant view of the employee, agent or
other authorized representatives of the person selling the markers.
   C.   Persons engaged in the retail sale of aerosol or pressurized containers
of paint and/or indelible markers shall display, at the location of retail
sale, a sign clearly visible and legible to employees and customers reading:
   It is unlawful for any person to sell, lend or give to any minor under the
age of eighteen (18) years, an aerosol or pressurized container of paint or an
indelible marker.
   This sign will be displayed in addition to the sign required by section
594.1(c) of the California Penal Code. (Ord. 9308, 9-7-93)
5-2-6-7: REMOVAL OF GRAFFITI:
   A.   Graffiti on property owned by the City shall be removed as soon as
practicable.
   B.   Whenever graffiti exists upon the property owned by another public
agency, or a private property owner, the City may remove it with the consent of
the public entity or private property owner owning said property.
   C.   Private property owners shall remove graffiti from their property
within twenty (20) calendar days after notification to the property owners by
the city to remove such graffiti. Failure to remove the graffiti within the
time allowed shall constitute a violation of this chapter.
      1.   Notice to private property owners by the city shall be addressed to
the name and address as it appears on the last tax assessment roll or in other
records maintained by public agencies, by depositing a copy of the notice in
the United States mail, certified with full postage affixed, or personally
delivering a copy of the notice to the owner of the property. The service is
complete at the time of deposit in the mail or when personal device is
effectuated. The failure of any person to receive such notice shall not affect
the validity of any legal proceedings regarding removal of the graffiti.
Notification to property owners shall be under the direction of the department
of public works.
      2.   In the event that the owner fails to remove the graffiti after
notice has been sent, the city may, at its option, abate the graffiti as a
nuisance. (Ord. 9308, 9-7-1993)
5-2-6-8: REWARD:
The city may pay to any person who provides information which leads to the
arrest and conviction of any person who applies any drawing, inscription,
figure, or mark, commonly known as graffiti, to a surface of real or personal
property, a reward as established by council resolution. (Ord. 9308, 9-7-1993)
5-2-6-9: CRIMINAL ACTION:
   A.   The violation of any provision of this chapter may be prosecuted as
either an infraction or a misdemeanor at the discretion of the city attorney.
   B.   Community service in the city may be imposed in lieu of any penalties
and punishments where there has been a conviction or guilty or nolo contendere
plea to a misdemeanor.
   C.   If a minor is personally unable to pay any fine or restitution levied
for violating any provision of this chapter, the parent or legal guardian shall
be liable for the payment of this fine or restitution for any intentional acts
of the minor. (Ord. 9308, 9-7-1993)
5-2-6-10: NONLIABILITY:
Prior to entry onto private property by city personnel or authorized contractor
for the purpose of graffiti removal, a specified and assigned written consent
form shall be obtained from the private property owner or designated agent for
such authorization of entry and release of liability. (Ord. 9308, 9-7-1993)
5-2-6-11: ADMINISTRATIVE FEE:
As a part of any abatement, a ten percent (10%) administrative fee will be
charged against the party responsible for violation of any provision of this
chapter. (Ord. 9308, 9-7-1993)
5-2-7: PUBLIC INDECENCY:
5-2-7-1: INDECENT CONDUCT:
A person commits public indecency, a misdemeanor, who knowingly or
intentionally, in a public place:
   A.   Engages in sexual intercourse; or
   B.   Appears in a state of nudity; or
   C.   Fondles the genitals of himself, herself or another person. (Ord. 2000-
11, 11-21-2000)
5-2-7-2: EXCEPTIONS:
The prohibition set forth in subsection
5-2-7-1B of this chapter shall not apply to:
   A.   Any child under ten (10) years of age; or
   B.   Any individual exposing a breast in the process of breastfeeding an
infant under two (2) years of age. (Ord. 2000-11, 11-21-2000)
5-2-7-3: DEFINITIONS:
The following words and phrases when used in this section
5-2-7 shall have the meanings respectively ascribed to them in this section:
NUDITY: The showing of the human male or female genitals, pubic hair or
cleavage of the buttocks with less than a fully opaque covering; the showing of
the female breast with less than a fully opaque covering of any part of the
nipple; the exposure of any device, costume, or covering which gives the
appearance of or simulates the genitals, pubic hair, natal cleft, perineum anal
region or pubic hair region; or the exposure of any device worn as a cover over
the nipples and/or areola of the female breast, which device simulates and
gives the realistic appearance of nipples and/or areola.
PUBLIC PLACE: Includes all outdoor places owned by or open to the general
public, and all buildings and enclosed places owned by or open to the general
public, including such places of entertainment, taverns, restaurants, clubs,
theaters, dance halls, banquet halls, party rooms or halls limited to specific
members, restricted to adults or to patrons invited to attend, whether or not
an admission charge is levied. (Ord. 2000-11, 11-21-2000)
CHAPTER 3
MINORS
SECTION:
5-3-1: Curfew
5-3-1: CURFEW:
   A.   Age and Hour Restrictions: Every person under the age of eighteen (18)
years who loiters about the public streets, avenues, alleys, parks or other
public places between the hours of ten o'clock (10:00) P.M., Pacific standard
time, or eleven o'clock (11:00) P.M., daylight savings time, and the time of
sunrise of the following day when not accompanied by his parent or legal
guardian having legal custody and control of such person is guilty of a
misdemeanor. (1975 Code §7-3.01)
   B.   Definition of Loiter: The words "to loiter" as used in this Section are
defined to mean to idle, to loaf, to stand idly by or to walk, drive or ride
about aimlessly without lawful purpose. (1975 Code §7-3.02)
   C.   Responsibility of Parents and Guardians: Every parent, guardian or
other person having the legal care, custody or control of any person under the
age of eighteen (18) years who knowingly aids, abets or encourages such person
described in subsection A hereof to violate any provision of this Section is
guilty of a misdemeanor. (1975 Code §7-3.03)
   D.   Penalty: Any minor violating the provisions of subsection A hereof
shall be dealt with in accordance with juvenile court law and procedure. (1975
Code §7-3.04)
CHAPTER 4
FORTUNETELLING
SECTION:
5-4-1: Purpose
5-4-2: Definitions
5-4-3: Permit Required
5-4-4: Filing And Fee Provisions
5-4-5: Applications
5-4-6: Referral Of Application To Other Departments
5-4-7: Issuance Of Permit
5-4-8: Denial Of Permit
5-4-9: Term Of Permit
5-4-10: Sale, Transfer Or Change Of Location
5-4-11: Operating Requirements
5-4-12: Display Of Permit And Identification Cards
5-4-13: Employment Of Individuals Under The Age Of Eighteen Prohibited
5-4-14: Services And Rate Sign
5-4-15: Inspection Sign
5-4-16: Inspection
5-4-17: Employment Of Individuals Without Permits Unlawful
5-4-18: Suspension Or Revocation Of Permit
5-4-19: Appeal From Suspension Or Revocation
5-4-20: Reapplication Of Denied Or Revoked Permit
5-4-21: Exemptions
5-4-1: PURPOSE:
The purpose of this chapter is to protect the health, welfare and safety of the
public at large and patrons of fortunetelling establishments by ensuring that
the services provided by those establishments are, to the greatest extent
possible, free from fraud, corruption, vice, trickery and other criminal
influences. It is also the purpose of this chapter to minimize the impact upon
local neighborhoods caused by concentrations of fortunetelling establishments
in localized areas and to provide that such establishments are located in areas
designated to serve broader portions of the community. (Ord. 2002-10, 8-6-2002)
5-4-2: DEFINITIONS:
For the purpose of this chapter, certain terms are defined as follows:
APPLICANT: An individual who is required to file an application for a permit
under this chapter, including a fortuneteller, individual, owner, managing
partner, managing officer of a corporation, or any other operator, manager, or
employee of a fortunetelling establishment.
FOR PAY: A fee, reward, donation, loan or receipt of anything of value.
FORTUNETELLER: Any individual who, for any consideration whatsoever, engages in
the practice of "fortunetelling" as herein defined unless otherwise excepted.
FORTUNETELLING: Telling of fortunes, forecasting of futures, or furnishing of
any information by means of any occult, psychic power, faculty, force,
chiromancy, clairvoyance, clairaudience, cartomancy, psychology, psychometry,
phrenology, spirits, tea leaves or other such reading, mediumship, telepathy,
or other craft art, science, cards, talisman, charm, potion, magnetism,
magnetized article or substance, gypsy cunning or foresight, crystal gazing,
oriental mysteries, or magic, of any kind or nature, or other means beyond the
ordinary process of knowledge.
FORTUNETELLING ESTABLISHMENTS: Any establishment having a fixed place of
business where any individual or entity engages in, or carries on, or permits
to be engaged in or carried on any activities defined in this section. (Ord.
2002-10, 8-6-2002)
5-4-3: PERMIT REQUIRED:
   A.   It is unlawful and a misdemeanor for any individual to engage in,
conduct or carry on, or to permit to be engaged in, conducted or carried on, in
or upon any premises in the city, the operation of a fortunetelling
establishment without first having obtained a permit from the city as herein
required. A fortunetelling establishment permit shall include the right of the
individual permittee to practice fortunetelling at such establishment.
   B.   It is unlawful and a misdemeanor for any individual to act as a
fortuneteller in the city without first having obtained a permit from the city
as required.
   C.   It is unlawful and a misdemeanor for any individual to act as a
fortuneteller in other than a duly licensed fortunetelling establishment. (Ord.
2002-10, 8-6-2002)
5-4-4: FILING AND FEE PROVISIONS:
   A.   Every individual or entity that proposes to maintain, operate or
conduct a fortunetelling establishment in the city shall file an application
with the director of finance upon a form provided by the city, together with a
nonrefundable filing fee. Said filing fee shall be established by the city
council, and may be revised from time to time. This fee is separate from and in
addition to the business tax as required by section
3-1A-2-9 of this code.
   B.   A permit, when issued, shall state whether it is for a fortunetelling
establishment or for a fortuneteller.
   C.   Fortunetelling establishment applicant(s) must post, with the city
manager, a surety bond in the principal sum amount of ten thousand dollars
($10,000.00) executed by a good and sufficient corporate surety authorized to
do surety business in the state of California. This form of bond shall be
approved by the city attorney and shall be given to insure good faith and fair
dealing on the part of the applicant and as a guarantee of indemnity for any
and all loss, damage, theft, or other injury suffered by any patrons of the
applicant during the term of the permit. (Ord. 2002-10, 8-6-2002)
5-4-5: APPLICATIONS:
To obtain the permit required by this chapter, the applicant shall submit an
application to the city manager on a form provided by the city manager and
shall include such information as may be required by the chief of police to
complete his/her investigation. (Ord. 2002-10, 8-6-2002)
5-4-6: REFERRAL OF APPLICATION TO OTHER DEPARTMENTS:
   A.   All applications for permits for fortunetelling establishments shall be
referred by the city manager to the planning department, which shall make
written recommendations to the city manager concerning compliance with the laws
and ordinances that he/she administers and enforces.
   B.   All applications for permits for fortunetelling establishments or for
the practice of fortunetelling shall be referred by the city manager to the
chief of police, who shall cause an investigation to be conducted to verify the
facts contained in the application. To this effect, the chief of police shall
require the applicant to have his/her fingerprints taken and may require such
additional information as may be necessary to establish the identification of
the applicant. When the investigation is completed a report and recommendation
shall be made in writing to the city manager. (Ord. 2002-10, 8-6-2002)
5-4-7: ISSUANCE OF PERMIT:
The city manager shall issue the permit if, based upon the investigation, it is
found:
   A.   That the operation, as proposed by the applicant, would comply with all
applicable laws;
   B.   That the applicant has not been convicted in a court of competent
jurisdiction of any of the following offenses:
      1.   An offense involving use of force or violence upon another
individual,
      2.   An offense involving the element of fraud or theft,
      3.   A crime requiring registration under section 290 of the California
Penal Code, or of any violation of sections 311 through 311.7, 314, 315, 316,
318, or 647 (a), (b) or (d) of the California Penal Code,
      4.   A crime requiring registration under section 11590 of the California
Health and Safety Code, or violations of section 11360, 11366, 11377, 11352, or
11379 of the Health and Safety Code,
      5.   Any other crime involving moral turpitude,
      6.   Any of the above substantive offenses as defined in the laws of any
jurisdiction other than the state of California or as defined by any law of the
state of California in effect before the above sections were adopted;
   C.   That the applicant has not knowingly and with intent to deceive made
any false, misleading, or fraudulent statements of fact in the license
application or any other document required by the city in conjunction
therewith. (Ord. 2002-10, 8-6-2002)
5-4-8: DENIAL OF PERMIT:
   A.   If one or more of the findings set forth in section
5-4-7 of this chapter cannot be made, the permit shall be denied. In the event
of denial, notification and reasons for denial shall be communicated by the
city manager to the applicant. The denied applicant shall, upon submission of
his/her written request, have the right to receive a hearing before the city
council. If such a hearing is not requested within ten (10) days of the date of
notification of denial of permit by the city manager, the denial shall be
final.
   B.   Any individual who operates a fortunetelling establishment or practices
fortunetelling after denial of an application, is guilty of a misdemeanor.
(Ord. 2002-10, 8-6-2002)
5-4-9: TERM OF PERMIT:
Permits issued under the provisions of section
5-4-7 of this chapter shall be valid until January 1 of the next year and may
be renewable annually. Initial permit application fees will not be prorated;
however, application submitted on or after October 1 will be valid until
January 1 of the second successive year. All applications for renewal of
fortunetelling establishment permits and fortuneteller permits shall be filed
with the city manager on forms provided by the city.
   A.   An application for renewal of a fortunetelling establishment permit
shall be accompanied by a nonrefundable filing fee. The amount of the fee shall
be established by the city council.
   B.   An application for renewal of a fortuneteller permit shall be
accompanied by a nonrefundable filing fee. The amount of the fee shall be
established by the city council.
   C.   All applications for renewal shall be referred to the chief of police,
who may require an applicant to have his/her fingerprints taken and to furnish
such additional information as may be necessary to establish the identification
of the applicant. (Ord. 2002-10, 8-6-2002)
5-4-10: SALE, TRANSFER OR CHANGE OF LOCATION:
Upon the sale, transfer or relocation of a fortunetelling establishment, the
permit therefor shall be null and void; provided, however, that upon death or
incapacity of the permittee, a fortunetelling establishment may continue in
business for a reasonable period of time, not to exceed three (3) months, to
allow for an orderly transfer of the business. No permittee shall operate under
the name or conduct his/her business under any designation or at any location
not specified in the permit. Any fortuneteller may have a valid permit
transferred for use at any other fortunetelling establishment upon written
application to the city manager accompanied by a nonrefundable transfer fee.
Said transfer fee shall be established by the city council. (Ord. 2002-10, 8-6-
2002)
5-4-11: OPERATING REQUIREMENTS:
   A.   No fortunetelling establishment or any portion of a building in which
the fortunetelling establishment is located shall be used for residential or
sleeping purposes.
   B.   Fortunetelling establishments may be open for operation only between
the hours of seven o'clock (7:00) A.M. and twelve o'clock (12:00) midnight,
inclusive of each day, or as otherwise permitted by applicable zoning
regulations.
   C.   No fortunetelling establishment shall be located closer than one
thousand feet (1,000') to any other licensed fortunetelling establishment.
   D.   No fortunetelling establishment shall provide service of any kind to
any person under the age of eighteen (18) years. It shall be the responsibility
of the fortunetelling establishment to verify the customer's age by requiring
proper identification. (Ord. 2002-14, 11-5-2002)
5-4-12: DISPLAY OF PERMIT AND IDENTIFICATION CARDS:
   A.   Every fortunetelling establishment shall display at all times during
business hours the permit issued pursuant to the provisions of this chapter for
such establishment in a conspicuous place so that the same may be readily seen
by all individuals entering this establishment.
   B.   The city manager shall provide each fortuneteller, or other employee
granted a permit, with an identification card which shall contain a photograph
and the name and permit number of said fortuneteller or employee which must be
displayed at all times during the hours of employment. The chief of police or
his/her designee shall be responsible for providing the photograph for the
identification card. (Ord. 2002-10, 8-6-2002)
5-4-13: EMPLOYMENT OF INDIVIDUALS UNDER THE AGE OF EIGHTEEN PROHIBITED:
It is unlawful for any individual owner, managing partner, managing officer, or
other individual in charge of any fortunetelling establishment to employ any
individual who is not at least eighteen (18) years of age. (Ord. 2002-10, 8-6-
2002)
5-4-14: SERVICES AND RATE SIGN:
Every permittee of a fortunetelling establishment shall post a sign in a
conspicuous place so that the same may be readily seen by all individuals
entering the fortunetelling establishment, printed in bold letters not less
than one inch (1") in height, listing the services available and the rate to be
charged therefor. No services shall be performed and no sums shall be charged
for such services other than those shown on the sign posted. (Ord. 2002-10, 8-
6-2002)
5-4-15: INSPECTION SIGN:
Every permittee of a fortunetelling establishment shall post a sign in a
conspicuous place so that the same may be readily seen by all individuals
entering the fortunetelling establishment, printed in bold letters not less
than one inch (1") in height, with the following thereon:
These premises are subject to inspection without notice by authorized officials
of the city.
(Ord. 2002-10, 8-6-2002)
5-4-16: INSPECTION:
The chief of police shall from time to time cause an inspection to be made of
the premises of each fortunetelling establishment in the city for the purpose
of determining compliance with the provisions of this chapter. (Ord. 2002-10,
8-6-2002)
5-4-17: EMPLOYMENT OF INDIVIDUALS WITHOUT PERMITS UNLAWFUL:
It is unlawful for any owner, operator, manager, or permittee in charge of or
in control of a fortunetelling establishment to employ any individual who is
not in possession of a valid, nonrevoked permit to practice fortunetelling
within a fortunetelling establishment. (Ord. 2002-10, 8-6-2002)
5-4-18: SUSPENSION OR REVOCATION OF PERMIT:
Any permit issued under this chapter shall be subject to suspension or
revocation by the director of finance for violation of any provision of this
chapter or for grounds that would warrant denial of the issuance of such permit
in the first instance. (Ord. 2002-10, 8-6-2002)
5-4-19: APPEAL FROM SUSPENSION OR REVOCATION:
   A.   Within ten (10) days after any denial, suspension, or revocation of a
permit, the individual aggrieved may appeal such action to the city manager by
filing a written request for a hearing with the city council. Upon the filing
of such a request, the city manager shall set a time and place for the hearing
and shall notify the appellant thereof. The hearing shall be set within thirty
(30) days after the request is filed. At the hearing, any individual may
present evidence in opposition to or in support of the appellants case. The
suspension or revocation of the permit shall be stayed pending a decision of
the city council on the appeal.
   B.   Any individual who operates a fortunetelling establishment or practices
fortunetelling after suspension of a permit or after revocation of a permit is
guilty of a misdemeanor. (Ord. 2002-10, 8-6-2002)
5-4-20: REAPPLICATION OF DENIED OR REVOKED PERMIT:
Any individual whose permit is denied or revoked may not apply for a permit to
operate a fortunetelling establishment or practice fortunetelling in the city
for a period of one year from the date of such revocation. (Ord. 2002-10, 8-6-
2002)
5-4-21: EXEMPTIONS:
   A.   The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to any individual solely
by reason that he/she is engaged in the business of entertaining the public by
demonstrations of mind reading, mental telepathy, thought conveyance, or the
giving of horoscopic readings, at public places and in the presence of and
within the hearing of other individuals and at which no questions are answered,
as part of such entertainment, except in a manner to permit all individuals
present at such public place to hear such answers.
   B.   No individual shall be required to pay any fee or take out any permit
for conducting or participating in any religious ceremony or service when such
individual holds a certificate of ordination as a minister, missionary,
hereinafter collectively referred to as a minister, medium, healer, or
clairvoyant, from any bona fide church or religious association maintaining a
church and holding regular services and having a creed or set of religious
principles that is recognized by all churches of like faith; provided that:
      1.   Except as provided in subsection B3 of this section, the fees,
gratuities, emolument and profits thereof shall be regularly accounted for and
paid solely to or for the benefit of the bona fide church or religious
association, as defined in this section.
      2.   The minister holding a certificate of ordination from such bona fide
church or religious association, as defined in this section, shall file with
the city manager a certified copy of the minister's certificate or ordination
with the minister's name, age, street address, and phone number in this city
where the activity set forth in this section is to be conducted.
      3.   Such bona fide church or religious association, as defined in this
section, may pay to its ministers a salary or compensation based upon a
percentage basis, pursuant to an agreement between the church and the minister
which is embodied in a resolution and transcribed in the minutes of such church
or religious association. (Ord. 2002-10, 8-6-2002)
CHAPTER 5
AUTOMOBILE TOWING
SECTION:
5-5-1: Automobile Towing Regulations
5-5-1: AUTOMOBILE TOWING REGULATIONS:
The Lemoore police department shall not use towing services of any towing
company that does not have an agreement with the city of Lemoore to provide
such service. The agreement between the city and the towing company providing
towing service shall require the towing company to comply with all California
highway patrol regulations and to provide adequate maintenance of towing
vehicles, a certificate of liability insurance, and to secure a business
license from the city of Lemoore. The agreement may also include other matters
required by the city council or city attorney. (Ord. 2009-06, 7-7-2009)
CHAPTER 6
NOISE
SECTION:
5-6-1: Purpose, Intent, And Applicability
5-6-2: Definitions
5-6-3: Enforcement, Violations, And Penalties
5-6-4: Sound Amplifiers
5-6-1: PURPOSE, INTENT, AND APPLICABILITY:
   A.   Purpose And Intent: The purpose and intent of this chapter is to
establish regulations and enforcement procedures for noise generated in the
city. In adopting this chapter, the city council declares that:
      1.   The making, creation, or maintenance of loud, unnecessary,
unnatural, or unusual noises which are prolonged, unusual, and unnatural in
their time, place, and use affect and are a detriment to the public health,
comfort, convenience, safety, welfare, and prosperity of the residents of the
city; and
      2.   The necessity in the public interest for the provisions and
prohibitions set forth in this chapter is declared as a matter of legislative
determination and public policy, and it is further declared that the provisions
of this chapter are in pursuance of, and for the purpose of, securing and
promoting the public health, comfort, convenience, safety, welfare, and
prosperity and the peace and quiet of the city and its inhabitants.
   B.   Applicability: This chapter shall be applicable to all uses and
activities conducted within the city except as provided in subsection C,
"Exceptions", of this section.
   C.   Exceptions: The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to the
following:
      1.   The operation of "emergency machinery", as defined in section
5-6-2, "Definitions", of this chapter.
      2.   The operation of an "emergency vehicle", as defined in section
5-6-2, "Definitions", of this chapter.
      3.   The conducting of "emergency work", as defined in section
5-6-2, "Definitions", of this chapter.
      4.   The operation on days other than Sunday of construction equipment or
of a construction vehicle, or the performance on days other than Sunday of
construction work, between the hours of seven o'clock (7:00) A.M. and eight
o'clock (8:00) P.M., provided that all required permits for the operation of
such construction equipment or construction vehicle or the performance of such
construction work have been obtained from the appropriate city department.
      5.   Activities conducted on the grounds of any public or private nursery
school, elementary school, intermediate school, secondary school, or college.
      6.   Outdoor gatherings, public dances, and shows, provided said events
are conducted pursuant to a license/permit issued by the city.
      7.   Activities conducted on any park or playground, provided such park
or playground is owned and operated by a public entity and the activity
complies with that public entity's noise regulations.
      8.   All mechanical devices, apparatus, or equipment which is utilized
for the protection or salvage of agricultural crops during periods of potential
or actual frost damage or other adverse weather conditions.
      9.   Mobile noise sources associated with agricultural operations
provided such operations do not take place between the hours of eight o'clock
(8:00) P.M. and seven o'clock (7:00) A.M. on weekdays, including Saturday, or
at any time on Sunday or a federal holiday.
      10.   Mobile noise sources associated with agricultural pest control
through pesticide application, provided that the application is made in
accordance with restricted material permits issued by or regulations enforced
by the agricultural commissioner.
      11.   Any activity to the extent regulation thereof has been preempted by
state or federal law.
      12.   Industrial uses and activities conducted in industrial zones.
      13.   Any act or activity prohibited by this code or any law of the state
of California or the United States. (Ord. 2012-01, 4-17-2012)
5-6-2: DEFINITIONS:
The following words, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings
ascribed to them in this section:
CHIEF: The chief of police of the city of Lemoore, or his/her designee.
DECIBEL (dB): A unit of sound level when the base of the logarithm is the tenth
root of ten (10) and the quantities concerned are proportional to power.
EMERGENCY MACHINERY: Machinery used or employed in an effort to protect,
provide, or restore safe conditions in the community or for the citizenry.
EMERGENCY VEHICLE: A vehicle used or employed to transport people or machinery
while engaged in an effort to protect, provide, or restore safe conditions in
the community or for the citizenry, or in the conduct of work by private or
public utilities when restoring utility service.
EMERGENCY WORK: Work or labor performed in an effort to protect, provide, or
restore safe conditions in the community or for the citizenry, or work by
private or public utilities when restoring utility service.
FREQUENCY: "Frequency" of a function periodic in time means the reciprocal of
the primitive period. The unit is the hertz and shall be specified.
HERTZ: The complete sequence of values of a periodic quantity which occurs
during a period.
LAWFULLY CONDUCTED ACTIVITIES: Any and all activities conducted by the city for
public health, safety, or welfare reasons.
LOUD OR UNRULY GATHERING: A gathering of two (2) or more persons on private
property or a permitted gathering of two (2) or more persons on public property
whose loud or unruly conduct constitutes a threat to public health, safety, or
general welfare. This term excludes incidents of domestic violence.
OFFENSIVE NOISE: Any sound or vibration caused by sound which occurs with such
intensity, frequency, or in such a manner as to annoy, disturb, injure, or
endanger the comfort, health, repose, peace, or safety of other persons within
the city, and includes, but is not limited to, noise produced by pets and
livestock, by an individual alone or by a group of people engaged in any
business, meeting, gathering, game, dance, or amusement, or by industrial
equipment, construction, motor vehicles, home appliances, electrical motors,
combustion engines, and any other noise producing objects. It shall
specifically mean any noise exceeding the ambient noise level at the property
line of any person offended thereby by more than ten decibels (10 dB).
PERIOD: The smallest increment of time for which the function repeats itself.
RESPONSIBLE PERSON(S): A person(s) with a right of possession in the property
on which a loud or unruly gathering is conducted, including, but not limited
to, an owner or tenant of the property if the gathering is on private property,
or a permittee if the gathering is a permitted gathering on public property, or
any person(s) accepting responsibility for such a gathering.
SOUND LEVEL: Sound level (noise level), in decibels (dB), is the sound pressure
level as measured with the "A" weighting and slow response by a sound level
meter.
SOUND LEVEL METER: An instrument including a microphone, an amplifier, an
output meter, and frequency weighting networks for the measurement of sound
levels which satisfies the pertinent specifications published by the American
National Standards Institute, New York, New York, in "American Standard Sound
Level Meters For Measurement Of Noise And Other Sounds", S1.4-1971, or the most
recent revision thereof.
SPECIAL SECURITY SERVICES: The provision of any police, fire, or other
emergency response to a loud or unruly gathering within twelve (12) hours of
the initial response as provided in this chapter. (Ord. 2012-01, 4-17-2012)
5-6-3: ENFORCEMENT, VIOLATIONS, AND PENALTIES:
   A.   Enforcement: The provisions of this chapter shall be enforced
consistent with the provision of title 1, chapter 4 of this code. Any city
official charged with enforcement of this chapter shall provide written notice
of violations to the party causing the violation, which shall include the
following information. A violation may be issued where no noise measurement has
been conducted if other documentation is prepared demonstrating a violation of
this chapter.
      1.   A description of the violation and citations of applicable
provisions being violated; and
      2.   A statement that the property owner may request an administrative
hearing on the matter, pursuant to the provisions of title 1, chapter 10 of
this code.
   B.   Noise Measurement: The following procedures shall be employed for
monitoring and evaluating noise in the community unless otherwise specified in
this chapter:
      1.   The evaluation shall be conducted any time of the day or night when
the offending noise source is being operated.
      2.   For outside measurements, the location selected for monitoring shall
be at a point at least ten feet (10') from any building, wall, or obstruction
(trees, bushes, etc.) whenever possible. In cases where no point on the
property line satisfies this criteria, readings will be taken as far as
possible from the nearest obstruction and such distance will be noted. For
inside measurements, the monitoring location shall be at least three feet (3')
from any wall.
      3.   The sound level meter shall be equipped with an omnidirectional
microphone.
      4.   No individual other than the operator shall be within ten feet (10')
of the sound level meter during the sample period.
      5.   The ambient noise level shall be determined with the offending noise
source not in operation, in the following manner:
         a.   Calibrate the sound level meter in accordance with the
manufacturer's instructions.
         b.   Set the sound level meter on the "A" weighted network at slow
response.
         c.   Without the offending noise source in operation, set the
microphone in a vertical position on the complaining party's property with the
microphone head approximately four feet (4') above the ground or floor. The
operator shall face the noise source and record the meter's instantaneous
response (reading) observed at fifteen (15) second intervals for a period of
fifteen (15) minutes. The arithmetical average (mean) reading is interpreted as
the ambient noise level of that sampling point.
      6.   With the offending noise source in operation, the operator shall
again record the instantaneous response at the same location at fifteen (15)
second intervals for a fifteen (15) minute period, or, for a noise source of
less than fifteen (15) minutes, the operator shall record the instantaneous
response at fifteen (15) second intervals for the time the offending noise
source is in operation. The arithmetical average (mean) response level recorded
while the offending noise source is in operation is interpreted as the
offending noise level.
   C.   Violations And Penalties:
      1.   No person shall make, cause, suffer, or permit to be made any
offensive noises that disturb or annoy people of ordinary sensitiveness or
which are so harsh or so prolonged or unnatural or unusual in their use, time,
or place as to cause physical discomfort to any person, and which are not
necessary in connection with any lawfully conducted activities.
      2.   No person shall, between the hours of eight o'clock (8:00) P.M. and
seven o'clock (7:00) A.M., make, cause, suffer, or permit to be made any
offensive noise within the vicinity of any building or place regularly used for
sleeping purposes.
      3.   Except as provided hereinafter, a violation of this chapter shall be
an infraction. Any person who violates any section of this chapter and is cited
for such a violation, and who within forty eight (48) hours after receiving
such a citation again violates the same section, shall be guilty of a
misdemeanor. A person is cited for a violation when he or she is issued and
signs an infraction or misdemeanor citation, or when he or she is arrested and
booked, or when a complaint is filed and the person is notified of the filing
of such a complaint. (Ord. 2012-01, 4-17-2012)
5-6-4: SOUND AMPLIFIERS:
   A.   Permit Required: No person shall use or cause to be used at any place
in the city whether on public property or private property any sound amplifying
device or equipment without first having secured a permit to do so from the
city.
      1.   Application For Permit: Any person desiring to obtain an
amplification permit shall submit a written application to the city. The
application shall describe in detail the activity proposed to be conducted for
which the sound amplification permit is requested, shall describe the
amplification equipment or devices to be used, shall set forth the steps that
the applicant will take to ensure that the sound amplification will not
unreasonably disturb other people within the vicinity, shall describe the
location where the sound amplification is to take place, shall describe the
neighborhood surrounding the location where the sound amplification is to take
place, shall include the name of the person who shall be responsible for
monitoring and ensuring compliance with the terms of any permit that is
granted, and shall include such other information as the city may require.
      2.   Granting Or Denial Of Permit: The chief may conditionally grant the
sound amplification permit only if: a) he/she determines that the sound
amplification will be conducted in such a manner as not to unreasonably disturb
neighbors or other persons in the vicinity of the sound amplification, and b)
that if actually implemented, the steps to be taken by the applicant to
minimize or avoid such disturbances will be adequate. In making the
determination whether to grant the permit, the chief may impose such conditions
as may be appropriate or necessary in order to protect the public peace and
safety.
      3.   Revocation Of Permit: Any permit granted pursuant to this section
shall be revocable at any time by the chief for a violation of the conditions
of the permit or a violation of this chapter.
      4.   Appeal: Any person aggrieved by any decision rendered by the chief
pursuant to this chapter shall have the right to appeal the decision to the
city council.
   B.   Exceptions To Permit Requirements: The sound amplifier permit required
by this chapter shall not be required for sound amplifying equipment or devices
under the following circumstances:
      1.   Sound amplification equipment or devices used on privately owned
property, whether indoors or outdoors, where the sound produced does not carry
beyond the property line or does not unreasonably disturb the person outside
the property where the sound is generated.
      2.   Sound amplification equipment or devices used in conformity with an
entertainment permit issued by the city.
      3.   Radios, record players, televisions, tape players, CD players, and
MP3 players, wherever used, when the volume does not exceed the level of normal
conversational speech.
      4.   Sound amplification equipment or devices used on emergency vehicles
or by government employees in connection with any activity undertaken for the
protection of the public welfare or safety.
      5.   When a permit has been issued by the city for sound amplification in
a city park.
   C.   Violations: Any person who uses or causes to be used any sound
amplifying equipment or device in violation of the provisions of this chapter,
whether by failing to obtain a permit when required or by failing to comply
with the terms and conditions of a permit when issued, is guilty of an
infraction. (Ord. 2012-01, 4-17-2012)
TITLE 6
MOTOR VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC
CHAPTER 1
GENERAL TRAFFIC PROVISIONS
SECTION:
6-1-1: Definitions
6-1-2: Authority of and Obedience to Police and Fire Department Officials
6-1-3: Obstruction or Interference with Police
6-1-4: Bicycles and Animals
6-1-5: Public Employees
6-1-6: Exemptions from Traffic Laws
6-1-7: Accidents
6-1-8: Violations
6-1-1: DEFINITIONS:
Whenever any words or phrases used herein are not defined but are defined in
the Vehicle Code of the State of California and amendments thereto, such
definitions shall apply. (1975 Code §9-1.02)
The following words and phrases when used in this Title shall, for the purpose
of this Title, have the meanings respectively ascribed to them in this Section:
BICYCLE: A light vehicle without a motor, having two (2) wheels, handlebars and
a seat or seats, and propelled by the operator. (1975 Code §9-1.03)
CENTRAL TRAFFIC DISTRICT: All streets and portions of streets within the area
described as follows: All that area bounded by C Street to E Street and Hill
Street to Armstrong Street. (1975 Code §9-1.04)
COACH: Any motor bus, motor coach, trackless trolley or passenger stage used as
a common carrier of passengers. (1975 Code §9-1.05)
COUNCIL: The Council of the City of Lemoore. (1975 Code §9-1.06)
CURB: The lateral boundary of the roadway whether such curb be marked by
curbing construction or not so marked; the word "curb" as herein used shall not
include the line dividing the roadway of a street from parking strips in the
center of a street nor from tracks or rights of way of public utility
companies. (1975 Code §9-1.07)
DIVISIONAL ISLAND: A raised island located in the roadway and separating
opposing or conflicting streams of traffic. (1975 Code §9-1.08)
HOLIDAYS: Within the meaning of this Title, holidays are those days designated
in the City personnel rules and regulations adopted in Section
1-6-1 of this Code. (1975 Code §9-1.09)
LOADING ZONE: The space adjacent to a curb reserved for the exclusive use of
vehicles during the loading or unloading of passengers or materials. (1975 Code
§9-1.10)
OFFICIAL TIME STANDARD: Whenever certain hours are named herein, they shall
mean standard time or daylight saving time as may be in current use in this
City. (1975 Code §9-1.11)
PARK: To stand or leave standing any vehicle, whether occupied or not,
otherwise than temporarily for the purpose of and while actually engaged in the
loading or unloading of passengers or materials. (1975 Code §9-1.12)
PARKWAY: That portion of a street other than a roadway or sidewalk. (1975 Code
§9-1.13)
PASSENGER LOADING ZONE: The space adjacent to a curb reserved for the exclusive
use of vehicles during the loading or unloading of passengers. (1975 Code §9-
1.14)
PEDESTRIAN: Any person afoot. (1975 Code §9-1.15)
POLICE OFFICER: Every officer of the Police Department of this City or any
officer authorized to direct or regulate traffic or to make arrests for
violations of traffic regulations. (1975 Code §9-1.16)
STOP: When required, means complete cessation of movement. (1975 Code §9-1.17)
STOP OR STAND: When prohibited, means any stopping or standing of a vehicle,
whether occupied or not, except when necessary to avoid conflict with other
traffic or in compliance with the directions of a police officer or official
traffic control device. (1975 Code §9-1.18)
VEHICLE CODE: The Vehicle Code of the State of California. (1975 Code §9-1.19)
6-1-2: AUTHORITY OF AND OBEDIENCE TO POLICE AND FIRE DEPARTMENT OFFICIALS:
   A.   Officers of the Police Department and such officers as are assigned by
the Chief of Police are hereby authorized to direct all traffic by voice, hand,
audible or other signal in conformance with traffic laws; except, that in the
event of a fire or other emergency to expedite traffic or to safeguard
pedestrians, officers of the Police Department or members of the Fire
Department may direct traffic as conditions may require, notwithstanding the
provisions to the contrary contained in this Title or the Vehicle Code. (1975
Code §9-2.01)
   B.   No person other than an officer of the Police Department or members of
the Fire Department or a person authorized by the Chief of Police or a person
authorized by law shall direct or attempt to direct traffic by voice, hand or
other signal; except, that persons may operate, when and as herein provided,
any mechanical push button signal erected by order of the Chief of Police.
(1975 Code §9-2.02)
   C.   No person shall fail or refuse to comply with or to perform any act
forbidden by any lawful order, signal or direction of a traffic or police
officer, or a member of the Fire Department, or a person authorized by the
Chief of Police or by law. (1975 Code §9-2.03)
6-1-3: OBSTRUCTION OR INTERFERENCE WITH POLICE:
No person shall interfere with or obstruct in any way any police officer or
other officer or employee of this City in their enforcement of the provisions
of this Title. The removal, obliteration or concealment of any chalk mark or
other distinguishing mark used by any police officer or other employee or
officer of this City in connection with the enforcement of the parking
regulations of this Title shall, if done for the purpose of evading the
provisions hereof, constitute such interference or obstruction. (1975 Code §9-
2.06)
6-1-4: BICYCLES AND ANIMALS:
Every person riding a bicycle or riding or driving an animal upon a highway
shall be granted all of the rights and shall be subject to all of the duties
applicable to the driver of a vehicle by this Title, except those provisions
which by their very nature can have no application. (1975 Code §9-2.05)
6-1-5: PUBLIC EMPLOYEES:
The provisions of this Title shall apply to the operator of any vehicle owned
by or used in the service of the United States government, this State, any
county or city, and it shall be unlawful for any said operator to violate any
of the provisions of this Title except as otherwise permitted herein or by the
Vehicle Code. (1975 Code §9-2.07)
6-1-6: EXEMPTIONS FROM TRAFFIC LAWS:
   A.   Authorized Emergency Vehicles:
      1.   The provisions of this Title regulating the operation, parking and
standing of vehicles shall not apply to vehicles operated by the Police or Fire
Departments, any public ambulance or any public utility vehicle or any private
ambulance 1 , which public utility vehicle or any private ambulance has
qualified as an authorized emergency vehicle, when any vehicle mentioned in
this Section is operated in the manner specified by the Vehicle Code in
response to an emergency call.
      2.   The foregoing exemptions shall not, however, relieve the operator of
any such vehicle from obligation to exercise due care for the safety of others
or the consequences of his wilful disregard of the safety of others.
   B.   Public Works and Postal Vehicles: The provisions of this Title
regulating the parking or standing of vehicles shall not apply to any vehicle
of a City department or public utility while necessarily in use for
construction or repair work or any vehicle owned or operated by the United
States Post Office Department while in use for the collection, transportation
or delivery of United States mail. (1975 Code §9-2.08)
 
Notes
1 1. See Title 3, Chapter 6, Article B of this Code.
6-1-7: ACCIDENTS:
   A.   The operator of a vehicle or the person in charge of any animal
involved in any accident resulting in damage to any property publicly owned or
owned by a public utility, including but not limited to any fire hydrant,
parking meter, lighting post, telephone pole, electric light or power pole, or
resulting in damage to any tree, traffic-control device or other property of a
like nature located in or along any street, shall within twenty four (24) hours
after such accident make a written report of such accident to the Police
Department of this City. Every such report shall state the time when and the
place where the accident took place, the name and address of the person owning
and of the person operating or in charge of such vehicle or animal, the license
number of every such vehicle, and shall briefly describe the property damage in
such accident.
   B.   The operator of any vehicle involved in an accident shall not be
subject to the requirements or penalties of this Section if and during the time
he is physically incapable of making a report, but in such event he shall make
a report as required herein within twenty four (24) hours after regaining
ability to make such report. (1975 Code §9-2.09)
6-1-8: VIOLATIONS:
It is a misdemeanor for any person to do any act forbidden or fail to perform
any act required in this Title, except for Chapter 4. Any violation of any
section of Chapter 4 shall be subject to a civil penalty as established by
resolution duly adopted by the City Council. (Ord. 9401, 2-1-94)
CHAPTER 2
TRAFFIC-CONTROL DEVICES AND MARKINGS
SECTION:
6-2-1: Traffic-Control Signs Required
6-2-2: Installation of Traffic-Control Devices
6-2-3: Removal of Traffic-Control Devices
6-2-4: Hours of Operation of Traffic-Control Devices
6-2-5: Turning Markers
6-2-6: Lane and Roadway Markings
6-2-7: Curb and Parking Space Markings
6-2-8: Crosswalks
6-2-9: Obedience to Traffic-Control Devices
6-2-10: Public Works Barriers and Signs
6-2-11: Golf Cart Crossing Zones
6-2-1: TRAFFIC-CONTROL SIGNS REQUIRED:
No provision of the Vehicle Code or of this Title for which signs are required
shall be enforced against an alleged violator unless appropriate legible signs
are in place giving notice of such provisions of the traffic laws. (1975 Code
§9-3.02)
6-2-2: INSTALLATION OF TRAFFIC-CONTROL DEVICES:
   A.   Traffic-Control Devices Generally:
      1.   The City Chief of Police shall have the power and duty to place and
maintain or cause to be placed and maintained official traffic-control devices
when and as required to make effective the provisions of this Title.
      2.   Whenever the Vehicle Code requires for the effectiveness of any
provision thereof that traffic-control devices be installed to give notice to
the public of the application of such law, the Chief of Police is hereby
authorized to install or cause to be installed the necessary devices subject to
any limitations or restrictions set forth in the law applicable thereto.
      3.   The Chief of Police may also place and maintain or cause to be
placed and maintained such additional traffic-control devices as he may deem
necessary or proper to regulate traffic or to guide or warn traffic, but he
shall make such determination only upon the basis of traffic engineering
principles and traffic investigations and in accordance with such standards,
limitations and rules as may be set forth in this Title or as may be determined
by ordinance or resolution of the City Council. (1975 Code §9-3.01)
   B.   Traffic Signals: The City Chief of Police is hereby directed to install
and maintain official traffic signals at those intersections and other places
where traffic conditions are such as to require that the flow of traffic be
alternately interrupted and released in order to prevent or relieve traffic
congestion or to protect life or property from exceptional hazard; provided,
however, that such traffic-control signals shall be installed only in
accordance with those traffic engineering and safety standards and instructions
set forth in the California Maintenance Manual issued by the Division of
Highways of the State Department of Public Works and upon resolution of the
City Council. (1975 Code §9-3.04)
6-2-3: REMOVAL OF TRAFFIC-CONTROL DEVICES:
The City Chief of Police is hereby authorized to remove, relocate or
discontinue the operation of any traffic-control device not specifically
required by the Vehicle Code or this Title whenever he shall determine in any
particular case that the conditions which warranted or required the
installation no longer exist or obtain. (1975 Code §9-3.07)
6-2-4: HOURS OF OPERATION OF TRAFFIC-CONTROL DEVICES:
The City Chief of Police shall determine the hours and days during which any
traffic-control device shall be in operation or be in effect, except in those
cases where such hours or days are specified in this Title. (1975 Code §9-3.08)
6-2-5: TURNING MARKERS:
The City Chief of Police is authorized to place markers, buttons or signs
within or adjacent to intersections and indicating the course to be traveled by
vehicles turning at such intersections, and the city chief of police is
authorized to locate and indicate more than one lane of traffic from which
drivers of vehicles may make right or left hand turns, and the course to be
traveled as so indicated may conform to or be other than as prescribed by law
or ordinance. (1975 Code §9-4.01)
6-2-6: LANE AND ROADWAY MARKINGS:
   A.   Lane Markings: The city chief of police is hereby authorized to mark
centerlines and lane lines upon the surface of the roadway to indicate the
course to be traveled by vehicles and may place signs temporarily designating
lanes to be used by traffic moving in a particular direction regardless of the
centerline of the highway or street. (1975 Code §9-3.05)
   B.   Roadway Markings: The city chief of police is authorized to place and
maintain distinctive roadway markings as described in the Vehicle Code on those
streets or parts of streets where the volume of traffic or the vertical or
other curvature of the roadway renders it hazardous to drive on the left side
of such markings or signs and markings. Such markings or signs and markings
shall have the same effect as similar markings placed by the state department
of public works pursuant to the provisions of the Vehicle Code. (1975 Code §9-
3.06)
6-2-7: CURB AND PARKING SPACE MARKINGS:
   A.   Curb Markings Regulating Parking And Standing:
      1.   The city chief of police is hereby authorized, subject to the
provisions and limitations of this title, to place, and when required herein
shall place, the following curb markings to indicate parking or standing
regulations, and said curb markings shall have meanings as set forth herein:
         a.   Red shall mean no stopping, standing or parking at any time
except as permitted by the Vehicle Code and except that a bus may stop at a red
zone marked or signed as a bus zone. (Ord. 9115, 8-20-1991)
         b.   Yellow shall mean no stopping, standing or parking at any time
for any purpose other than loading or unloading of passengers or materials;
provided, that the loading or unloading of the passengers shall not consume
more than three (3) minutes nor the loading or unloading of materials more than
twenty (20) minutes. (Ord. 2002-13, 10-1-2002)
         c.   White shall mean no stopping, standing or parking for any purpose
other than loading or unloading of passengers 1 , or for the purpose of
depositing mail in an adjacent mailbox, which shall not exceed three (3)
minutes, and such restrictions shall apply between eight o'clock (8:00) A.M.
and six o'clock (6:00) P.M. of any day except Sundays and holidays and except
as follows:
            (1)   When such zone is in front of a hotel or in front of a
mailbox, the restriction shall apply at all times.
            (2)   When such zone is in front of a theater, the restriction
shall apply at all times, except when such theater is closed.
         d.   Blue shall mean the space adjacent to the curb so painted is
restricted for the exclusive use of any vehicle which displays either a
distinguishing license plate or a placard issued pursuant to section 22511.5 of
the California Vehicle Code.
      2.   When the city chief of police, as authorized under this title, has
caused curb markings to be placed, no person shall stop, stand or park any
vehicle adjacent to any such legible markings in violation of any of the
provisions of this subsection A.
   B.   Parking Space Markings: The city chief of police is authorized to
install and maintain parking space markings to indicate parking spaces adjacent
to curbings where authorized parking is permitted.
   C.   Unauthorized Painting Of Curbs: No person, unless authorized by this
city, shall paint any street or curb surface; provided, however, that this
subsection shall not apply to the painting of numbers on a curb surface by any
person who has complied with the provisions of any resolution or ordinance of
this city pertaining thereto. (Ord. 9115, 8-20-1991)
 
Notes
1 1. See also section
  6-4-7 of this title.
6-2-8: CROSSWALKS:
   A.   Establishment Of Crosswalks: The city chief of police shall establish,
designate and maintain crosswalks at intersections and other places by
appropriate devices, marks or lines upon the surface of the roadway as follows:
         Crosswalks shall be established and maintained at all intersections
within the central traffic district and at such intersections outside such
district, and at other places within or outside said district where the city
chief of police determines that there is particular hazard to pedestrians
crossing the roadway subject to the limitations contained in subsection B of
this section.
   B.   Restrictions: Other than crosswalks at intersections, no crosswalks
shall be established in any block which is less than four hundred feet (400')
in length and such crosswalk shall be located as nearly as practicable at
midblock.
   C.   Signs May Be Posted: The city chief of police may place signs at or
adjacent to an intersection in respect to any crosswalk directing that
pedestrians shall cross in the crosswalk so indicated. (1975 Code §9-9.01)
6-2-9: OBEDIENCE TO TRAFFIC CONTROL DEVICES:
The operator of any vehicle or train shall obey the instruction of any official
traffic control device placed in accordance with this title unless otherwise
directed by a police officer or other authorized person subject to the
exceptions granted the operator of any authorized emergency vehicle when
responding to emergency calls. (1975 Code §9-3.03)
6-2-10: PUBLIC WORKS BARRIERS AND SIGNS:
No person, public utility or department in the city shall erect or place any
barrier or sign on any street unless of a type approved by the city chief of
police or disobey the instructions, remove, tamper with or destroy any barrier
or sign lawfully placed on any street by any person, public utility or any
department of this city. (1975 Code §9-8.07)
6-2-11: GOLF CART CROSSING ZONES:
   A.   Golf cart crossing zones, for use by golf carts at any time other than
during darkness, may be established on any street, other than a state highway,
which has a posted speed limit of forty five (45) miles per hour or less and
which is immediately adjacent to a golf course as follows:
      1.   The city chief of police finds and determines that the condition
pertaining to that street, with the addition of proper signs, markers or
lighting, or any combination of those, will permit the establishment of a golf
cart crossing with reasonable safety and the signs, markers or lighting
specified are in place.
      2.   The golf cart crossing shall be at an angle or approximately ninety
degrees (90°) to the direction of the roadway. (Ord. 9203, 1-21-1992)
CHAPTER 3
RULES OF THE ROAD
SECTION:
6-3-1: Turning Movements
6-3-2: Speed Limits
6-3-3: Restrictions On Driving
6-3-4: One-Way Streets And Alleys
6-3-5: Yield Right Of Way Intersections
6-3-6: Through Streets And Stop Intersections
6-3-7: Parades And Funeral Processions
6-3-8: Limited Access
6-3-9: Traffic Not To Be Obstructed
6-3-10: Traffic In Central Traffic District
6-3-11: Clinging To Moving Vehicles
6-3-12: Truck Routes; Limited Load Streets
6-3-13: Railroad Trains And Crossings
6-3-14: Pedestrians
6-3-1: TURNING MOVEMENTS:
   A.   Authority To Restrict Turns: The city chief of police is hereby
authorized to determine those intersections at which drivers of vehicles shall
not make a right, left or U-turn and shall place proper signs at such
intersections. The making of such turns may be prohibited between certain hours
of any day and permitted at other hours, in which event the same shall be
plainly indicated on the signs or they may be removed when such turns are
permitted. (1975 Code §9-4.02)
   B.   Right Turn Restrictions:
      1.   No driver of a vehicle shall make a right turn against a red or stop
signal at any intersection which is signposted, giving notice of such
restriction as hereinafter provided in this subsection B.
      2.   The city chief of police shall post appropriate signs giving effect
to this subsection where he determines that the making of right turns against a
traffic signal "stop" indication would seriously interfere with the safe and
orderly flow of traffic. (1975 Code §9-4.04)
   C.   Obedience To Turning Markers:
      1.   When authorized markers, buttons or other indications are placed
within an intersection indicating the course to be traveled by vehicles turning
thereat, no driver of a vehicle shall disobey the directions of such
indications. (1975 Code §9-4.01)
      2.   Whenever authorized signs are erected indicating that no right or
left or U-turn is permitted, no driver of a vehicle shall disobey the
directions of any such sign. (1975 Code §9-4.03)
6-3-2: SPEED LIMITS:
Speed limits in the zones should be established by the most recent speed study
that has been approved and accepted by both Chief of Police as well as City
Council.
   A.   SPEED LIMIT ZONES
      Lemoore Avenue from Bush Street to D Street.
      Bush Street from College Avenue to Marsh Street.
      Bush Street from Lemoore Avenue to Locust Street.
      Vine Street from Highway 198 to Bush Street.
      Lemoore Avenue from Highway 198 to Bush Street.
      West D Street from Hill Street to Olive Street.
      West Bush Street from Byron Street to Fox Street.
      Bush Street from Fox Street to Lemoore Avenue.
      West Bush Street from 19th Avenue to 19 1/2 Avenue.
      West Bush Street from 19th Avenue to Byron Street.
      East D Street, 200 block east to 1/10 mile east of Smith Street.
      West D Street from Olive Street to 19th Avenue.
      West Hanford-Armona Road from Lemoore Avenue to Fox Street.
      Lemoore Avenue from G Street to Hanford-Armona Road.
      19th Avenue from Highway 198 to Cedar Lane.
      Cinnamon Drive from Lemoore Avenue to Fox Street.
      Iona Avenue from 18th Avenue to Vine Street.
      Iona Avenue from Vine Street to 19th Avenue.
      Cinnamon Drive from Carla Drive to Hanford-Armona Road.
      Cinnamon Drive from 300 feet west of Venice Avenue to Lemoore Avenue.
      191/2 Avenue from Bush Street to Cinnamon Drive.
      191/2 Avenue from Sonoma Avenue to Bush Street.
      Silverado Drive from 19th Avenue to Sonoma Avenue.
      East Hanford-Armona Road from 100 yards east of Opal Avenue extended to
Lemoore Avenue.
      Lemoore Avenue from Hanford-Armona Road to Faun Lane.
      Lemoore Avenue from Faun Lane to Glendale Avenue.
      West D Street from 19th Avenue to West Bush Street.
      Cinnamon Drive from Fox Street to 19th Avenue.
      19th Avenue from Cedar Lane to Bush Street.
      19th Avenue from West Bush Street to Cinnamon Drive.
      Fox Street from Cinnamon Drive to Hanford-Armona Road.
      Liberty Drive from Cinnamon Drive to Hanford-Armona Road.
      Hanford-Armona Road from Fox Street to Liberty Drive.
      Hanford-Armona Road from Liberty Drive to 19th Avenue.
      West Cinnamon Drive from 19th Avenue to 191/2 Avenue.
      19th Avenue from Cinnamon Drive to Hanford-Armona Road.
      Bush Street from Locust Street to East D Street.
      Bellehaven Drive from Bush Street to Royal Lane.
      East D Street 1/10 mile east of Smith Street to east city limits.
      East Hanford-Armona Road 100 yards east of Opal Avenue extended to the
east city limits.
      Bush Street from Bellehaven Drive to College Drive.
      Bellehaven Drive from Bush Street to north city limits.
      Lemoore Avenue from Iona Avenue to Highway 198.
      Hanford-Armona Road from 19th Avenue to Highway 41.
      18th Avenue from Iona Avenue to south city limits.
(Ord. 2015-02, 3-17-2015; amd. Ord. 2023-03, 8-1-2023)
6-3-3: RESTRICTIONS ON DRIVING:
   A.   Emerging From Alley, Driveway Or Building: The driver of a vehicle
emerging from an alley, driveway or building shall stop such vehicle
immediately prior to driving onto a sidewalk or into the sidewalk area
extending across any alleyway or driveway. (1975 Code §9-6.03)
   B.   Riding or Driving on Sidewalk: No person shall ride, drive, propel or
cause to be propelled any vehicle or animal across or upon any sidewalk
excepting over permanently constructed driveways and excepting when it is
necessary for any temporary purpose to drive a loaded vehicle across a sidewalk
in accordance with the following:
      1.   Said sidewalk area shall be substantially protected by wooden planks
two inches (2") thick, and written permission to cross be previously obtained
from the City Chief of Police.
      2.   Such wooden planks shall not be permitted to remain upon such
sidewalk area during the hours of six o’clock (6:00) P.M. to six o’clock (6:00)
A.M.
      3.   This subsection shall not be utilized to access a paved driveway.
The installation of a new driveway shall also require the installation of a
drive approach and the issuance of an encroachment permit consistent with the
City of Lemoore Improvement Standards.
      4.   This subsection shall not apply to any disabled person who holds a
valid permit from the Chief of Police to drive or ride upon the sidewalk. (1975
Code §9-8.04)
   C.   Riding or Driving on New Pavement and Markings: No person shall ride or
drive any animal or any vehicle over or across any newly made pavement or
freshly painted markings in any street when a barrier sign, cone-marker or
other warning device is in place warning persons not to drive over or across
such pavement or marking, or when any such device is in place indicating that
the street or any portion thereof is closed. (1975 Code §9-8.05)
   D.   Commercial Vehicles Using Private Driveways: No person shall operate or
drive a commercial vehicle in or across any private driveway, approach or
sidewalk area or the driveway itself without the consent of the owner or
occupant of the property if a sign or marking is in place indicating that use
of such driveway is prohibited.
   For the purpose of this subsection, a commercial vehicle shall mean a
vehicle having a rated capacity in excess of one-half (1/2) ton. (1975 Code §9-
8.03; amd. Ord. 2024-02, 6-18-2024)
6-3-4: ONE-WAY STREETS AND ALLEYS:
   A. Designation of One-Way Streets and Alleys:
      1. No person shall operate any vehicle so as to enter with the same in an
easterly direction upon the alley located between "D" and "E" Streets from the
west line of Follett Street or drive the same in an easterly direction along
said alley to the east line of Fox Street. (1975 Code §9-5.01)
      2. No person shall operate any vehicle so as to enter with the same in a
westerly direction upon the alley located between "C" and "D" Streets from the
east line of Fox Street to the west line of Follett Street or drive the same in
a westerly direction along said alley. (1975 Code §9-5.02)
   B. Signs Posted: Whenever any ordinance or resolution of this City
designates any one-way street or alley, the City Chief of Police shall place
and maintain signs giving notice thereof, and no such regulation shall be
effective unless such signs are in place. Signs indicating the direction of
lawful traffic movement shall be placed at every intersection where movement of
traffic in the opposite direction is prohibited. (1975 Code §9-5.09)
6-3-5: YIELD RIGHT-OF-WAY INTERSECTIONS:
Whenever any ordinance or resolution of this City designates and describes any
street as a street where the operators of vehicles shall be required at certain
intersections to yield the right of way to operators of vehicles approaching
such intersection from a different direction, the City Chief of Police shall
erect and maintain yield right-of-way signs which shall conform with and shall
be placed as provided in the Vehicle Code. (1975 Code §9-7.01)
All operators of vehicles approaching any intersection where yield right-of-way
signs have been placed by resolution of the City Council are hereby required to
yield the right of way to operators of vehicles approaching the signed
intersection where no yield right-of-way signs have been placed. (1975 Code §9-
7.02)
6-3-6: THROUGH STREETS AND STOP INTERSECTIONS:
   A. Through Streets Designated: Those streets and parts of streets
established by the General Plan as expressways or thoroughfares or by
resolution of the Council are hereby declared to be through streets for the
purposes of this subsection.
   B. Application of Provisions: The provisions of this Section shall apply at
one or more entrances to the intersections as such entrances and intersections
are established by resolution of the Council, and shall apply at those highway
railway grade crossings as are established by resolution of the Council. (1975
Code §9-6.02)
   C. Signs Posted: Whenever any ordinance or resolution of this City
designates and describes any street or portion thereof as a through street, or
any intersection at which vehicles are required to stop at one or more
entrances thereto, or any railroad grade crossing at which vehicles are
required to stop, the City Chief of Police shall erect and maintain stop signs
as follows: a stop sign shall be erected on each and every street intersecting
such through street or portion thereof so designated and at those entrances of
other intersections where a stop is required and at any railroad grade crossing
so designated. Every such sign shall conform with, and shall be placed as
provided in the Vehicle Code. (1975 Code §9-6.01)
6-3-7: PARADES AND FUNERAL PROCESSIONS:
No operator of any vehicle shall drive between the vehicles comprising a
funeral procession or a parade; provided, that such vehicles are conspicuously
so designated. The directing of all vehicles and traffic on any street over
which such funeral procession or parade wishes to pass shall be subject to the
orders of the Police Department. (1975 Code §9-8.01)
6-3-8: LIMITED ACCESS:
No person shall drive a vehicle onto or from any limited access roadway except
at such entrances and exits as are lawfully established. (1975 Code §9-8.06)
6-3-9: TRAFFIC NOT TO BE OBSTRUCTED:
No operator of any vehicle shall enter an intersection or a marked crosswalk
unless there is sufficient space on the other side of the intersection or
crosswalk to accommodate the vehicle he is operating without obstructing the
passage of other vehicles or pedestrians, notwithstanding any traffic control
signal indication to proceed. (1975 Code §9-8.08)
6-3-10: TRAFFIC IN CENTRAL TRAFFIC DISTRICT:
   A. Certain Vehicles Restricted At Certain Times: No person shall operate any
of the following vehicles in the central traffic district between the hours of
eight o'clock (8:00) A.M. and six o'clock (6:00) P.M. of said day:
      1. Any freight vehicle more than eight and one-half feet (81/2') in
width, with load, or any freight vehicle so loaded that any part of its load
extends more than twenty feet (20') to the front or rear of said vehicle.
      2. Any vehicle carrying building material that has not been loaded or is
not to be unloaded at some point within the central traffic district.
      3. Any vehicle conveying refuse, rubbish, garbage or dirt, except city
garbage and refuse trucks.
Provided, that the city chief of police may with a written permit authorize the
operation of any such vehicle for the purpose of making necessary emergency
deliveries to or from points within the central traffic district. (1975 Code
§9-13.01)
   B. Advertising Vehicles: No person shall operate or drive any vehicle used
for advertising purposes or any advertising vehicle equipped with sound
amplifying or loud speaking device upon any street or alley at anytime within
the central traffic district without the written permission of the city chief
of police authorizing use thereof as herein provided. (1975 Code §9-13.02)
6-3-11: CLINGING TO MOVING VEHICLES:
No person shall attach himself with his hands, or catch on or hold on with his
hands or by other means, to any moving vehicle or train for the purpose of
receiving motive power therefrom. (1975 Code §9-8.02)
6-3-12: TRUCK ROUTES; LIMITED LOAD STREETS:
   A. Truck Routes: Whenever any resolution of this city designates and
describes any street or portion thereof as a street, the use of which is
permitted by any vehicle exceeding the maximum gross weight limit of five (5)
tons, the city chief of police is hereby authorized to designate such street or
streets by appropriate signs as "Truck Routes" for the movement of vehicles
exceeding the maximum gross weight limit of five (5) tons.
   When any such truck route or routes are established and designated by
appropriate signs, the operator of any vehicle exceeding the maximum gross
weight limit of five (5) tons shall drive on such route or routes and none
other; except, that nothing in this section shall prohibit the operator of any
vehicle exceeding the maximum gross weight of five (5) tons coming from a truck
route having ingress and egress by direct route to and from restricted streets
when necessary for the purpose of making pick ups or deliveries of goods, wares
and merchandise from or to any building or structure located on such restricted
streets or for the purpose of delivering material to be used in the actual and
bona fide repair, alteration, remodeling or construction of any building or
structure upon such restricted streets for which a building permit has
previously been obtained therefor, or when it is necessary to transport any
such truck for repairs.
   Provisions of this section shall not apply to: 1) passenger buses under the
jurisdiction of the public utility commission, or 2) any vehicle owned by the
public utility while necessarily in use in the construction, installation and
repair of any public utility.
   Those streets and parts of streets established by resolution of the council
are hereby declared to be truck routes for the movement of vehicles exceeding a
maximum gross weight of five (5) tons. (Ord. 2014-02, 7-1-2014)
   B. Limited Load Streets: Whenever any resolution of this city designates and
describes any street or portion thereof as a street, the use of which is
prohibited by any commercial vehicle, the city chief of police shall erect and
maintain appropriate signs on those streets affected by such ordinance.
   hose streets and parts of streets established by resolution of the city
council are hereby declared to be streets, the use of which is prohibited by
any commercial vehicle. Provisions of this subsection shall not apply to
passenger buses under the jurisdiction of the public utility commission. (1975
Code §9-13.04)
6-3-13: RAILROAD TRAINS AND CROSSINGS:
   A.   Operation Of Vehicle At Railroad Crossing: No person shall drive any
vehicle through, around or under any crossing gate or barrier at a railroad
grade crossing while such gate or barrier is closed or being opened or closed.
(1975 Code §9-14.01)
   B.   Trains Not To Block Crossings: No person shall cause or permit any
railway train or railway cars or similar vehicles on rails to stop or stand or
to be operated in such a manner as to prevent the use of any street for the
purposes of travel for a period of time longer than ten (10) minutes; except,
that this provision shall not apply to railway trains, cars or similar vehicles
on rails while blocking or obstructing the crossing because of an accident
which requires the operator of the train, car or similar vehicle on rails to
stop at or near the scene of the accident. (1975 Code §9-14.02)
6-3-14: PEDESTRIANS:
No pedestrian shall cross a roadway other than by a crosswalk in the central
district or in any business district. (1975 Code §9-9.02)
CHAPTER 4
STOPPING, STANDING OR PARKING
SECTION:
6-4-1: Application And Interpretation
6-4-2: No Parking Areas
6-4-3: Method Of Parking
6-4-4: General Parking Restrictions
6-4-5: Time Limit Parking
6-4-6: No Stopping Zones
6-4-7: Stopping For Loading Or Unloading
6-4-8: Designation Of Restricted And Prohibited Parking Places
6-4-9: Emergency Parking Signs
6-4-10: Peddlers And Vendors
6-4-11: Disabled Commercial Vehicles
6-4-12: Parking Lots
6-4-13: Removal Of Illegally Parked Vehicles
6-4-1: APPLICATION AND INTERPRETATION:
   A.   Application Of Provisions: The provisions of this title prohibiting the
stopping, standing or parking of a vehicle shall apply at all times or at those
times herein specified, except when it is necessary to stop a vehicle to avoid
conflict with other traffic or in compliance with other traffic or in
compliance with the directions of a police officer or official traffic control
device.
   B.   Conflicts With Other Laws: The provisions of this title imposing a time
limit on standing or parking shall not relieve any person from the duty to
observe other and more restricted provisions of the Vehicle Code or of the
ordinances of this city prohibiting or limiting the standing or parking of
vehicles in specified places or at specified times. (1975 Code §9-10.01)
6-4-2: NO PARKING AREAS:
No operator of any vehicle shall stop, stand, park or leave standing such
vehicle in any of the following places, except when necessary to avoid conflict
with other traffic or in compliance with the direction of a police officer or
other authorized officer or traffic sign or signal:
   A.   On either side of any street between the projected property lines of
any public walk, public steps, street or thoroughfare terminating at such
street, when such area is indicated by an appropriate sign or by red paint upon
the curb surface.
   B.   In any area where the city chief of police determines the parking or
stopping of a vehicle should constitute a traffic hazard or would endanger life
or property, when such area is indicated by an appropriate sign or by red paint
upon the curb surface.
   C.   In any area established by resolution of the city council as a no
parking area, when such area is indicated by an appropriate sign or by red
paint upon the curb surface.
   D.   In any area where the parking or stopping of any vehicle would
constitute a traffic hazard or would endanger life or property.
   E.   On any street or highway where the use of such street or highway, or a
portion thereof, is necessary for the cleaning, repair or construction of the
street or highway or the installation of underground utilities, or where the
use of the street or highway, or any portion thereof, is necessary for the
movement of equipment, articles or structures of unusual size, and the parking
of such vehicle would prohibit or interfere with such use or movements;
provided, that signs giving notice of such no parking are erected or placed at
least twenty four (24) hours prior to the effective time of such no parking.
   F.   At any place within twenty feet (20') of a crosswalk at an intersection
in the central traffic district or in any business district when such place is
indicated by appropriate signs or by red paint upon the curb surface; except,
that a bus may stop at a designated bus stop.
   G.   Within six feet (6') of the approach to any boulevard stop sign or
traffic signal. (1975 Code §9-10.04)
6-4-3: METHOD OF PARKING:
   A.   Parallel Parking: Parallel parking on any of the streets or portions of
streets established by a resolution of the council as parallel parking zones,
when a sign or pavement marking is in place indicating such parallel parking.
It shall be unlawful for the operator of any vehicle to park said vehicle
except:
      1.   A vehicle may be stopped or parked parallel to and within eighteen
inches (18") from the right side of said vehicle to the curb facing in the
direction of traffic movement.
      2.   Said vehicle shall be parked entirely within the limits of space
allotted to park vehicles as the space is indicated on pavement markings. No
vehicle shall park on the turning space designated by a white "X" on the
pavement. (1975 Code §9-11.04)
   B.   Diagonal Parking: Diagonal parking on any of the streets or portions of
streets established by resolution of the city council as diagonal parking
zones, when signs or pavement markings are in place indicating such diagonal
parking. It shall be unlawful for the operator of any vehicle to park the said
vehicle except:
      1.   At the angle of the curb indicated by signs or pavement markings
allotting space to park vehicles and entirely within the limits of said
allotted space.
      2.   With the right front wheel nearest to the curb and within six inches
(6") of said curb.
The provisions of this subsection shall not apply when such vehicle is actually
engaged in the process of loading or unloading passengers, freight or goods, in
which event the provisions applicable in section
6-4-7 of this chapter shall be complied with. (1975 Code §9-11.05)
   C.   Parking Within Markings: When parking space markings are placed on the
highway, subject to other more restrictive limitations, no vehicle shall be
stopped, left standing or parked other than within a single space, unless the
size or shape of such vehicle makes compliance impossible 1 . (1975 Code §9-
11.06)
 
Notes
1 1. See section
  6-2-7 of this title.
6-4-4: GENERAL PARKING RESTRICTIONS:
   A.   One-Way Streets And Alleys:
      1.   All vehicles so parked or stopped in the alleys designated in
subsection
6-3-4A1 of this title shall be parked or stopped facing in the proper direction
for legal traffic thereon, and on the north side thereof. (1975 Code §9-5.05)
      2.   All vehicles so parked or stopped in the alley designated in
subsection
6-3-4A2 of this title shall be parked or stopped facing in the proper direction
for legal traffic thereon, and on the south side thereof. (1975 Code §9-5.06)
   B.   Fire Zone Number One:
      1.   Parking In Alleys:
         a.   No person shall park or stop any vehicle for any purpose other
than the loading or unloading of passengers or material in any alley within the
limits of fire zone number one. (1975 Code §9-5.03)
No stop for the loading or unloading of passengers shall be more than three (3)
minutes, nor for the loading or unloading of materials for more than thirty
(30) minutes in any such alley. (1975 Code §9-5.04)
         b.   No vehicle shall be parked or stopped in such a manner as to
obstruct the passage of any other vehicle in any alley within the limits of
fire zone number one. (1975 Code §9-5.07)
      2.   Parking Heavy Vehicles: No person shall stop, park or leave standing
any vehicle of more than two (2) tons' capacity, whether attended or
unattended, on any street, excepting alleys, within the limits of fire zone
number one; excepting, that vehicles of more than two (2) tons' capacity may be
stopped, parked or left standing for the purpose of loading or unloading
merchandise between the hours of seven o'clock (7:00) A.M. and ten o'clock (10:
00) A.M. of any day in zones designated for loading and unloading of
merchandise by the chief of police for the city. (1975 Code §9-5.08)
   C.   All Night Parking: No person shall stop, stand or park their vehicles
on any street designated by resolution of the city council as all night parking
prohibited streets for any period of time between the hours of two o'clock (2:
00) A.M. and six o'clock (6:00) A.M. of any day; provided, that this subsection
shall not apply to a vehicle of any regularly licensed physician when actually
engaged in making professional calls. (1975 Code §9-11.08)
   D.   Parkways: No person shall stop, stand or park a vehicle within any
parkway. (1975 Code §9-10.01)
   E.   Parking Near Schools:
      1.   The city chief of police is hereby authorized to erect signs
indicating that no parking upon that side of any street adjacent to any school
property shall be permitted, when such parking would, in his opinion, interfere
with traffic or create a hazardous situation.
      2.   When official signs are erected prohibiting parking upon that side
of a street adjacent to any school property, no person shall park a vehicle in
any such designated place. (1975 Code §9-10.09)
   F.   Parking Vehicles For Certain Purposes:
      1.   Storage: No person who owns or has possession, custody or control of
any vehicle shall park such vehicle upon any street or alley for more than
seventy two (72) consecutive hours in any thirty (30) day period.
      2.   Vehicles For Sale: No operator of any vehicle shall park said
vehicle upon any street in this city for the principal purpose of advertising
or displaying it for sale, unless authorized by a resolution of the city
council.
      3.   Repairing Or Greasing Vehicles: No person shall construct or cause
to be constructed, repair or cause to be repaired, grease or cause to be
greased any vehicle or any part thereof upon any public street in this city.
Temporary emergency repairs may be made upon a public street.
      4.   Washing Or Polishing Vehicles For A Fee: No person shall wash or
cause to be washed, polish or cause to be polished any vehicle or any part
thereof upon any public street in this city when a charge is made for such
service. (Ord. 2003-11, 12-16-2003)
   G.   Parking Of Heavy Trucks Regulated:
      1.   It is unlawful to leave, park or allow to be parked any commercial
vehicle exceeding a maximum gross weight of five (5) tons commonly described as
a truck, truck and trailer, or tractor, whether attended or not attended, on
any public street, or alley fronting on any property zoned as residential, or
in a residential area within the city, except that such parking will be
permitted along those truck routes as designated in section
6-3-12 of this title where such parking is not restricted by appropriate
signage. Nothing within this section relating to the parking or standing of
commercial vehicles in excess of five (5) tons in a residential area will be
effective with respect to any commercial vehicle making pick ups or deliveries
of goods, wares and merchandise from or to any building or structure located on
the restricted streets for the purpose of delivering materials to be used in
the actual and bona fide repair, alteration, remodeling or construction of any
building or structure upon the restricted street for which a building permit
has previously been obtained.
      2.   For residents conducting a permitted home occupation in a
residential area, only one vehicle, no larger than a one ton truck, may be used
by the occupant directly or indirectly in conjunction with the home occupation.
(Ord. 2014-02, 7-1-2014)
   H.   Parking, Stopping Or Letting Vehicles Stand In Certain Zones And Areas:
      1.   Except for temporary loading and unloading purposes, no person shall
park, stop, or let stand any vehicle on private property in any zone of the
city in such a manner that any portion of the vehicle extends beyond the
property line into the public right of way and obstructs or seriously impedes
the view of the driver of any vehicle lawfully approaching an intersection or
while said driver lawfully enters or leaves any driveway; provided, however,
that this subsection H1 shall not apply to vehicles parked, stopped, or let
stand in the private driveway of private property constituting a corner lot
where the vehicle cannot reasonably be parked in the driveway without
encroaching beyond the property line into the right of way.
      2.   No person shall store, park, or let stand any vehicle in any street
or alley of the city in any residential district for a continuous period of
more than seventy two (72) hours in any thirty (30) day period.
      3.   Notwithstanding the provisions of subsections H1 and H2 of this
section, approval may be granted by the chief of police for the temporary
parking of a vehicle on a residential public street immediately adjacent
thereto for up to seven (7) additional days if requested by the resident and if
the vehicle is owned by someone other than the resident and good cause is
shown. Said approval shall be visibly displayed on the vehicle. (Ord. 2003-11,
12-16-2003)
6-4-5: TIME LIMIT PARKING:
   A.   Ten Minute Parking:
      1.   Green curb marking shall mean no standing or parking for a period of
time longer than ten (10) minutes at any time between nine o'clock (9:00) A.M.
and six o'clock (6:00) P.M on any day except Sundays and holidays.
      2.   When authorized signs, parking meters or curb markings have been
determined by the city chief of police to be necessary and are in place giving
notice thereof, no operator of any vehicle shall stop, stand or park said
vehicle adjacent to any such legible curb marking or sign or parking meter in
violation thereof. (1975 Code §9-11.01)
   B.   One Hour Parking: When authorized signs, parking meters or curb
markings have been determined by the city chief of police to be necessary and
are in place giving notice thereof, no operator of any vehicle shall stop,
stand or park said vehicle between the hours of nine o'clock (9:00) A.M. and
six o'clock (6:00) P.M. on any day except Sundays and holidays for a period of
time longer than one hour. (1975 Code §9-11.02)
   C.   Two Hour Parking: When authorized signs, parking meters or curb
markings have been determined by the city chief of police to be necessary and
are in place giving notice thereof, no operator of any vehicle shall stop,
stand or park said vehicle between the hours of eight o'clock (8:00) A.M. and
six o'clock (6:00) P.M. of any day except Sundays and holidays for a period of
time longer than two (2) hours. (1975 Code §9-11.03)
6-4-6: NO STOPPING ZONES:
The city chief of police shall designate as established no stopping zones by
placing and maintaining appropriate signs indicating that stopping of vehicles
is prohibited and indicating the hours and days when stopping is prohibited.
During the hours and on the days designated on the signs, it shall be unlawful
for the operator of any vehicle to stop said vehicle on any of the streets or
parts of streets established by resolution of the council as no stopping areas.
(1975 Code)
6-4-7: STOPPING FOR LOADING OR UNLOADING:
   A.   Authority To Establish Loading Zones:
      1.   The city chief of police is hereby authorized to determine and to
mark loading zones and passenger loading as follows:
         a.   At any place in the central traffic district or in any business
district.
         b.   Elsewhere in front of the entrance to any place of business or
the front of any hall or place used for the purpose of public assembly.
      2.   In no event shall more than one-half (1/2) of the total curb length
in any block be reserved for loading zone purposes.
      3.   Loading zones shall be indicated by yellow paint on top of all curbs
of said zones, and passenger loading zones shall be indicated by white paint on
top of all curbs of said zones 1 . (1975 Code §9-12.01)
   B.   Standing For Loading Or Unloading Only:
      1.   No person shall stop, stand or park a vehicle in any yellow loading
zone for any purpose other than loading or unloading of passengers or materials
for such time as is permitted in subsection
6-2-7A of this title.
      2.   No person shall stop, stand or park a vehicle in any passenger
loading zone for any purpose other than the loading or unloading of passengers
for such time as is specified in said subsection
6-2-7A of this title.
      3.   No person shall stop, stand or park a vehicle for any purpose other
than the unloading or loading of persons or material in any alley. (1975 Code
§9-12.03)
 
Notes
1 1. See also section
  6-2-7 of this title.
6-4-8: DESIGNATION OF RESTRICTED AND PROHIBITED PARKING PLACES:
The city chief of police is hereby authorized to maintain, by appropriate signs
or by paint upon the curb surface, all no stopping zones, no parking areas and
restricted parking areas as defined and described in this title. (1975 Code)
6-4-9: EMERGENCY PARKING SIGNS:
   A.   Whenever the city chief of police shall determine that an emergency
traffic congestion is likely to result from the holding of a public or private
assembly, gathering, funeral or function, or for other reasons, the city chief
of police shall have power and authority to order temporary signs to be erected
or posted indicating that the operation, parking or standing of vehicles is
prohibited on such streets and alleys as the city chief of police shall erect
during the times that such emergency signs are in place. Such signs shall
remain in place only during the existence of such emergency and the city chief
of police shall cause such signs to be removed promptly thereafter.
   B.   When signs authorized by the provisions of this section are in place
giving notice thereof, no person shall operate, park or stand any vehicle
contrary to the directions and provisions of such signs. (1975 Code §9-10.11)
6-4-10: PEDDLERS AND VENDORS:
   A.   Parking Restricted: Except as otherwise provided in this section, no
person shall stand or park any vehicle, wagon or pushcart from which goods,
wares, merchandise, fruits, vegetables or foodstuffs are sold, displayed,
solicited or offered for sale or bartered or exchanged, or any lunch wagon or
eating car or vehicle, on any portion of any street within this city; except,
that such vehicles, wagons or pushcarts may stand or park only at the request
of a bona fide purchaser for a period of not to exceed twenty (20) minutes at
any one place. The provisions of this subsection shall not apply to persons
delivering such articles upon order of, or by agreement with a customer from a
store or other fixed place of business or distribution. (Ord. 2009-03, 3-3-
2009)
   B.   Permit To Park Required:
      1.   Food Vendors 1 : No person shall park or stand on any street any
lunch wagon, eating cart or vehicle or pushcart from which tamales, peanuts,
popcorn, candy or other articles of food are sold or offered for sale without
first obtaining written permission to do so from the city chief of police which
shall designate the specific location in which such cart shall stand.
      2.   Vehicles For Hire: No person shall park or stand any vehicle or
wagon used or intended to be used in the transportation of property for hire on
any street while awaiting patronage for such vehicle or wagon without first
obtaining a written permit to do so from the city chief of police which shall
designate the specific location where such vehicle may stand. (1975 Code §9-
10.10)
 
Notes
1 1. See title 3, chapter 5 of this code.
6-4-11: DISABLED COMMERCIAL VEHICLES:
Every motor truck having an unladen weight of four thousand (4,000) pounds or
more, and every truck or tractor, irrespective of weight when operated upon any
street or highway during darkness, shall be equipped with and carrying at least
two (2) flares or two (2) warning lights or reflectors, which reflectors shall
be of a type approved by the department of California highway patrol. When any
vehicle above mentioned is disabled upon streets or highways within this city
where there is insufficient street lighting to reveal the vehicle at a distance
of two hundred feet (200') during darkness, a warning signal of the character
indicated above shall be immediately placed at a distance of approximately one
hundred feet (100') in advance of and one hundred feet (100') to the rear of
such disabled vehicle by the driver thereof. The warning signal herein
mentioned shall be displayed continuously during darkness while such vehicle
remains disabled upon such street or highway. (1975 Code §9-10.12)
6-4-12: PARKING LOTS:
   A.   Use Of Public Parking Lots: The use of public parking lots of the city
shall conform with the following:
      1.   The chief of police shall designate points of entry into and
departure from and parking areas on such parking lots by appropriate signs or
pavement markings. When such signs or markings are in place giving notice
thereof, no person shall enter, park on or depart from said lots with any
vehicle contrary to the directions and provisions of such signs.
      2.   No person shall operate, drive or park any vehicle in or upon any
public parking lot within the city and owned or operated by the city after the
hours when parking upon such lots is prohibited and signs posted showing the
hours for said parking lots.
   B.   Private Off Street Parking Facilities:
      1.   Use Generally: No person shall operate, drive or park any vehicle
upon any privately owned and maintained off street parking facilities that are
generally held open for the use of the public for purposes of vehicular parking
upon adoption of a resolution of the city council describing said off street
parking facilities pursuant to section 21107.8 of the Vehicle Code and upon the
posting of a notice required by said section. (Ord. 8201, 3-2-1982)
      2.   Parking Restrictions:
         a.   No person shall park any vehicle in or upon any privately owned
and maintained off street parking facility in violation of the terms and
conditions shown on signs posted thereon. Such signs shall be not less than
seventeen inches by twenty two inches (17" x 22") in size with lettering not
less than one inch (1") in height and shall specify:
            (1)   The limitations on or extent of allowed parking; and
            (2)   That the off street parking facility is subject to public
traffic regulations and control.
         b.   Notwithstanding the provisions of subsection B2a of this section,
this subsection B2 shall not apply to any off street parking facility unless:
            (1)   The signs required by subsection B2a of this section are
posted on the property, and
            (2)   A resolution is adopted by the city council describing said
off street parking facility after a public hearing thereon with at least ten
(10) days' prior written notice to the owner and operator of the privately
owned and maintained off street parking facility involved.
         c.   Before the owner or person in lawful possession of any private
property may cause the removal of a vehicle parked on the property, California
Vehicle Code section 22658 requires:
            (1)   Signs prohibiting public parking to be displayed in plain
view at all entrances to the property; and
            (2)   The size of such signs to be specified by ordinance.
The size of such signs shall be not less than seventeen inches by twenty two
inches (17" x 22") with lettering not less than one inch (1") in height. (Ord.
8403, 4-3-1984)
6-4-13: REMOVAL OF ILLEGALLY PARKED VEHICLES:
Any regularly employed and salaried officer of the police department of this
city may remove or cause to be removed:
   A.   Any vehicle that has been parked or left standing upon a street or
highway for seventy two (72) hours in any thirty (30) day period, or more
consecutive hours, without approval of the chief of police.
   B.   Any vehicle which is parked or left standing upon a street or highway
between the hours of seven o'clock (7:00) A.M. and seven o'clock (7:00) P.M.
when such parking or standing is prohibited by ordinance or resolution of this
city and signs are posted giving notice of such removal.
   C.   Any vehicle which is parked or left standing upon a street or highway
where the use of such street or highway or a portion thereof is necessary for
the cleaning, repair or construction of the street or highway or for the
installation of underground utilities or where the use of the street or highway
or any portion thereof is authorized for a purpose other than the normal flow
of traffic or where the use of the street or highway or any portion thereof is
necessary for the movement of equipment, articles or structures of unusual size
and the parking of such vehicle would prohibit or interfere with such use or
movement; provided, that signs giving notice that such vehicle may be removed
are erected or placed at least twenty four (24) hours prior to the removal.
(Ord. 2003-11, 12-16-2003)
CHAPTER 5
ABANDONED, INOPERABLE VEHICLES
SECTION:
6-5-1: Findings; Nuisance Declared
6-5-2: Definitions
6-5-3: Abandoned, Inoperable Vehicles Prohibited
6-5-4: Abatement Procedure
6-5-5: Administrative And Removal Costs
6-5-6: Administration And Enforcement
6-5-7: Exemptions From Provisions
6-5-8: Effect Of Other Regulations
6-5-1: FINDINGS; NUISANCE DECLARED:
In addition to and in accordance with the determination made and the authority
granted by the State of California under section 22660 of the Vehicle Code to
remove abandoned, wrecked, dismantled or inoperative vehicles or parts thereof
as public nuisances, the City Council hereby makes the following findings and
declarations:
The accumulation and storage of abandoned, wrecked, dismantled or inoperative
vehicles or parts thereof on private or public property not including highways
is hereby found to create a condition tending to reduce the value of private
property, to promote blight and deterioration, to invite plundering, to create
fire hazards, to constitute an attractive nuisance creating a hazard to the
health and safety of minors, to create a harborage for rodents and insects and
to be injurious to the health, safety and general welfare. Therefore, the
presence of an abandoned, wrecked, dismantled or inoperative vehicle or part
thereof on private or public property not including highways, except as
expressly hereinafter permitted, is hereby declared to constitute a public
nuisance which may be abated as such in accordance with the provisions of this
Chapter. (1975 Code §9-17.01)
6-5-2: DEFINITIONS:
As used in this Chapter, the following words and terms shall have the meanings
ascribed to them in this Section:
HIGHWAY: A way or place of whatever nature, publicly maintained and open to the
use of the public for purposes of vehicular travel. Highway includes street.
PUBLIC PROPERTY: Does not include "highway".
VEHICLE: A device by which any person or property may be propelled, moved or
drawn upon a highway, except a device moved by human power or used exclusively
upon stationary rails or tracks. (1975 Code §9-17.01)
6-5-3: ABANDONED, INOPERABLE VEHICLES PROHIBITED:
It shall be unlawful and a misdemeanor for any person to abandon, park, store
or leave or permit the abandonment, parking, storing or leaving of any licensed
or unlicensed vehicle or part thereof which is in an abandoned, wrecked,
dismantled or inoperative condition upon any private property or public
property not including highways within the City for a period in excess of
thirty (30) days unless such vehicle or part thereof is completely enclosed
within a building in a lawful manner where it is not plainly visible from the
street or other public or private property, or unless such vehicle is stored or
parked in a lawful manner on private property in connection with the business
of a licensed dismantler, licensed vehicle dealer or a junkyard. (1975 Code §9-
17.15)
It shall be unlawful and a misdemeanor for any person to fail or refuse to
remove an abandoned, wrecked, dismantled or inoperative vehicle or part thereof
or refuse to abate such nuisance when ordered to do so in accordance with the
abatement provisions of this Chapter or State law where such State law is
applicable. (1975 Code §9-17.16)
6-5-4: ABATEMENT PROCEDURE:
   A.   Public Hearing: A public hearing shall be held on the question of
abatement and removal of the vehicle or part thereof as an abandoned, wrecked,
dismantled or inoperative vehicle and the assessment of the administrative
costs and the cost of removal of the vehicle or part thereof against the
property on which it is located. (1975 Code §9-17.07)
      1.   Applicability: The provisions of this Chapter shall not apply to: a)
a vehicle or part thereof that is completely enclosed within a building in a
lawful manner where it is not visible from the street or other public or
private property, or b) a vehicle or part thereof that is stored or parked in a
lawful manner on private property in connection with the business of a licensed
dismantler, licensed vehicle dealer, or a junkyard. The exception provided by
this subsection A1 shall not, however, authorize the maintenance of a public or
private nuisance as defined under provisions of law other than chapter 10 of
division 11 of the Vehicle Code.
      2.   Notice: Not less than a ten (10) day notice of intention to abate
and remove the vehicle or part thereof as a public nuisance shall be issued by
the Chief of Police or his or her designee, unless the property owner and the
owner of the vehicle have signed releases authorizing removal and waiving
further interest in the vehicle or part thereof. However, the notice of
intention is not required for removal of a vehicle or part thereof that is
inoperable due to the absence of a motor, transmission, or wheels and incapable
of being towed, is valued at less than two hundred dollars ($200.00) by a
person specified in section 22855 of the Vehicle Code, and is determined by the
local agency to be a public nuisance presenting an immediate threat to public
health or safety, provided that the property owner has signed a release
authorizing removal and waiving further interest in the vehicle or part
thereof. Prior to final disposition under section 22662 of the Vehicle Code of
such a low-valued vehicle or part for which evidence of registration was
recovered pursuant to subsection C3 of this Section, the Chief of Police or his
or her designee shall provide notice to the registered and legal owners of
intent to dispose of the vehicle or part, and if the vehicle or part is not
claimed and removed within twelve (12) days after the notice is mailed, from a
location specified in section 22662 of the Vehicle Code, final disposition may
proceed. This subsection A2 applies only to inoperable vehicles located upon a
parcel that is: a) zoned for agricultural use, or b) not improved with a
residential structure containing one or more dwelling units.
      3.   Hearing Rights: The ten (10) day notice of intention to abate and
remove a vehicle or part thereof, when required by this subsection A, shall
contain a statement of the hearing rights of the owner of the property on which
the vehicle is located and of the owner of the vehicle. The statement shall
include notice to the property owner that he or she may appear in person at a
hearing or may submit a sworn written statement denying responsibility for the
presence of the vehicle on the land, with his or her reasons for such denial,
in lieu of appearing. The notice of intention to abate shall be mailed, by
registered or certified mail, to the owner of the land as shown on the last
equalized assessment roll and to the last registered and legal owners of record
unless the vehicle is in such condition that identification numbers are not
available to determine ownership.
      4.   Public Hearing: A public hearing shall be held before the Chief of
Police or his or her designee upon request for such a hearing by the owner of
the vehicle or the owner of the land on which the vehicle is located. This
request shall be made to the Chief of Police within ten (10) days after the
mailing of notice of intention to abate and remove the vehicle or at the time
of signing a release pursuant to subsection A2 of this Section. If the owner of
the land on which the vehicle is located submits a sworn written statement
denying responsibility for the presence of the vehicle on his or her land
within that time period, this statement shall be construed as a request for
hearing that does not require the presence of the owner submitting the request.
If the request is not received within that period, the Chief of Police or his
or her designee shall have the authority to remove the vehicle.
      5.   Vehicle Reconstruction: After a vehicle has been removed, it shall
not be reconstructed or made operable, unless it is a vehicle that qualifies
for either horseless carriage license plates or historical vehicle license
plates, pursuant to section 5004 of the Vehicle Code, in which case the vehicle
may be reconstructed or made operable.
      6.   Responsibility: The owner of the land on which the vehicle is
located may appear in person at the hearing or present a sworn written
statement denying responsibility for the presence of the vehicle on the land,
with his or her reasons for the denial. If it is determined at the hearing that
the vehicle was placed on the land without the consent of the landowner and
that he or she has not subsequently acquiesced to its presence, then the City
shall not assess costs of administration or removal of the vehicle against the
property upon which the vehicle is located or otherwise attempt to collect
those costs from the owner.
      7.   Conduct Of Hearings: Except as provided in subsection B of this
Section, all hearings under this Chapter shall be held before the Chief of
Police or his or her designee, who shall hear all facts and testimony he or she
deems pertinent. Said facts and testimony may include testimony on the
condition of the vehicle or part thereof and the circumstances concerning its
location on the said private property or public property. The hearing officer
shall not be limited by the technical rules of evidence. (Ord. 9609, 12-3-1996)
      8.   Decisions: The hearing officer may impose such conditions and take
such other action as he deems appropriate under the circumstances to carry out
the purpose of this Chapter. He may delay the time for removal of the vehicle
or part thereof if, in his opinion, the circumstances justify it. At the
conclusion of the public hearing, the hearing officer may find that a vehicle
or part thereof has been abandoned, wrecked, dismantled or is inoperative on
private or public property and order the same removed from the property as a
public nuisance and disposed of as hereinafter provided and determine the
administrative costs and the cost of removal to be charged against the owner of
the parcel of land on which the vehicle or part thereof is located. The order
requiring removal shall include a description of the vehicle or part thereof
and the correct identification number and license number of the vehicle, if
available at the site.
If it is determined at the hearing that the vehicle was placed on the land
without the consent of the landowner and that he has not subsequently
acquiesced in its presence, the hearing officer shall not assess costs of
administration or removal of the vehicle against the property upon which the
vehicle is located or otherwise attempt to collect such costs from such
landowner.
If an interested party makes a written presentation to the hearing officer but
does not appear, he shall be notified in writing of the decision. (1975 Code
§9-17.09; amd. Ord. 9609, 12-3-1996)
   B.   Appeals: Any interested party may appeal the decision of the hearing
officer by filing a written notice of appeal with the said hearing officer
within five (5) days after his decision. Such appeal shall be heard by the City
Council which may affirm, amend or reverse the order or take other action
deemed appropriate.
The Clerk shall give written notice of the time and place of the hearing in the
manner provided and to the appellant and those persons specified in subsection
A of this Section. In conducting the hearing, the City Council shall not be
limited by the technical rules of evidence. (1975 Code §9-17.10)
   C.   Removal Of Vehicles:
      1.   Effective Date Of Removal: Five (5) days after adoption of the order
declaring the vehicle or parts thereof to be a public nuisance, five (5) days
from the date of mailing of notice of the decision if such notice is required
by subsection A3 of this Section or Section
6-5-3 of this Chapter, or fifteen (15) days after such action of the governing
body authorizing removal following appeal, the vehicle or parts thereof may be
disposed of by removal to a scrap yard or automobile dismantler's yard. After a
vehicle has been removed, it shall not be reconstructed or made operable,
unless it is a vehicle that qualifies for either horseless carriage license
plates or historical vehicle license plates, pursuant to section 5004 of the
California Vehicle Code, in which case the vehicle may be reconstructed or made
operable. (Ord. 9609, 12-3-1996)
      2.   Inventory Of Vehicle Contents: Prior to the removal of the vehicle
or part thereof as provided in subsection C1 of this Section, the authorized
enforcement officer shall inventory the contents of any unclaimed personal
property found in any such vehicle in the presence of the owner or other person
in possession of such property and shall retain and dispose of such property in
the same manner as any other property found or abandoned in the City. (1975
Code §9-17.12)
      3.   Notice Of Removal: Within five (5) days after the date of removal of
an abandoned vehicle, the Chief of Police or his or her designee shall give
notice to the Department of Motor Vehicles identifying the vehicle or part
thereof and any evidence of registration available, including, but not limited
to, the registration, certificates of ownership, or license plates. (Ord. 9609,
12-3-1996)
      4.   Contract For Vehicle Removal; Entry Powers: When the City Council
has contracted with or granted a franchise to any person or persons, such
person or persons shall be authorized to enter upon private property or public
property to remove or cause the removal of a vehicle or parts thereof declared
to be a nuisance pursuant to this Chapter. (1975 Code §9-17.05)
6-5-5: ADMINISTRATIVE AND REMOVAL COSTS:
   A.   Assessments Of Administrative Costs: The City Council shall from time
to time determine and fix an amount to be assessed as administrative costs
(excluding the actual cost of removal of any vehicle or part thereof) under
this Chapter. (1975 Code §9-17.06)
   B.   Administrative And Removal Costs, A Lien: If the administrative costs
and the cost of removal which are charged against the owner of a parcel of land
pursuant to subsection
6-5-4C3 of this Chapter are not paid within thirty (30) days of the date of the
order or the final disposition of an appeal therefrom, such costs shall be
assessed against the parcel of land pursuant to section 38773.5 of the
Government Code and shall be transmitted to the tax collector for collection.
Said assessment shall have the same priority as other City taxes. (1975 Code
§9-17.14)
6-5-6: ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT:
Except as otherwise provided herein, the provisions of this Chapter shall be
administered and enforced by the Chief of Police of the City. In the
enforcement of this Chapter, such officer and his deputies may enter upon
private or public property to examine a vehicle or parts thereof or obtain
information as to the identity of a vehicle and to remove or cause the removal
of a vehicle or part thereof declared to be a nuisance pursuant to this
Chapter. (1975 Code §9-17.04)
6-5-7: EXEMPTIONS FROM PROVISIONS:
This Chapter shall not apply to:
   A.   A vehicle or part thereof which is completely enclosed within a
building in a lawful manner where it is not visible from the street or other
public or private property.
   B.   A vehicle or part thereof which is stored or parked in a lawful manner
on private property in connection with the business of a licensed dismantler,
licensed vehicle dealer, junk dealer or when such storage or parking is
necessary to the operation of a lawfully conducted business or commercial
enterprise.
Nothing in this Section shall authorize the maintenance of a public or private
nuisance as defined under provisions of law other than chapter 10 (commencing
with section 22650) of division 11 of the Vehicle Code and this Chapter. (1975
Code §9-17.02)
6-5-8: EFFECT OF OTHER REGULATIONS:
This Chapter is not the exclusive regulation of abandoned, wrecked, dismantled
or inoperative vehicles within the City. It shall supplement and be in addition
to the other regulatory codes, statutes and ordinances heretofore or hereafter
enacted by the City, the State or any other legal entity or agency having
jurisdiction. (1975 Code §9-17.03)
CHAPTER 6
SKATEBOARDS, SCOOTERS AND ROLLER SKATES
SECTION:
6-6-1: Application
6-6-2: Definitions
6-6-3: Use And Operation
6-6-4: Exclusion For Private Skateboard Parks
6-6-5: Violations
6-6-1: APPLICATION:
This chapter applies to the use, operation and propulsion of skateboards,
manual-scooters, motorized-scooters, in-line skates, and common roller skates
on all highways, roadways, streets, alleys, sidewalks and rights-of-way within
the City, on all property owned by and under the jurisdiction of the City, and
on all private property within the City for which a request for application of
this chapter to such property has been approved by resolution of the City
Council. (Ord. 2017-03, 3-7-2017; amd. Ord. 2022-07, 11-1-2022)
6-6-2: DEFINITIONS:
The following definitions shall apply to terms used in this chapter:
COMMON ROLLER SKATES: A shoe, boot, or apparatus worn on a shoe or boot with
wheels attached to such shoe, boot, or apparatus.
IN-LINE SKATES: A roller skate with wheels in a straight line resembling the
blade of an ice skate.
MANUAL-SCOOTER: A plank or board, whether made of wood, plastic, metal, or any
other material with wheels, with a steering apparatus attached, without a
motor, and is foot propelled.
MOTORIZED SCOOTER: Any two-wheeled device that has handlebars, has either a
floorboard that is designed to be stood upon when riding or a seat and
footrests in place of the floorboard, may be foot propelled, and is powered by
an electric motor, or of similar power source.
ROLLER SKATES: A footwear or device, which may be attached to feet or footwear,
to which wheels are attached and such wheels may be used to aid the wearer in
moving, and shall include "in-line" roller skates.
SKATEBOARD: A plank or board of any material that has wheels attached to it and
is propelled or moved by human, gravitational, or mechanical power, and to
which there is not an affixed steering apparatus, device, or mechanism to turn
and control the wheels. (Ord. 2022-07, 11-1-2022)
6-6-3: USE AND OPERATION:
   A.   Except as otherwise provided in this section, no person shall use,
operate, or propel skateboards, manual-scooters, in-line skates, or common
roller skates on any property, public or private, including any parking lot,
highway, roadway, street, alley, right-of-way, private through street, private
alley, or any other real property within that area of the City bounded by the
middle of "F" Street on the north, the middle of "C" Street on the south, the
middle of Lemoore Avenue and Eighteenth Avenue on the east, and the middle of
Hill Street on the west.
   B.   No person shall use, operate, or propel a skateboard, manual-scooter,
motorized-scooter, in-line skates, or common roller skates on any public
property under the jurisdiction of the City, including, but not limited to,
public parks, public government buildings or public school grounds, except that
skateboards and roller skates may be used at the "Lemoore Rotary Youth Plaza"
under the following conditions: 1) skateboard and roller skate users must be
fourteen (14) years of age or older, 2) helmets, elbow pads and knee pads must
be worn by all users or operators of skateboards and roller skates, 3) no
tobacco products shall be permitted within the confines of the Lemoore Rotary
Youth Plaza, and 4) skateboard and roller skate users must obey all posted
rules and regulations.
   C.   On all other property within the limits of the City, other than those
properties falling within the provisions of subsections A and B of this
section, no person shall use, operate or propel a skateboard, manual-scooter,
in-line skates, or common roller skates on any highway, roadway, street, alley,
right-of-way, private through street or private alley in the City if there is a
sidewalk adjacent to and parallel with such highway, roadway, street, alley,
right-of-way, private through street or private alley. If such a sidewalk
exists, skateboards, manual-scooters, or roller skates shall be operated on the
sidewalk. If no such sidewalk is present, skateboards, manual-scooters, or
roller skates may be used, operated, or propelled in the highway, roadway,
street, alley, right-of-way, private through street, or private alley, but only
in such manner that the user rides, operates, or propels the skateboard,
manual-scooter or roller skates as far toward the right-hand edge of the
highway, roadway, street, alley, right-of-way, private through street, or
private alley as is practicable, and in the same direction as traffic,
exercising due care when passing a standing vehicle or one proceeding in the
same direction.
   D.   No person shall use, operate, or propel a motorized-scooter on any
sidewalk within the City, except as may be necessary to enter or leave adjacent
property. Any person operating a motorized-scooter upon a highway at a speed
less than the normal speed of traffic moving in the same direction at the time
shall ride as close as practicable to the right-hand curb or right edge of the
roadway, except when overtaking and passing another vehicle proceeding in the
same direction, when preparing for a left turn, or when reasonably necessary to
avoid conditions, including, but not limited to, fixed or moving objects,
vehicles, bicycles, pedestrians, animals, surface hazards, or substandard width
lanes. Whenever a bicycle lane has been established on a roadway, any person
operating a motorized-scooter upon the roadway shall ride within the bicycle
lane, except when overtaking and passing another vehicle, when preparing for a
left turn, when reasonably necessary to avoid debris and other hazardous
condition, or when approaching a place where a right turn is authorized.
   E.   No person shall use, operate, or propel a skateboard, manual-scooter,
or roller skates on any private property within the City for which a request
for application of this chapter to such property has been approved by
resolution of the City Council and as to which any relevant provisions of
California Vehicle Code sections 21107, 21107.5, 21107.6, 21107.7, 21107.8,
21108, 21109, 21110, and 21111 may apply and are complied with.
   F.   No person shall use, operate, or propel a skateboard, manual-scooter,
motorized-scooter, or roller skates on any public or private property or on any
highway, roadway, street, alley, right-of-way, private through street or
private alley in any manner which endangers the safety of any person or
property. No person using, operating, or propelling a skateboard, manual-
scooter, motorized-scooter, or roller skates on any property within the limits
of the City shall pass or approach a pedestrian at any distance closer than
five feet (5').
   G.   No person shall use, operate, or propel a skateboard, manual-scooter,
or roller skates within twenty feet (20') of the entrance of any shop, store,
business, or commercial establishment while such shop, store, business or
commercial establishment is open to the public for business.
   H.   No person shall use, operate, or propel a skateboard, manual-scooter,
motorized-scooter, or roller skates within the City on a ramp, jump or any
other device used to force the skateboard, manual-scooter, motorized-scooter,
or roller skates off the pavement unless such person is wearing a helmet, elbow
pads and knee pads, and no such ramps, jumps, or other devices used to force
skateboards, manual-scooters, motorized-scooters, or roller skates off the
pavement are allowed on any public highways, roadways, streets, alleys,
sidewalks or rights-of-way or on any private property within the City for which
a request for application of this chapter to such property has been approved by
resolution of the City Council.
   I.   No person using, operating, propelling, or otherwise riding upon any
skateboard, manual-scooter, motorized-scooter, or roller skates within the City
shall attach the same or himself to any streetcar, vehicle, bicycle, motorized
bicycle, or other mechanical device, or to any animal.
   J.   No person shall use, operate, or propel a skateboard, manual-scooter,
motorized-scooter, or roller skates within City limits later than one-half (1/
2) hour after sunset or earlier than one-half (1/2) hour prior to sunrise
without the use of an arm mounted light or reflective clothing or both; with
the exception that skateboards and roller skates may be used at the skate park
within the Lemoore Rotary Youth Plaza during special events where the overhead
floodlights at the skate park have been illuminated as scheduled by the City of
Lemoore Parks and Recreation Department.
   K.   In-line skating at the Rotary Youth Skate Park facility represents a
hazardous recreational activity and the City of Lemoore will not be liable for
injuries incurred by persons participating in the hazardous recreational
activity in the City's skate park facility.
   L.   It is unlawful for any person to possess, consume, or otherwise use,
any alcoholic beverage at the City skate park. It is unlawful for any person to
possess, consume or otherwise use, any alcoholic beverage unless a valid
alcohol use permit has been issued by the City, and the person who has been
granted an alcohol use permit has possession of the permit and is present in
the immediate vicinity of the event for which the permit was issued.
   M.   It is unlawful for any person to operate a motorized-scooter upon a
highway while under the influence of an alcoholic beverage, or any drug, or
under the combined influence of an alcoholic beverage and any drug.
   N.   The words "alcoholic beverage" as used in this section shall include,
without limitation, alcohol, spirits, beer or wine or which contains one-half
of one percent (0.50%) or more of alcohol by volume and which is fit for
consumption, either alone or, when diluted, mixed or combined with other
substances.
   O.   The word "drug" as used in this section shall include any controlled
substance as defined in Division 10 of the Health and Safety Code (commencing
with section 11000), or any imitation controlled substance as defined in
Chapter 1 of Division 10.1 of the Health and Safety Code (commencing with
section 11670).
   P.   It is unlawful for any person to enter, loiter, or remain in the City
skate park between nine o'clock (9:00) P.M. and seven o'clock (7:00) A.M. on
any day during the period of May 1 through September 30 of each year. It is
unlawful for any person to enter, loiter, or remain in the City skate park
after six o'clock (6:00) P.M. and seven o'clock (7:00) A.M. on any day during
the period of October 1 through April 30 of each year. This subsection does not
apply to organizations or groups that first obtain a City permit for night use
or are participating in a City-approved event or function.
   Q.   Notwithstanding any other provision of this section, subsections A, C,
E, and G above shall not apply to the operation of motorized-scooters. (Ord.
2017-03, 3-7-2017; amd. Ord. 2022-07, 11-1-2022)
6-6-4: EXCLUSION FOR PRIVATE SKATEBOARD PARKS:
This chapter shall not apply to any private facility constructed and engineered
for skateboarding; provided, that such facility has been duly established and
authorized by the City, and complies with the provisions of section 115800 et
seq., of the California Health and Safety Code. (Ord. 2017-03, 3-7-2017; amd.
Ord. 2022-07, 11-1-2022)
6-6-5: VIOLATIONS:
Violations of this chapter shall be punishable as infractions. In addition, at
the time of citation, any Peace Officer shall have the discretion to impound
the skateboard, manual-scooter, motorized-scooter, or roller skates as evidence
pending the adjudication of the infraction, and, at the time of impoundment,
shall issue the owner or operator thereof a receipt for all impounded property.
(Ord. 2017-03, 3-7-2017; amd. Ord. 2022-07, 11-1-2022)
CHAPTER 7
TRAFFIC OFFENDER FUND
SECTION:
6-7-0: Short Title
6-7-1: Purpose Of Fund
6-7-2: Establishment Of Administrative Fee
6-7-3: Reimbursement For Tow On Vehicles
6-7-0: SHORT TITLE:
   This chapter shall be known as the CITY OF LEMOORE TRAFFIC OFFENDER FUND.
(Ord. 9906, 1-20-1999)
6-7-1: PURPOSE OF FUND:
The city council finds and determines as follows:
   A.   Established: There is hereby established a special fund for the
purposes of receiving and expending administrative fees collected pursuant to
section
6-7-2 of this chapter. This special fund shall be known and designated as the
traffic offender fund.
   B.   Expenditure Of Monies: The expenditure of all monies in the traffic
offender fund shall be made exclusively for the purposes of traffic safety and
traffic offender programs within the city of Lemoore.
   The traffic offender program shall include the enforcement of, education
for, and prosecution of a suspended or revoked driving privilege, unlicensed
driver, and persons driving under the influence of alcohol and/or drugs.
Expenditures shall include, but not limited to, purchase of equipment,
contractual services, material and supplies, or any other expenditure related
to traffic safety and the enforcement of traffic laws with the city of Lemoore.
The administration of the fund shall conform to this code and all accounting
principles practiced by the city.
   C.   Accumulation Of Monies In The Fund: The balance remaining in the
traffic offender fund at the close of any fiscal year shall be deemed to have
been provided for a specific purpose and shall be carried forward and
accumulated in said fund for the purposes set forth herein. (Ord. 9906, 7-20-
1999)
6-7-2: ESTABLISHMENT OF ADMINISTRATIVE FEE:
   A.   Administrative Fee; Police Department: A fee to reimburse the city of
Lemoore for costs incurred in the administration of procedures for removing
vehicles shall be charged by the Lemoore police department to the owner of a
vehicle removed pursuant to section 14602.6, 12500(a), 22651(h), 22651(o), or
22651(p) of the California Vehicle Code. Said charges shall be in accordance
with and by the authority of section 22850.5 of the California Vehicle Code and
section 53158 of the Government Code.
   B.   Fee Approval: The police chief shall propose the fee authorized by this
section. The fees shall not go into effect until approved by resolution by the
Lemoore city council. The fee shall not exceed an amount that covers the actual
administrative costs incurred by the city relating to the removal, impoundment,
storage, and release of the vehicle, as determined and fixed by the city
council from time to time.
   C.   Authorization: The police chief is hereby authorized to adopt such
rules, regulations, and procedures as are necessary for the release of properly
impounded vehicles and for the Lemoore police department to impose, collect,
and administer the fee authorized by this section, subject to the requirements
of sections 22850.3 through 22851.10 of the Vehicle Code. (Ord. 9906, 7-20-
1999)
6-7-3: REIMBURSEMENT FOR TOW ON VEHICLES:
The fee may be reimbursed to the owner or person in lawful possession of the
vehicle if the fee was incurred:
   A.   Because the vehicle was towed and stored at the order of the Lemoore
police department to examine the vehicle for evidence of a crime;
   B.   Because the vehicle was towed and stored by the order of the Lemoore
police department and said towing or storage was not authorized by any of the
several provisions of the California Vehicle Code;
   C.   Because officers, agents or employees of the Lemoore police department
erred in the reporting, filing, or recording of the circumstances of the towing
and storage of the vehicle;
   D.   Because officers, agents, or employees of the Lemoore police department
erred in reporting a vehicle as subject to towing or storage or ordering a
vehicle towed and stored when in fact such vehicle was not subject to towing
and storage.
(Ord. 9906, 7-20-1999)
CHAPTER 8
RECREATIONAL VEHICLES AND BOATS
SECTION:
6-8-1: Definitions
6-8-2: Public Right-Of-Way-Parking And Storage Of Recreational Vehicles
Prohibited
6-8-3: Private Property-parking And Storage Of Recreational Vehicles Prohibited
6-8-4: Violations
6-8-1: DEFINITIONS:
For the purposes of this chapter:
BOAT: A vessel for transport by water.
PUBLIC RIGHT-OF-WAY: A street, alley, municipal parking lot, or public property
belonging to the city of Lemoore.
RECREATIONAL VEHICLE: Means and includes the following:
   ALL-TERRAIN VEHICLES: A recreational vehicle designed for or capable of
travel over rough ground, including but not limited to, 4-wheelers, 3-wheelers,
ATVs, dune buggies, and other similar type vehicles.
   AUXILIARY DOLLY: A vehicle, not designed for carrying persons or property on
its own structure, which is so constructed and used in conjunction with a
semitrailer as to support a portion of the weight of the semitrailer and any
load thereon, but not permanently attached to the semitrailer, although a part
of the weight of such dolly may rest on another vehicle.
   BUS: A motor vehicle designed for carrying more than ten persons including
the driver and used or maintained for the transportation of passengers.
   COMMERCIAL COACH: A vehicle, with or without motive power, designed and
equipped for human occupancy for industrial, professional, or commercial
purposes, including a trailer coach.
   MOTOR HOME: A vehicle, with or without motive power, designed for human
habitation for recreational or emergency occupancy.
   MOTOR TRUCK: A vehicle, designed, used or maintained primarily for the
transportation of property and which has an unladen weight in excess of 6,500
pounds.
   TENT TRAILER: A vehicle, with or without motive power, designed for human
habitation for recreational or emergency occupancy.
   TRAILER: A vehicle designed for carrying persons or property on its own
structure and for being drawn by a motor vehicle and so constructed that no
part of its weight rests upon any other vehicle and which has a wheelbase in
excess of four feet. For purposes of this chapter, a trailer shall also
include, but not be limited to, a boat trailer and utility trailer or any other
such similar apparatus.
   WATERCRAFT: A boat or other vessel that travels on water, including but not
limited to, boats, jet skis, wave runners, or any other similar personal
watercraft or vessel.
UNLADEN WEIGHT: The weight of the vehicle equipped and ready for operation on
the road including the fenders, body, equipment required by law, any special
cabinets, boxes or body parts permanently attached to the vehicle, oil in the
motor, radiator full of water, with five gallons of gasoline or equivalent
weight of other motor fuel.
(Ord. 2024-07, 12-3-2024)
6-8-2: PUBLIC RIGHT-OF-WAY-PARKING AND STORAGE OF RECREATIONAL VEHICLES
PROHIBITED:
   Subject to Section
6-8-3, subdivision F, no person shall abandon, park, store, leave, keep or
maintain, or permit to be abandoned, parked, stored, left, kept or maintained,
any recreational vehicle or boat upon any public right-of-way. Unless an
approved temporary parking permit has been obtained from the Police Department,
no habitation or occupancy of the recreational vehicle or boat shall be allowed
at any time that the recreational vehicle or boat is located on the public
right-of-way except when a person is actively loading or unloading the
recreational vehicle or boat.
(Ord. 2024-07, 12-3-2024)
6-8-3: PRIVATE PROPERTY-PARKING AND STORAGE OF RECREATIONAL VEHICLES
PROHIBITED:
   A.   Nothing in this section shall prohibit the parking or storage of a
recreational vehicle or boat on any private property in a garage or structure
that fully encloses the recreational vehicle or boat. For purposes of this
section, “fully encloses” means that the garage or structure provides coverage
of the recreational vehicle or boat on all four sides so that no part of the
recreational vehicle or boat can be seen outside of the garage or structure.
   B.   The recreational vehicle or boat shall not be used for human habitation
or occupancy for longer than seven (7) days when it is located on private
property unless a temporary (7-day) habitation permit has been obtained from
the police department or as is consistent with Employee Housing as defined
within Section
9-4A-5 and which meets the requirements under Health and Safety Code section
17008.
   C.   Except as provided herein, no person shall abandon, park, store, leave,
keep or maintain, or permit to be abandoned, parked, stored, left, kept or
maintained, any boat or recreational vehicle on private property.
   D.   Rear Or Side Yard Storage: One recreational vehicle and one boat may be
parked, stored, left, kept, or maintained at a single-family residence if the
recreational vehicle and/or boat comply with the following conditions:
      1.   The recreational vehicle and/or boat are each 45 feet or less in
length, less than 16 feet in height, and less than eight feet in width;
      2.   The recreational vehicle and/or boat are located in the legally
permitted rear yard or the legally permitted side yard as defined in Section
9-12-2 of Title 9 of the Lemoore Municipal Code.
   E.   Storage on Residential Driveway: Only one recreational vehicle or boat
may be parked, stored, left, kept, or maintained in the front driveway of a
single-family residence if the recreational vehicle and/or the boat each comply
with the following conditions:
      1.   The recreational vehicle and/or boat cannot be properly stored
pursuant to the requirements of subsection D.
      2.   When stored, the recreational vehicle and/or boat shall be
positioned to provide a minimum setback of four feet from adjoining properties
and sidewalks. The recreational vehicle and/or boat shall not be stored in a
manner that blocks secondary exits or encroaches upon the public right-of-way.
      3.   The recreational vehicle and/or boat shall be stored on the
residence’s primary driveway or on a properly permitted and approved pad that
is in compliance with applicable rain runoff standards.
      4.   As stored, the recreational vehicle and/or boat shall not exceed a
height of 16 feet.
      5.   The recreational vehicle and/or boat shall have a valid and current
DMV registration, corresponding to a current resident of the property where the
recreational vehicle and/or boat is being stored, and the recreational vehicle
and/or boat shall not be in a planned nonoperation filing (PNO) status.
      6.   The recreational vehicle and/or boat must be operable and shall not
be stored in a dismantled state, or with severe damage.
      7.   The recreational vehicle and/or boat shall not be stored with open
slide outs, it shall not be connected to sewer or water, and it shall not be
inhabited at any time unless it is being actively cleaned, repaired, loaded,
unloaded or a temporary 7-day habitation permit has been obtained from the
police department.
   F.   Parking Permits: Registered owners of recreational vehicles and/or
boats that do not fit under the guidelines for storage within the rear, side or
front of a residence, as allowed within this chapter, may apply for a permit,
allowing them to temporarily store their recreational vehicle and/or boat in
their driveway or the public roadway in front of their residence, if allowable,
for 7 days. Issued permits shall be subject to the following conditions:
      1.   The recreational vehicle and/or boat may be parked in the driveway
temporarily without the required setbacks in subsection E.3., provided the
recreational vehicle and/or boat does not encroach upon the public right-of-way
(e.g., sidewalk).
      2.   The recreational vehicle and/or boat shall not be parked on a public
street if it creates a hazardous condition. All recreational vehicles and/or
boats parked on a public street, even if permitted, shall be subject to
California law prohibiting parking on a public street for more than 72
consecutive hours.
      3.   The recreational vehicle and/or boat shall not be stored in a manner
where any portion of the vehicle or boat encroaches into the public right-of-
way or, if parked within the roadway, encroaches further than reasonably
necessary into the public right-of-way.
      4.   Permits can be obtained from the police department or code
enforcement. Permits will be issued to the current address to which the
recreational vehicle and/or boat is being stored/parked. Permits should be
requested a minimum of ten days prior to the dates for which the permit is
needed.
      5.   Issuance of permits shall be limited to one permit per month and a
maximum of 10 permits during the 12-month period preceding the most recent
permit request.
      6.   Permits shall be conspicuously posted on the recreational vehicle
and/or boat in a manner that reasonably ensures visibility.
      7.   At no time, shall there be electrical extension cords, or any other
connection placed across the sidewalk or other public areas.
      8.   Any violation of these conditions shall result in the revocation of
the permit and/or a citation for violation of Section
6-8-3 of the Lemoore Municipal Code.
(Ord. 2024-07, 12-3-2024)
6-8-4: VIOLATIONS:
   A.   Violations of Section
6-8-3, or any subdivision of this chapter, shall be assessed an administrative
citation pursuant to Title 1 of the Lemoore Municipal Code and shall be in an
amount consistent with Section
1-4-1.
   B.   Owners issued an administrative citation pursuant to this section shall
have 15 days from the date of citation in which to comply with the requirements
of this chapter. During such 15-day period, owners shall not be cited for a
subsequent violation unless such violation occurs 15 days after the prior
citation.
(Ord. 2024-07, 12-3-2024)
TITLE 7
PUBLIC WAYS AND PROPERTY
CHAPTER 1
USE OF PUBLIC WAYS AND PROPERTY
SECTION:
7-1-1: Rules and Regulations
7-1-1: RULES AND REGULATIONS:
Regulations regarding the use of public streets, alleys, parks and other public
areas shall be established by resolution of the City Council and upon posting
thereof on said property.
Any person violating any of the provisions of this Section shall be guilty of
an infraction and shall be punishable as set forth in sections 19c and 19d of
the Penal Code of the State of California. (Ord. 7707, 9-20-77)
CHAPTER 2
PRECISE PLAN OF STREETS AND HIGHWAYS
SECTION:
7-2-1: Purpose
7-2-2: Definitions
7-2-3: Application of Provisions
7-2-4: Contents of Plan
7-2-5: Preparation of Plan
7-2-6: Additions and Amendments to Plan
7-2-7: Building Setback Lines
7-2-8: Nonconforming Uses
7-2-9: Variances
7-2-10: Recording Precise Plan Lines
7-2-11: Violations
7-2-1: PURPOSE:
In order to conserve and promote the public health, safety and general welfare
and to make provisions for essential transportation highways, a Precise Plan of
Streets and Highways is hereby adopted to regulate the location of building and
other improvements with respect to existing or planned rights of way. For the
purpose of convenience and practical requirements and limitations, such Precise
Plan will be developed progressively by the addition from time to time, in the
manner prescribed by law, of detailed plans for certain streets or highways and
that when such detailed plans have been prepared, processed and adopted as
aforesaid, they shall become a part of the Precise Plan of Streets and
Highways. Said Precise Plan of Streets and Highways is adopted in accordance
with the Planning Law of the State of California 1 and acts amendatory thereto,
and is based on the Adopted General Plan of the North Kings County Planning
Areas, Lemoore Portion. (1975 Code §10-4.01)
 
Notes
1 1. West's Ann. Cal. Gov. Code, §§65000 et seq.
7-2-2: DEFINITIONS:
When used in this Chapter, the following words and terms shall have the
meanings ascribed to them in this Section:
BUILDING SETBACK LINES: Lines as determined by the Zoning Ordinance 2 and
measured from Precise Plan lines such distance as required by the Zoning
Ordinance for the respective zone classifications.
COUNCIL: The City Council of the City of Lemoore.
PLANNING COMMISSION: The Planning Commission of the City of Lemoore 1 .
PRECISE PLAN LINES: Lines as indicated on a map of a precise section of a
street or highway, the distance between said lines indicating the right-of-way
width as proposed for such street or highway.
ZONING ORDINANCE: The Zoning Ordinance of the City of Lemoore and ordinances
amendatory thereto 2 . (1975 Code §10-4.02)
 
Notes
2 2. See Title 9 of this Code.
1 1. See Title 2, Chapter 1 of this Code.
2 2. See Title 9 of this Code.
7-2-3: APPLICATION OF PROVISIONS:
   A.   Generally: The provisions of this Chapter and all additions or
amendments thereto shall be applicable to any property, building, structure or
other improvement situated within the City which is owned, leased, controlled,
operated or occupied by any person or any public or quasi-public district,
agency, corporation or association excepting therefrom the State or County.
(1975 Code §10-4.22)
   B.   Buildings: No building, structure or other improvement, whether
publicly or privately owned, shall hereafter be erected, constructed, replaced,
moved in or placed within the Precise Plan lines of streets and highways as
adopted by this Chapter or any additions or amendments thereto, or closer to
the street or highway lines than the building setback lines as determined by
this Chapter or any additions or amendments thereto; and no permit or approval
therefor shall be issued by any official or employee of the City. (1975 Code
§10-4.07)
   C.   Subdivisions: The street and highway design of any subdivision of land
falling under the provisions of the Subdivision Map Act of the State of
California and other subdivision laws as are now or may subsequently be adopted
by the City 3 shall be based on Precise Plan lines as adopted by this Chapter
or any additions or amendments hereof. (1975 Code §10-4.09)
 
Notes
3 3. See Title 8, Chapter 7 of this Code.
7-2-4: CONTENTS OF PLAN:
The Precise Plan for Streets and Highways shall be described by maps based on
the Adopted General Plan of the North Kings County Planning Area, Lemoore
Portion, which with appropriate notations, information and data appearing
thereon shall set forth in detail all pertinent features necessary to assure
compliance with and enforcement of the provision and requirements of said
Precise Plan, including the proposed widths of rights of way and may show the
location of buildings and other improvements with respect to existing or
planned rights of way and the recommended treatment of such streets and
highways.
7-2-5: PREPARATION OF PLAN:
The Planning Commission is charged with the responsibility of preparing the
Precise Plan of Streets and Highways and the required resolutions and maps with
respect thereto, and shall prepare and maintain for public inspection a map of
the North Kings County Planning Area, Lemoore Portion, on which each part of
said Precise Plan shall be shown and said detailed map shall be of such scale
as will permit the showing thereon of all dimensions and other data necessary
to completely show the requirements imposed by the adoption of such Plan. The
said map showing the comprehensive Precise Plan of Streets and Highways, or
such portions thereof as may be adopted, shall show upon its face proper
notations identifying the particular ordinance and the corresponding detailed
larger scale map pertaining to such portion of the comprehensive Precise Plan
referred to by each such notation. (1975 Code §10-4.03)
7-2-6: ADDITIONS AND AMENDMENTS TO PLAN:
   A.   Adoption of Additions and Amendments: Additions or amendments to the
Precise Plan of Streets and Highways shall be adopted by ordinance in
accordance with the provisions of the Planning Law of the State of California 1
, and acts amendatory thereto except, that notices of the time and place of all
public hearings shall also be given by first class mail to each property owner,
as shown on the last assessment roll of the County of Kings, whose property is
within or abuts a proposed Precise Plan line. Each addition and amendment shall
contain, as a part thereof, a map of the street or highway which is the subject
of such addition or amendment and such map shall be a detailed map as required
by Section
7-2-4 of this Chapter. Each such addition or amendment and the map which is a
part thereof shall have the title of "Precise Plan Lines for (Name of Street or
Highway)". (1975 Code §10-4.04)
   B.   Interim Period: In the event of the introduction of a proposed addition
or amendment to this Chapter for the purpose of adopting Precise Plan lines for
any street or highway, as provided herein, at a duly constituted meeting of the
Council, no permit shall be issued for any building, structure or other
improvement not complying with the proposed Precise Plan lines for said street
or highway or any property fronting, facing or located adjacent to such street
or highway as indicated by said proposed Precise Plan lines. In the event said
addition or amendment is not adopted, such permits may be issued immediately
upon rejection of said proposed addition or amendment by the Council; provided,
that all conditions imposed by law for the issuance of said permits have been
complied with. (1975 Code §10-4.05)
 
Notes
1 1. West's Ann. Cal. Gov. Code §§65000 et seq.
7-2-7: BUILDING SETBACK LINES:
All building setback lines as designated by the Zoning Ordinance 1 shall be
measured from the Precise Plan lines as set forth on maps thereof on and after
the effective date of said maps. Building setback lines shall be that distance
from the Precise Plan lines as designated for the respective zoning
classification in the Zoning Ordinance. (1975 Code §10-4.06)
 
Notes
1 1. See Title 9 of this Code.
7-2-8: NONCONFORMING USES:
If any buildings, structures or other improvements existed within the Precise
Plan lines of streets and highways as established by this chapter or any
additions or amendments hereof, on the effective date hereof, or closer to the
street or highway lines than the building setback lines as determined by this
chapter or any additions or amendments hereof, on the effective date hereof,
such nonconforming buildings, structures or other improvements may continue
with reasonable maintenance; provided however, that no such nonconforming
building, structure or other improvement shall be moved, altered, enlarged or
reconstructed; except, that alterations which do not enlarge, add to or extend
such buildings, structures or other improvements into the area lying between
the existing street or highway property line and the precise plan lines may be
approved to the extent of and in accordance with the procedure for improvements
to nonconforming buildings, structures and other improvements as outlined in
the zoning ordinance 2 . (1975 Code §10-4.8)
 
Notes
2 2. See title 9, chapter 2, article C of this code.
7-2-9: VARIANCES:
The planning commission shall have the authority to grant variances from the
terms of this chapter or any additions or amendments thereto in order to
prevent or lessen practical difficulties and unnecessary hardships or results
inconsistent with the objectives and purposes of this chapter as would occur
through a strict or literal interpretation and enforcement of the provisions
hereof.
   A.   Application For Variance:
      1.   Filing Of Application; Contents: The application for variance shall
be filed with the Lemoore planning commission and shall be accompanied by a fee
fixed by resolution of the council in an amount sufficient to cover the cost of
processing the application as provided in this chapter.
The application for variance shall be made on a form prescribed by the planning
commission which shall include the following data:
         a.   Name and address of the applicant;
         b.   Statement that the applicant is the owner of the property or is
the authorized agent of the owner;
         c.   Address or description of the property;
         d.   Statement of the precise nature of the variance requested and the
practical difficulty or unnecessary hardship or result inconsistent with the
objectives and purposes of this chapter which would occur through a strict or
literal interpretation and enforcement hereof, together with any other data
pertinent to the findings, prerequisite to the granting of a variance as set
forth in subsection B of this section.
The application shall also be accompanied by an accurate scale drawing of the
site showing all existing and proposed locations of streets, property lines,
uses, buildings, structures or other improvements, driveways, pedestrian walks,
off street parking and off street loading facilities and landscaped areas.
      2.   Investigation Of Applicant: The secretary of the planning commission
shall give notice to the applicant of the time when the application will be
considered and said secretary may give notice of the time to any other
interested party. The planning commission shall cause an investigation of the
application to be made and shall prepare a report thereon which shall be sent
to the applicant. The application together with a copy of the aforesaid report
shall be referred to the planning commission within fifteen (15) days from the
date of application.
      3.   Hearing On Application: The planning commission may, if it so
determines, hold a public hearing for the purpose of considering an application
for a variance. Such public hearing shall be held not less than ten (10) days
nor more than thirty (30) days after the filing of the application.
   Notice of a public hearing shall be given not less than ten (10) days nor
more than thirty (30) days prior to the date of the hearing by mailing, postage
prepaid, a notice of the time and place of the hearing to all persons whose
names appear on the latest adopted tax roll of the county of Kings who own
property which is within or abuts the precise plan lines from which a variance
is being requested. The notice shall be titled as follows:
      NOTICE OF PROPOSED VARIANCE FROM THE PRECISE PLAN LINES FOR
                          BETWEEN                           AND
______________________.
and shall set forth the nature of the proposed change, a description and
location of the property under consideration and the time and place at which a
public hearing on the variance will be held. Notice is required to be given
only to property owners whose property is within three hundred feet (300')
measured from the property upon which a variance proceeding has been initiated.
   At the public hearing, the planning commission shall review the application,
the report, the statements and drawings submitted therewith, and shall receive
relevant evidence concerning the variance, particularly with respect to the
findings set forth in subsection B of this section. (1975 Code §10-4.11)
   B.   Findings Required For Granting A Variance: The planning commission may
grant variance from the terms of this chapter, or any additions or amendments
hereto, if, on the basis of the application, report, statements and drawings
and the evidence submitted, the planning commission makes the following
findings:
      1.   That there are exceptional or extraordinary circumstances or
conditions applicable to the property upon which the proposed building,
structure or other improvement is sought to be erected, constructed, altered,
replaced, reconstructed, moved or placed.
      2.   That the granting of the application for variance is necessary for
the preservation and enjoyment of substantial property rights.
      3.   That the granting of the application for variance will not be
detrimental to the public health, safety or welfare and will not adversely
affect existing adopted Precise Plans or General Plans of the City and will not
be materially injurious to properties or improvements in the vicinity.
      4.   That the granting of the variance will not constitute a grant of
special privilege.
   C.   Conditions of Variance: Upon the granting of a variance under the
provisions of this Chapter, the Planning Commission shall designate such
conditions in connection therewith which will, in the opinion of the Planning
Commission, result in the variance causing the minimum possible interference
with the purposes of this Chapter and with the ultimate accomplishment of the
objectives of the aforesaid Precise Plan lines. (1975 Code §10-4.13)
   D.   Decision of Planning Commission: The Planning Commission may grant or
deny an application for variance and shall record its action by formal
resolution. A variance may be granted for a limited time period. Within three
(3) days following the date of the decision of the Planning Commission, written
notice of said decision shall be given by mail to the applicant and the
Council.
   A variance which has been granted by the Planning Commission shall become
effective upon the expiration of fifteen (15) days following the date of which
the variance was granted unless an appeal has been filed with the City Clerk or
unless the Council has initiated proceedings to review the decision of the
Planning Commission all as provided herein. (1975 Code §10-4.14)
   E.   Appeals Regarding Initial Applications and Renewal Applications:
      1.   Within fifteen (15) days following the date of a decision of the
Planning Commission on an application for variance or an application for
renewal of a variance, the decision may be appealed to the Council by the
applicant or any other interested party.
      2.   An appeal shall be filed with the City Clerk and shall state
specifically wherein it is claimed that there was an error or abuse of
discretion by the Planning Commission or wherein the decision is not supported
by the evidence in the record.
      3.   Within five (5) days after the filing of an appeal from a decision
of the Planning Commission on an application for a variance, the Planning
Commission shall transmit to the City Clerk for variance application the scale
drawing of the site and all other data filed therewith, the minutes of the
public hearing, if a public hearing was held, the report of the Planning
Commission, the findings of the Planning Commission and the decision of the
Planning Commission on the application for variance.
      4.   Where an appeal is from a decision of the Planning Commission on an
application for a renewal of a variance, the Planning Department shall transmit
to the City Clerk within five (5) days after the filing of an appeal in
addition to the above, the application for renewal, the report on the renewal
application, the findings and decision of the Planning Commission on said
renewal application.
      5.   The City Clerk shall give notice to the applicant and to the
appellant (if the applicant is not the appellant) and may give notice to any
other interested party the time when an appeal will be considered by the
Council. (1975 Code §10-4.15)
   F.   Decision Review by City Council:
      1.   Review: Within fifteen (15) days following the date of a decision by
the Planning Commission on an application for variance, or an application for
renewal of variance, or on the revocation of a variance, on its motion, the
Council may initiate proceedings to review the decision of the Planning
Commission. (1975 Code §10-4.16)
      2.   Council Decisions: When a decision of the Planning Commission on an
application for variance, or an application for renewal of variance, or on the
revocation of a variance is brought before the Council either on appeal or on
its own motion, the Council may affirm, reverse or modify a decision of the
Planning Commission; provided, that if a decision denying a variance or denying
a renewal of variance is reversed, or a decision granting a variance or a
decision granting a renewal of variance is modified, the Council shall, on the
basis of the record transmitted by the Planning Commission and on the basis of
such additional evidence as may be submitted, make the findings prerequisite to
the granting of a variance as prescribed and set forth in subsection B of this
Section.
      3.   Effect of Council Decisions: A variance or renewal of variance which
has been the subject of an appeal to the Council or which has been the subject
of review by the Council shall become effective three (3) days following the
date on which the variance or renewal of variance is granted and approved by
the Council. (1975 Code §10-4.17)
   G.   Renewal of Variance:
      1.   Renewal Application: A variance which has been granted may be
renewed for one additional period of one year; provided, that prior to the
expiration of one year from the date when the variance originally became
effective, an application for the renewal of a variance shall be filed and
processed in the manner set forth in subsection A of this Section which governs
the filing and processing of applications for variances.
      2.   Granting or Denial of Renewal Application: The Planning Commission
may grant an application for renewal of a variance if it is able to make the
findings prerequisite to the granting of a variance as prescribed and set forth
in subsection B of this Section. The application for renewal shall be denied if
such findings cannot be made.
      3.   Appeal and Review: Within fifteen (15) days following the date of a
decision of the Planning Commission on an application for renewal, the decision
may be appealed to the Council. If no appeal is filed within said fifteen (15)
day period and if the Council within said fifteen (15) day period does not
initiate proceedings to review the decision of the Planning Commission as
provided herein, the decision of the Planning Commission shall be final and
conclusive. (1975 Code §10-4.19)
   H.   Revocation of Variance:
      1.   Failure to Obtain Building Permit and to Commence Construction:
Unless, prior to the expiration of one year following the date on which the
variance became effective, a building permit is obtained from the City Building
Official and construction is commenced and diligently pursued toward completion
on the site which was the subject of the variance application, the Planning
Commission shall, on its own motion, give written notice to the person or
persons to whom the variance was granted that a hearing will be held by the
Planning Commission for the purpose of revoking the variance.
   Notice of said hearing shall be given not less than ten (10) days nor more
than thirty (30) days prior to the date of the hearing by either personal
service of a copy of said notice on the person or persons to whom the variance
was granted or by sending a copy of said notice by certified mail to said
person or persons. The notice shall state the reason or reasons why action is
being taken for the purpose of revoking the variance.
   At said hearing, the Planning Commission shall receive all relevant
testimony concerning the variance, the issuance of any building permit, the
commencement of construction, the extent of the construction and the diligence
with which construction was pursued toward completion. If the Planning
Commission finds that no building permit was obtained within the one year
period or that construction was not diligently pursued toward completion, then
the variance shall be revoked.
   If the variance is revoked by the Planning Commission, the person or persons
to whom the variance had previously been granted may, within fifteen (15) days
following the date of the decision of the Planning Commission, appeal the
decision to the Council. If no appeal is filed within said fifteen (15) day
period as provided herein and if the Council within said fifteen (15) day
period does not initiate proceedings to review the decision of the Planning
Commission as provided in subsection F1 of this Section, the decision of the
Commission shall be final and conclusive.
   The appeal shall be filed with the City Clerk and shall state specifically
wherein it is claimed that there was an error or abuse of discretion by the
Planning Commission or wherein the decision is not supported by the evidence in
the record.
   Within five (5) days after the filing of an appeal, the Planning Commission
shall transmit to the City Clerk the variance application, the minutes of the
hearing, the report of the findings of the Planning Commission and their
decision.
   The City Clerk shall give notice to the appellant of the time when the
appeal will be considered by the Council. (1975 Code §10-4.18)
      2.   Failure to Comply with Conditions Upon Which Variance was Granted:
         a.   A variance granted subject to a condition or conditions shall be
revoked by the Planning Commission if the condition or any one of the
conditions are not complied with.
         b.   When the condition or any one of the conditions of a variance
have not been complied with, the Planning Commission shall notify the holder of
the variance that such condition or conditions have not been complied with and
shall give the holder a reasonable period of time within which to comply with
said condition or conditions. If the holder of the variance fails to comply
with the condition or conditions within such period of time, the Planning
Commission on its own motion shall give written notice to the holder of the
variance that a hearing will be held by the Planning Commission for the purpose
of revoking the variance.
         c.   Notice of said hearing shall be given not less than ten (10) days
nor more than thirty (30) days prior to the date of the hearing by either
personal service of a copy of said notice on the holder of the variance or by
sending a copy of said notice by certified mail or registered mail to said
holder of the variance. The notice shall state the reason or reasons why action
is being taken for the purpose of revoking the variance.
         d.   At said hearing, the Planning Commission shall receive all
relevant testimony concerning the variance and the condition or conditions
which were imposed. If the Planning Commission finds that the condition or any
one of the conditions imposed have not been complied with, then the variance
shall be revoked.
         e.   If the variance is revoked by the Planning Commission, the holder
of the variance may, within fifteen (15) days following the date of the
decision of the Planning Commission, appeal the decision to the Council. If no
appeal is filed within said fifteen (15) day period as provided herein, and if
the Council within said fifteen (15) day period does not initiate proceedings
to review the decision of the Planning Commission as provided in subsection F1
of this Section, the decision of the Planning Commission shall be final and
conclusive.
         f.   The appeal shall be filed with the City Clerk and shall state
specifically wherein it is claimed that there was an error or abuse of
discretion by the Planning Commission or wherein the decision is not supported
by the evidence in the record.
         g.   Within five (5) days after the filing of an appeal, the Planning
Commission shall transmit to the City Clerk the variance application, the
minutes of the public hearing on the variance application, if a public hearing
was held, the report, findings and decision of the Planning Commission on the
variance application, the report on the failure of appellant to comply with the
condition or conditions of the variance, the minutes of the hearing on the
matter of the revocation, the findings and decision of the Planning Commission
on the matter of the revocation of the variance.
         h.   The City Clerk shall give notice to the appellant of the time
when the appeal will be considered by the Council. (1975 Code §10-4.20)
      I.   New Application For Variance: Following the denial of an application
for a variance or the revocation of a variance for failure to comply with the
condition or conditions on which the variance was originally granted, no
application for the same or substantially the same variance on the same or
substantially the same site shall be filed within one year after the date of
the denial of the variance application or the revocation of the variance. (1975
Code §10-4.21)
7-2-10: RECORDING PRECISE PLAN LINES:
The secretary of the planning commission shall cause to be recorded in the
office of the county recorder of the county of Kings a full, true and correct
copy, duly attested, of all maps of the precise plan lines which are herein
adopted or hereafter added to this chapter by amendment or addition. (1975 Code
§10-4.10)
7-2-11: VIOLATIONS:
Any building, structure or other improvement constructed, erected, altered,
moved, enlarged or maintained and any use of a site contrary to the provisions
of this chapter or any addition or amendment hereto shall be and is hereby
declared to be unlawful and a public nuisance, and the city attorney is hereby
authorized to institute the necessary legal proceedings for the abatement,
removal and enjoinment thereof in the manner provided by law and shall take
such other steps as may be necessary to accomplish these ends.
All remedies provided herein shall be cumulative and not exclusive. (1975 Code
§10-4.23)
CHAPTER 3
STREET NAMING AND HOUSE NUMBERING
SECTION:
7-3-1: Purpose
7-3-2: Roadway Naming
7-3-3: House And Building Numbering
7-3-1: PURPOSE:
This chapter establishes regulations for and the process of naming streets
within the city of Lemoore. It also establishes the process for assigning house
numbers to individual homes and other buildings. By adopting these standards
and policies, the city establishes uniform practices for the naming of streets
in order to avoid potential conflicting names or misunderstandings and to
promote the public welfare and general convenience of the community. (Ord.
2012-01, 4-17-2012)
7-3-2: ROADWAY NAMING:
Street names within a proposed subdivision shall comply with the following
standards:
   A.   General Naming Standards:
      1.   Street names shall be such that they do not duplicate or confuse
with any other street names in Lemoore and its vicinity (e.g., the sphere of
influence, Lemoore Naval Air Station). Examples of such duplication are
"Washington Street" and "Washington Avenue".
      2.   Street names that sound very similar shall be avoided. This is to
limit diction problems when people are reporting under stress. Examples of such
confusing names are "Beach" and "Peach", or "Pinewood" and "Pinwood".
      3.   A street that is proposed to be extended without any significant
change in direction, either now or in the future, shall have the same name as
the existing street.
      4.   A new street that is aligned to an existing street but otherwise is
not intended to be connected to the existing street, either now or in the
future, will have a different name. This is to make it convenient for strangers
to town to locate addresses and prevent unnecessary delay in response time in
emergency situations.
      5.   The street name will not change if a street changes direction by
curving gradually over a sufficient distance.
      6.   The streets shall not be named after people's first names and shall
have not more than two (2) words. Exceptions may be granted in a case where the
street name is to honor a person of national, state, or local importance (e.g.,
Martin Luther King Avenue, George Washington Street).
      7.   Except for county avenues, the street names shall not be numerals.
      8.   When an existing street name consists of a fractional number (e.g.,
181/2 Avenue, 183/4 Avenue, and 191/2 Avenue), those may be changed to new
names upon annexation.
      9.   The combined number of letters in a street name (excluding the
suffix) shall not exceed fifteen (15).
   B.   Suffixes:
      1.   Street suffixes in any subdivision or development may be:
         a.   The same for all streets;
         b.   The same for all streets except cul-de-sac streets;
         c.   North-south streets as "avenue" and east-west streets as
"streets";
         d.   Curvilinear streets as "drive" or "trail"; or
         e.   Short streets (less than 500 feet) as "way".
      2.   The name of cul-de-sac streets shall be different from the main
street from which it originates. The suffix of cul-de-sac streets shall be as
follows:
         a.   "Court" if it is generally east of the street it originates from;
         b.   "Circle" if it is generally west of the street it originates
from;
         c.   "Lane" if it is generally north of the street it originates from;
         d.   "Place" if it is generally south of the street it originates
from.
      3.   Where a cul-de-sac street crosses another street, the portion of the
cul-de-sac street on either side of the other street will have the same name
except for the suffix.
   C.   Street Name Theme: Street names in an area or subdivision shall be from
one single theme except for any existing street to be extended into the area or
subdivision. Themes on which the streets are named may include, but are not
limited to, trees, flowers, fruits, birds, presidents, and states.
   D.   Approval Of Street Names: Prior to recording street names, the public
works, police, fire, and planning departments shall review the names for
potential conflicts and direct changes of the subdivider as appropriate. The
planning commission is hereby charged with the responsibility to process all
instances wherein street names on the same alignment are different and to
recommend one name for said street to the city council or the board of
supervisors of the county of Kings if the said streets are in the county and
metropolitan area. (Ord. 2012-01, 4-17-2012)
7-3-3: HOUSE AND BUILDING NUMBERING:
There is hereby established a uniform system for numbering buildings fronting
on all streets, avenues, and public ways in the city and the metropolitan area
surrounding the city as hereinafter provided, and all houses and other
buildings shall be numbered in accordance with the provisions of this section.
   A.   General Building And Space Numbering Standards:
      1.   City Core Area: All buildings fronting on all streets, avenues and
public ways in the "city core area", which is bounded by Lemoore Avenue, Bush
Street, Martin Street, and Cinnamon Drive, shall be made to conform to the
provisions of this subsection and in accordance with the building and space
numbering map on file in the office of the city clerk which is hereby made a
part of this section.
      Except as otherwise provided in this subsection and insofar as it shall
be possible to do so, each unit of building number shall represent a frontage
or space of twelve and one-half feet (121/2'), and each unit of block tier
number shall successively be increased by one hundred (100) for each successive
tier. For the purpose of this subsection, the term "tier" or "block tier" as
used in this subsection shall mean all blocks between two (2) parallel adjacent
streets in any direction, all blocks in said tier having the same number.
      For the purpose of this subsection, the base or reference point from
which block tier numbers shall be consecutively assigned is hereby designated
as the intersection of Lemoore Avenue with Bush Street.
      In numbering spaces and buildings, the number shall increase in the
direction of increased tiers and proceeding along a street in this direction,
the odd numbers shall be on the south and west side, as the case may be, and
the even numbers shall be on the north and east side, as the case may be.
      2.   All Other Areas Of The City And The Metropolitan Building Number
Area: All buildings fronting on all streets, avenues, and public ways in the
city, except for the buildings fronting on all streets, avenues, and public
ways as described in subsection A1 of this section and all streets, avenues,
and public ways in the metropolitan building number area, as hereinafter
described, shall be numbered in accordance with the provisions of this
subsection.
         a.   Metropolitan Building Numbering Area Described: The metropolitan
building numbering area is that area bounded as follows: 17th Avenue on the
east; Iona Avenue on the south to the right-of-way of Highway 198 and along
said freeway to Highway No. 41; Highway No. 41 on the west to a point three
hundred thirty feet (330') north of Hanford-Armona Road; thence easterly
parallel to the Hanford-Armona Road to 183/4th Avenue (Liberty Drive); thence
northerly along 183/4th Avenue to a point 330 feet north of the center section
line; thence easterly parallel to Glendale Avenue to 17th Avenue, the East
Boundary Road.
         b.   Baselines: Lemoore Avenue is hereby designated as the north-
south base line and Bush Street is hereby designated as the east- west
baseline.
         c.   Building Numbers: Building numbers shall be assigned beginning at
the Lemoore Avenue baseline at one hundred (100) numbers per three hundred
thirty feet (330') (1/16 of a mile) east and west of the line, and building
numbers shall be assigned beginning at the Bush Street baseline at one hundred
(100) numbers per three hundred thirty feet (330') north and south of the Bush
Street baseline.
         d.   Frontage: There shall be assigned approximately six and six-
tenths feet (6.6') of frontage per number adjusted to conform with the actual
distance in any section within the area subject to the provisions of this
section, including the metropolitan building numbering area.
         e.   Odd And Even Numbers: Even numbers shall be assigned on the north
and east sides of streets; odd numbers shall be assigned on the south and west
sides of streets.
         f.   Street Orientation: Streets oriented north of the Bush Street
baseline shall have a prefix "north", and streets oriented south of the Bush
Street baseline shall have a prefix "south". Streets oriented east of the
Lemoore Avenue baseline shall have a prefix "east", and streets oriented west
of the Lemoore Avenue baseline shall have a prefix of "west". The prefix shall
only be required when the street is in both directional areas.
         g.   Diagonal Streets: The numbering of diagonal streets shall be
progressive in the same direction at the same rate of one hundred (100) numbers
per three hundred thirty feet (330'), with an adjustment being made in the
frontage per number depending on the degree of the diagonal.
         h.   Curved Streets: Curved streets shall be assigned the numbers
assigned from the grid system at that point and progress according to the
alignment of the streets. Such curved streets and the assignment of numbers
therefor shall receive special consideration in the integration of the system
into this chapter as and when they shall hereafter occur.
         i.   Official House Numbering Map Adopted: That certain map entitled
"Detailed house numbering system for the Lemoore Area, bounded by, but not
including 21st Avenue (Marsh Drive), 161/2 Avenue (Jackson Avenue), 171/2th
Avenue, and a line measured three hundred thirty feet (330') north of the
Glendale Avenue alignment" is hereby established as the official building
numbering map for all of the streets, avenues, and public ways in the city,
save and except those streets within the city core area as covered by
subsection A1 of this section.
      3.   Numbering Of Additional Dwelling Units Or Structures Fronting An
Alley:
         a.   When additional dwelling units are approved on the same yard, the
addresses shall be the same as the primary structure with a letter suffix added
to the address (e.g., A, B, C).
         b.   When numbering structures that front an alley, their address
shall incorporate the nearest facing street and use an "X", "Y", or "Z" suffix
after the address number.
      4.   Numbers For Multi-Family Residential Properties: Tenant units within
multi-family residential properties (e.g., apartments, condominiums) shall be
assigned unit numbers. The numbering shall be lowest to highest right to left
or left to right as determined by direction of numbering at the street. Numbers
shall start at one hundred (100) for units on the first floor, two hundred
(200) for second floor, and so on for each additional floor. Unit numbers shall
not repeat within the same complex so as to distinguish units in different
buildings.
   B.   Issuance Of House Numbers: The planning department, building inspector,
or other official designated by the city council, shall be authorized to issue
building numbers in the city and metropolitan area as hereinabove described.
Numbers assigned shall be recorded and plotted on the house numbering system
map which is hereby adopted, and he shall maintain an index file method of
keeping proper records to avoid duplication of numbers or error in assignment.
   C.   Specifications For Numbers:
      1.   Building numbers shall be not less than three inches (3") high,
shall be legible, of durable material, and be placed so same can be seen from
the street.
      2.   All owners or persons in charge of buildings shall cause the proper
numbers to be so placed upon the same in accordance herewith or on some
conspicuous place visible from the street in the front thereof in conformity
with the numbers assigned by the building inspector in accordance with the
provisions of this section.
   D.   Notification Of New, Changed, Or Corrected Addresses: The following
departments, agencies, and service providers shall be notified, in writing, of
new addresses, or changed or corrected addresses, upon approval or issuance by
the city:
      1.   AT&T;
      2.   Central dispatch;
      3.   Comcast;
      4.   Kings County assessor's office;
      5.   Lemoore building department;
      6.   Lemoore police department;
      7.   Lemoore fire department;
      8.   Lemoore water and refuse;
      9.   Southern California Gas Co. (the gas company);
      10.   The property owner(s) of record; and
      11.   The U.S. postmaster. (Ord. 2012-01, 4-17-2012)
CHAPTER 4
ADVERTISING DISPLAYS ADJACENT TO FREEWAYS
SECTION:
7-4-1: Definitions
7-4-2: Prohibited Advertising Displays Adjacent to Landscaped Freeways
7-4-3: Removal of Prohibited Displays
7-4-4: Exemptions from Provisions
7-4-1: DEFINITIONS:
As used in this Chapter, certain terms are defined as follows:
ADVERTISING DISPLAY: Refers to advertising structures and to signs.
ADVERTISING STRUCTURE; SIGN:
   Advertising Structure: Refers to a structure of any kind or character
erected or maintained for outdoor advertising purposes on which any poster,
bill, printing, painting or other advertisement of any kind whatsoever may be
placed, including statuary.
   Sign: Refers to any card, cloth, metal, painted or wooden sign of any
character placed for outdoor advertising purposes on or to the ground, or any
tree, wall, bush, rock, fence, building, structure, or thing, either publicly
or privately owned, other than an advertising structure.
Neither "advertising structure" nor "sign", as used in this Chapter includes:
   A.   Official notices issued by a court or public body or officers;
   B.   Notices posted by any public officer in performance of a public duty,
or by any person in giving legal notice;
   C.   Directional, warning or information signs or structures required or
authorized by law or by Federal, State or Municipal authority.
FREEWAY: A highway in respect to which the owners of abutting lands have no
right or easement of access to or from their abutting lands or in respect to
which such owners have only limited or restricted right or easement of access,
and which is declared to be such in compliance with the Streets and Highways
Code of the State of California.
LANDSCAPED FREEWAY: A section or sections of a freeway which is now or
hereafter may be improved by the planting of at least on one side of the
freeway right of way of lawns, trees, shrubs, flowers or other ornamental
vegetation which shall require reasonable maintenance.
Planting for the purpose of soil erosion control or traffic noise abatement
shall not change the character of a freeway to a landscaped freeway.
TO PLACE: The verb "to place" and any of its variants as applied to advertising
displays includes the maintaining and the erecting, constructing, posting,
painting, printing, tacking, nailing, gluing, stitching, carving or otherwise
fastening, affixing or making visible any advertising display on or to the
ground, or any tree, bush, rock, fencepost, wall building, structure or thing.
(1975 Code §10-3.01)
7-4-2: PROHIBITED ADVERTISING DISPLAYS ADJACENT TO LANDSCAPED FREEWAYS:
No advertising displays shall be placed or maintained on property adjacent to a
section of freeway which has been or hereafter may be landscaped as defined
herein, if the advertising display is designated to be viewed primarily by
persons traveling on such landscaped section of a freeway or if prohibited by
the Zoning Ordinance of the City 1 . (1975 Code §10-3.02)
 
Notes
1 1. See Title 9 of this Code.
7-4-3: REMOVAL OF PROHIBITED DISPLAYS:
Any advertising structure or sign which is now or hereafter may be in violation
of the provisions of Section
7-4-2 of this Chapter shall be removed within three (3) years from the date
when the project for the landscaping of a section or sections of a freeway
shall have been completed or accepted or within (3) years from the effective
date hereof, and the character of said section or sections shall have been
changed from a freeway to a landscaped freeway, whichever is later. (1975 Code
§10-3.04)
7-4-4: EXEMPTIONS FROM PROVISIONS:
The provisions of Section
7-4-2 of this Chapter shall not apply to any of the following listed
advertising structures or signs used exclusively to:
   A.   Advertise the sale or lease of the property on which said advertising
display is placed;
   B.   Designate the name of the owner or occupant of the premises upon which
said advertising display is placed or to identify such premises;
   C.   Advertise the business conducted or goods manufactured or produced or
services rendered upon the property upon which said advertising display is
placed.
Such signs shall only be allowed in accordance with the provisions of the
Zoning Ordinance of the City or other ordinances pertaining thereto. (1975 Code
§10-3.03)
CHAPTER 5
STREET TREES
SECTION:
7-5-1: Purpose
7-5-2: Definitions
7-5-3: Tree Committee Created
7-5-4: Comprehensive Street Tree Plan; Master List of Trees
7-5-5: Permit to Plant or Remove Trees
7-5-6: Tree Maintenance
7-5-7: Replacement of Removed Trees
7-5-8: Nuisance Trees
7-5-9: Prohibited Acts and Conditions
7-5-10: Liability
7-5-11: Enforcement; Violations
7-5-1: PURPOSE:
This Chapter is adopted to preserve, protect and promote the public health,
safety, peace, comfort, convenience, prosperity and general welfare. More
specifically, this Chapter is intended to achieve the following:
   A.   To provide a comprehensive plan for the planting, replanting, removal
and maintenance of trees within designated public streets, including arterial
and collector streets as designated by the City's General Plan, streets within
the Central Business District and streets providing access to schools, parks
and other public facilities.
   B.   To establish and maintain a pattern of street trees within all public
streets which will enhance the living and working area of the City, enhance
real property values, conserve energy, reduce glare, diminish the effects of
vehicular noise, provide shade and avoid hazards to street improvements and to
public safety occasioned by trees which are of such physical condition or
location as to constitute a public nuisance. (Ord. 9111, 7-16-91)
7-5-2: DEFINITIONS:
For the purpose of this Chapter, words hereinafter listed shall have the
meanings set forth in this Section:
CITY: The City of Lemoore, California.
COMMUNITY DEVELOPMENT DIRECTOR: The Community Development Director of the City.
OWNER: The legal owner of real property fronting on any street of the City and
any lessee of such owner.
PERSON: An individual, firm, association, corporation or copartnership, and the
lessees, trustees, receivers, agents, servants and employees of any such
person.
PLANNING COMMISSION: The City Planning Commission of the City.
PUBLIC STREET or STREET: All roads, streets, avenues, boulevards, alleys,
parkways and other public rights of way, or any portion thereof, of the City.
PUBLIC WORKS DIRECTOR or DIRECTOR: The Public Works Director of the City.
TREE: Any woody plant which normally has one stem or trunk bearing lateral
branching and foliage, or a crown of foliage, well above the ground level at
maturity.
TREE COMMITTEE or COMMITTEE: The Tree Committee of the City. (Ord. 9111, 7-16-
91)
7-5-3: TREE COMMITTEE CREATED:
There is hereby created an advisory committee of the Planning Commission, to be
known as the "Tree Committee of the City". (Ord. 9111, 7-16-91)
7-5-4: COMPREHENSIVE STREET TREE PLAN; MASTER LIST OF TREES:
   A.   Comprehensive Street Tree Plan: The planning commission shall prepare
and recommend, and the city council shall adopt by resolution, a comprehensive
plan for the planting and maintaining of trees within the public streets of the
city, which plan shall be designated as the comprehensive street tree plan.
Said plan shall include those public streets which, in the commission's
judgment, bear a relationship to the purposes of this chapter. The plan shall
be so prepared that all appropriate public streets may be included in the plan.
The plan shall consist of a written statement, maps and such detailed designs
as may be appropriate, setting forth or depicting the following:
      1.   The specific types of trees to be planted, including their desirable
location or spacing.
      2.   The identification of those existing trees which should be retained.
      3.   The identification of those existing trees which may constitute a
public hazard or public nuisance and which may require substantial maintenance
or removal.
In preparing initial and subsequent versions of the comprehensive street tree
plan, the commission and city council may limit the plan's content to only that
information required under subsection A1 of this section. It is the intent of
this section that the plan shall be developed gradually in recognition of the
practical problems associated with fulfilling all requirements of this section
within any specified period of time.
   B.   Master List Of Trees 1 : The tree committee shall prepare and
recommend, and the city council shall adopt by resolution, a master list of
trees that are suitable for implementing the comprehensive street tree plan,
and for the planting of trees within all other public streets not included in
the comprehensive plan. The master list shall be prepared and adopted within
three (3) months after the adoption of this chapter. In preparing and amending
the master list, the tree committee shall consult with persons who, by reason
of training and experience, have expertise in the selection, planning, planting
and maintenance of trees that are well suited to local climatic and soil
conditions. Upon its adoption, the list shall be known as the master list of
trees, and shall be placed on file in the offices of the city clerk, public
works director and community development director. Revisions or changes to the
master list may be made in the same manner prescribed for the preparation and
adoption of the original master list.
   C.   Conformance With Tree Plan Or Master List: All trees hereinafter
planted within a public street shall conform as to type, species, location and
spacing as prescribed by the comprehensive street tree plan, if applicable, or
by the master list of trees. Projects requiring approval by the planning
commission under site plan review provisions of the zoning ordinance 2 shall
conform to the requirements of this section. (Ord. 9111, 7-16-1991)
 
Notes
1 1. See also section 9-5D1-5 of this code.
2 2. See title 9 of this code.
7-5-5: PERMIT TO PLANT OR REMOVE TREES:
No person shall plant, remove, injure or interfere with any tree upon the
public streets of the city without obtaining an encroachment permit from the
public works director. The director is hereby authorized to grant such
permission at his discretion as being necessary. The public works director's
decision to disallow the issuance of a permit to remove may be appealed by an
aggrieved party to the planning commission, which shall then have the power to
allow or disallow issuance of a permit to remove the tree. A permit to remove a
tree shall be valid for a period not to exceed ninety (90) days after its date
of issuance. (Ord. 2011-01, 3-1-2011)
7-5-6: TREE MAINTENANCE:
It shall be the obligation of the owner to water and otherwise maintain all
trees planted or growing in the public street, as defined in this chapter, and
those trees growing on the owner's real property. (Ord. 9111, 7-16-1991)
7-5-7: REPLACEMENT OF REMOVED TREES:
Any tree which is removed by a property owner under the provisions of this
chapter shall be replaced by the property owner in accordance with the
provisions of the comprehensive street tree plan or master list of trees,
whichever is applicable. Where required, replacement shall be made at the
expense of the property owner within ninety (90) days of obtaining a permit for
the removal of the original tree as prescribed under section
7-5-5 of this chapter. (Ord. 9111, 7-16-1991)
7-5-8: NUISANCE TREES:
   A.   Nuisance Declared; Abatement: Any tree growing within a public street
which is endangering or in any way may endanger the security or usefulness of
any public street, or of any underground or overhead utility, may be declared a
public nuisance and the Public Works Director may cause such tree to be pruned,
thinned, cut back at the roots or removed, or to permit any public utility to
do so. Before taking an action to remove a tree, the Director shall notify the
Tree Committee, the Planning Commission, the City Council and the affected
property owners. The Planning Commission or property owner may, within thirty
(30) days of receiving notice, appeal such proposed action to the City Council,
and the City Council shall hear such appeal and shall have final authority over
any such appeal.
   B.   Summary Abatement: The Director may cause a street tree to be trimmed,
pruned or removed when the condition of the tree is so hazardous as to
constitute an immediate and significant danger to the public. Conditions
warranting such action include serious damage to the tree incurred through
vehicular collision, fire, explosion or other casualty, or by an act of God or
the public enemy.
   C.   Abatement Costs: The cost of removing any tree which has been
determined a public nuisance under subsection A of this Section, or the cost of
trimming, pruning or removal of a tree which has become a hazard under
subsection B of this Section due to any act, fault or neglect of the owner
shall be at the sole expense of the owner. In all other cases, the cost of
removal shall be borne by the City. (Ord. 9111, 7-16-91)
7-5-9: PROHIBITED ACTS AND CONDITIONS:
It shall be a violation of the provisions of this Chapter to abuse, destroy or
mutilate any tree within a public street, or to attach or place any rope or
wire (other than as required to support a young or broken tree), sign, poster,
handbill or other material to any tree growing within a public street, or to
cause or permit any electrically charged wire to come into contact with any
such tree, or to allow any gaseous liquid or solid substance which is harmful
to such tree to come into contact with its roots or leaves. (Ord. 9111, 7-16-
91)
7-5-10: LIABILITY:
Nothing contained in this Chapter shall be deemed to impose any liability upon
the City, its officers or its employees, nor to relieve any property owner from
the duty to avoid violating any of the applicable provisions of this Chapter.
(Ord. 9111, 7-16-91)
7-5-11: ENFORCEMENT; VIOLATIONS:
The Public Works Director is hereby charged with the responsibility for the
enforcement of this Chapter and may serve notice to any person in violation
hereof or institute legal proceedings as may be required, and the City Attorney
is hereby authorized to institute appropriate proceedings to that end.
Any person violating any provision of this Chapter shall be guilty of an
infraction. (Ord. 9111, 7-16-91)
CHAPTER 6
UNDERGROUND UTILITY FACILITIES
SECTION:
7-6-1: Definitions
7-6-2: Hearing to Determine Necessity of Underground Utilities
7-6-3: Underground Districts May be Designated
7-6-4: Notice to Property Owners and Utility Companies
7-6-5: Responsibility for Underground Construction
7-6-6: Unlawful Acts
7-6-7: Exceptions to Provisions
7-6-8: Extension of Time
7-6-1: DEFINITIONS:
Whenever in this Chapter the words or phrases hereinafter in this Section
defined are used, they shall have the respective meanings assigned to them in
the following definitions:
COMMISSION: The Public Utilities Commission of the State of California.
PERSON: Individuals, firms, corporations, partnerships and their agents and
employees.
POLES, OVERHEAD WIRES and ASSOCIATED OVERHEAD STRUCTURES: Poles, towers,
supports, wires, conductors, guys, stubs, platforms, crossarms, braces,
transformers, insulators, cutouts, switches, communication circuits,
appliances, attachments and appurtenances located above ground within a
district and used or useful in supplying electric communication or similar or
associated service.
UNDERGROUND UTILITY DISTRICT or DISTRICT: That area in the City within which
poles, overhead wires and associated overhead structures are prohibited as such
area is described in a resolution adopted pursuant to the provisions of Section
7-6-3 of this Chapter.
UTILITY: All persons or entities supplying electric, communication or similar
or associated service by means of electrical materials or devices. (1975 Code
§13-3.01)
7-6-2: HEARING TO DETERMINE NECESSITY OF UNDERGROUND UTILITIES:
The Council may, from time to time, call public hearings to ascertain whether
the public necessity, health, safety or welfare requires the removal of poles,
overhead wires and associated structures within designated areas of the City
and the underground installation of wires and facilities for supplying
electric, communication or similar or associated service. The City Clerk shall
notify all affected property owners as shown on the last equalized assessment
roll and utilities concerned by mail of the time and place of such hearings at
least ten (10) days prior to the date thereof. Each such hearing shall be open
to the public and may be continued from time to time. At each such hearing, all
persons interested shall be given an opportunity to be heard. The decision of
the Council shall be final and conclusive. (1975 Code §13-3.02)
Prior to holding such public hearing, the Director of Public Works shall
consult with all affected utilities and shall prepare a report for such hearing
by the City Council containing, among other information, the extent of such
utilities' participation and estimates of the total costs to the City and
affected property owners. Such report shall also contain an estimate of the
time required to complete such underground installation and removal of overhead
facilities. (1975 Code §13-3.03)
7-6-3: UNDERGROUND DISTRICTS MAY BE DESIGNATED:
If, after any such public hearing, the Council finds that the public necessity,
health, safety or welfare requires such removal and such underground
installation within a designated area, the Council shall, by resolution,
declare such designated area in underground utility district and order such
removal and underground installation. Such resolution shall include a
description of the area comprising such district and shall fix the time within
which such removal and underground installation shall be accomplished and
within which affected property owners must be ready to receive underground
service. A reasonable time shall be allowed for such removal and underground
installation, having due regard for the availability of labor, materials and
equipment necessary for such removal and for the installation of such
underground facilities as may be occasioned thereby. (1975 Code §13-3.04)
7-6-4: NOTICE TO PROPERTY OWNERS AND UTILITY COMPANIES:
Within ten (10) days after the effective date of a resolution adopted pursuant
to Section
7-6-3 hereof, the City Clerk shall notify all affected utilities and all
persons owning real property within the district created by said resolution of
the adoption thereof. The City Clerk shall further notify such affected
property owners of the necessity that, if they or any person occupying such
property desire to continue to receive electric, communication or similar or
associated service, they or such occupant shall provide all necessary facility
changes on their premises so as to receive such service from the lines of the
supplying utility or utilities at a new location subject to the applicable
rules, regulations and tariffs of the respective utility or utilities on file
with the Commission.
Notification by the City Clerk shall be made by mailing a copy of the
resolution adopted pursuant to Section
7-6-3 together with a copy of this Chapter, to affected property owners as such
are shown on the last equalized assessment roll and to the affected utilities.
(1975 Code § 13-3.08)
7-6-5: RESPONSIBILITY FOR UNDERGROUND CONSTRUCTION:
   A.   Responsibility of Utility Companies: If underground construction is
necessary to provide utility service within a district created by any
resolution adopted pursuant to Section
7-6-3 hereof, the supplying utility shall furnish that portion of the conduits,
conductors and associated equipment required to be furnished by it under its
applicable rules, regulations and tariffs on file with the Commission. (1975
Code §13-3.09)
   B.   Responsibility of Property Owners:
      1.   Every person owning, operating, occupying or renting a building or
structure within a district shall construct and provide that portion of the
service connection on his property between the facilities referred to in
subsection A of this Section and the termination facility on or within said
building or structure being served, all in accordance with the applicable
rules, regulations and tariffs of the respective utility or utilities on file
with the Commission. If the above is not accomplished by any person within the
time provided for in the resolution enacted pursuant to Section
7-6-3 hereof, the Director of Public Works shall give notice in writing to the
person in possession of such premises, and a notice in writing to the owner
thereof as shown on the last equalized assessment roll, to provide the required
underground facilities within ten (10) days after receipt of such notice.
   The notice to provide the required underground facilities may be given
either by personal service or by mail. In case of service by mail on either of
such persons, the notice must be deposited in the United States mail in a
sealed envelope with postage prepaid, addressed to the person in possession of
such premises at such premises, and the notice must be addressed to the owner
thereof as such owner's name appears, and must be addressed to such owner's
last known address as the same appears on the last equalized assessment roll,
and when no address appears, to General Delivery, City of Lemoore. If notice is
given by mail, such notice shall be deemed to have been received by the person
to whom it has been sent within forty eight (48) hours after the mailing
thereof. If notice is given by mail to either the owner or occupant of such
premises, the Director of Public Works shall, within forty eight (48) hours
after the mailing thereof, cause a copy thereof, printed on a card not less
than eight inches by ten inches (8"x10") in size, to be posted in a conspicuous
place on said premises.
   The notice given by the Director of Public Works to provide the required
underground facilities shall particularly specify that work is required to be
done, and shall state that if said work is not completed within thirty (30)
days after receipt of such notice, the Director of Public Works will provide
such required underground facilities, in which case the cost and expense
thereof will be assessed against the property benefited and become a lien upon
such property.
      2.   If, upon the expiration of the thirty (30) day period, the said
required underground facilities have not been provided, the Director of Public
Works shall forthwith proceed to do the work; provided, however, if such
premises are unoccupied and no electric or communications services are being
furnished thereto, the Director of Public Works, in lieu of providing the
required underground facilities, may authorize the disconnection and removal of
any and all overhead services, wires and associated facilities supplying
utility service to said property. Upon completion of the work by the Director
of Public Works, he shall file a written report with the City Council setting
forth the fact that the required underground facilities have been provided and
the cost thereof, together with a legal description of the property against
which such cost is to be assessed. The Council shall thereupon fix a time and
place for hearing protests against the assessment of the cost of such work upon
such premises, which said time shall not be less than ten (10) days thereafter.
      3.   The Director of Public Works shall forthwith, upon the time for
hearing such protests having been fixed, give a notice in writing to the person
in possession of such premises, and a notice in writing thereof to the owner
thereof, in the manner hereinabove provided for the giving of the notice to
provide the required underground facilities, of the time and place that the
Council will pass upon such report and will hear protests against such
assessment. Such notice shall also set forth the amount of the proposed
assessment.
      4.   Upon the date and hour set for the hearing of protests, the Council
shall hear and consider the report and all protests, if there be any, and then
proceed to affirm, modify or reject the assessment.
      5.   If any assessment is not paid within five (5) days after its
confirmation by the Council, the amount of the assessment shall become a lien
upon the property against which the assessment is made by the Director of
Public Works, and the Director of Public Works is directed to turn over to the
Assessor and Tax Collector a notice of lien on each of said properties on which
the assessment has not been paid, and said Assessor and Tax Collector shall add
the amount of said assessment to the next regular bill for taxes levied against
the premises upon which said assessment was not paid. Said assessment shall be
due and payable at the same time as said property taxes are due and payable,
and if not paid when due and payable, shall bear interest at the rate of six
percent (6%) per annum. (1975 Code §13-3.10)
   C.   Responsibility of City: City shall remove at its own expense all City-
owned equipment from all poles required to be removed hereunder in ample time
to enable the owner or user of such poles to remove the same within the time
specified in the resolution enacted pursuant to Section
7-6-3 hereof. (1975 Code §13-3.11)
7-6-6: UNLAWFUL ACTS:
Whenever the Council creates an underground utility district and orders the
removal of poles, overhead wires and associated overhead structures therein as
provided in Section
7-6-3 hereof, it shall be unlawful for any person or utility to erect,
construct, place, keep, maintain, continue, employ or operate poles, overhead
wires and associated overhead structures in the district after the date when
said overhead facilities are required to be removed by such resolution, except
as said overhead facilities may be required to furnish service to an owner or
occupant of property prior to the performance by such owner or occupant of the
underground work necessary for such owner or occupant to continue to receive
utility service as provided in subsection
7-6-5B hereof, and for such reasonable time required to remove said facilities
after said work has been performed, and except as otherwise provided in this
Chapter. (1975 Code §13-3.05)
7-6-7: EXCEPTIONS TO PROVISIONS:
   A.   Emergency or Unusual Circumstances: Notwithstanding the provisions of
this Chapter, overhead facilities may be installed and maintained for a period,
not to exceed sixty (60) days, without authority of the Director of Public
Works in order to provide emergency service. The Director of Public Works may
grant special permission, on such terms as the Director of Public Works may
deem appropriate, in cases of unusual circumstances, without discrimination as
to any person or utility, to erect, construct, install, maintain, use or
operate poles, overhead wires and associated overhead structures. (1975 Code
§13-3.06)
   B.   Other Exceptions: This Chapter and any resolution adopted pursuant to
Section
7-6-3 hereof shall, unless otherwise provided in such resolution, not apply to
the following types of facilities:
      1.   Any Municipal facilities or equipment installed under the
supervision and to the satisfaction of the Director of Public Works.
      2.   Poles or electroliers used exclusively for street lighting.
      3.   Overhead wires (exclusive of supporting structures) crossing any
portion of a district within which overhead wires have been prohibited, or
connecting buildings on the perimeter of a district, when such wires originate
in an area from which poles, overhead wires and associated overhead structures
are not prohibited.
      4.   Poles, overhead wires and associated overhead structures used for
the transmission of electric energy at nominal voltages in excess of thirty
four thousand five hundred (34,500) volts.
      5.   Overhead wire attached to the exterior surface of a building by
means of a bracket or other fixtures and extending from one location on the
building to another location on the same building or to an adjacent building
without crossing any public street.
      6.   Antennas, associated equipment, and supporting structures used by a
utility for furnishing communication services.
      7.   Equipment appurtenant to underground facilities such as surface-
mounted transformers, pedestal-mounted terminal boxes and meter cabinets and
concealed ducts.
      8.   Temporary poles, overhead wires and associated overhead structures
used in providing power or communications to construction projects. (1975 Code
§13-3.07)
7-6-8: EXTENSION OF TIME:
In the event that any act required by this Chapter or by a resolution adopted
pursuant to Section
7-6-3 hereof cannot be performed within the time provided on account of
shortage of materials, war, restraint by public authorities, strikes, labor
disturbances, civil disobedience or any other circumstances beyond the control
of the actor, then the time within which such act will be accomplished shall be
extended for a period equivalent to the time of such limitation. (1975 Code
§13-3.12)
CHAPTER 7
WATER AND SEWER REGULATIONS
ARTICLE A. WATER USE AND SERVICE
SECTION:
7-7A-1: Compliance With Provisions
7-7A-2: Administrative Officers
7-7A-3: Definition Of Utility
7-7A-4: Authority To Turn On And Shut Off Water
7-7A-5: Application For Water Service
7-7A-5.5: Water Meters; New Service
7-7A-6: Water Taps
7-7A-7: Stopcocks
7-7A-8: Prohibited Acts And Conditions
7-7A-9: Shutting Off Water
7-7A-10: Water Service Rates And Charges
7-7A-11: Cross-Connections
7-7A-11-1: General Policy
7-7A-11-2: Definitions
7-7A-11-3: Requirements, Water System
7-7A-11-4: Installation Of Water Service Connection, Maintenance
7-7A-11-5: Inspection Of Customer's System
7-7A-11-6: Backflow Devices
7-7A-11-7: Protective Devices, Degree Of Hazard
7-7A-11-8: Approval Of Director
7-7A-11-9: Inspection And Tests
7-7A-11-10: Presently Installed Devices
7-7A-12: Enforcement; Entry Powers
7-7A-13: Violations And Penalties
7-7A-1: COMPLIANCE WITH PROVISIONS:
On and after the effective date hereof, users of the water system to the City
shall pay the monthly rates and fees then in effect and as may be amended from
time to time in accordance with this article and abide by the regulations
established pursuant to the provisions of this article. (Ord. 8205, 10-5-1982)
7-7A-2: ADMINISTRATIVE OFFICERS:
   A.   Water Office: It shall be the duty of the Water Office to assess, bill
for, and collect charges for water use and service and to assess, bill for, and
collect basic penalties and additional penalties for nonpayment of the charges
within the time and in the manner prescribed by the City Council. References in
this chapter to Water Collector shall mean the Water Office. (Ord. 9801, 3-17-
1998)
   B.   Water Superintendent: The Water Superintendent employed by said City
shall have the sole charge and management of the Municipal water plant, the
care and custody of the motors, pumps, wells, all types, tools, implements and
materials used in connection with said plant, and shall be held responsible for
the safety of the property entrusted in his care, subject at all times to the
order of the City Council. The said Water Superintendent shall perform and do
all things required by him by the City Council relating to the operation and
care of the plant, and any and all repairs and changes to any part of the plant
are to be done under the supervision of the said Superintendent. (Ord. 8205,
10-5-1982)
7-7A-3: DEFINITION OF UTILITY:
For the purpose of this article, a "utility" is defined as a system, plant,
works, facilities or undertaking for the collection, treatment or disposal of
sewage or for the obtaining, conserving, treating and supplying of water and a
sanitation or garbage removal or disposal system 1 . (Ord. 8205, 10-5-1982)
 
Notes
1 1. See title 4, chapter 1 of this Code.
7-7A-4: AUTHORITY TO TURN ON AND SHUT OFF WATER:
No one except the City Water Collector or a regularly authorized officer of the
Water Department shall turn the water off or on at any premises. (Ord. 8205,
10-5-1982)
7-7A-5: APPLICATION FOR WATER SERVICE:
In every case in which any property owner or his agent desires a connection to
be made to the water mains of the City, an application must be made to the
Utility Billing Department. Applications from public agencies, landowners,
developers, or commercial businesses for water service outside the City
boundaries shall be evaluated and approved consistent with subsections
7-7C-2B and C of this chapter.
Each applicant for water service may be required to establish credit before
service will be initiated. Credit will be deemed established if the applicant
meets any or all conditions established by City Council resolution.
   A.   If a deposit is made or required to establish credit, it shall be paid
to the Utility Billing Department, which will deposit it into a special, non-
interest-bearing account dedicated exclusively for such purposes. In the event
the service account becomes delinquent or when service is terminated, the
deposit will be applied to the customer's unpaid bill(s). If the deposit
exceeds the amount of the bill(s), the excess amount will be refunded to the
customer. The deposit shall be refunded to a customer who has paid all bills
for water service without delinquency for the prior twelve (12) consecutive
months. If the City draws against the deposit to cover delinquent payments, the
City may require the customer to restore the deposit to its original amount as
a condition of providing ongoing water service.
   B.   The Water Division shall furnish temporary service, if feasible, to any
applicant on the following conditions:
      1.   Applicant will be required to pay the estimated cost of installing
and removing the facilities necessary to furnish service in advance; and
      2.   Applicant will be required to establish credit in the manner set
forth in subsection A of this section.
   C.   Before any such application for water service is granted, the Utility
Billing Department shall confirm that applicant has paid any delinquent utility
services account with the City in the name of the applicant, the applicant's
spouse, any co-resident, business firm or association with which the applicant
is or has been associated in such a way as to benefit directly from the City's
utility service. If it is discovered later that any customer had an outstanding
delinquent account with the City for utility services at the time of the
application in the name of the applicant, the applicant's spouse, any co-
resident, business firm or association with which the applicant is or has been
associated in such a way as to benefit directly from the City's utility
service, then the outstanding balance of any such account shall be added on to
the balance of the customer's new account. (Ord. 2018-07, 9-18-2018)
7-7A-5.5: WATER METERS; NEW SERVICE:
As a condition of new water service, a suitable water meter to measure the
water service shall be installed on the water service facilities in accordance
with chapter 8 (commencing with section 500) of the California Water Code. The
cost of installation of the meter shall be paid by the water user, and the City
does hereby impose the cost of the installation of the meter in the amounts set
forth in resolution 8808 (adopted May 17, 1988, and as amended, from time to
time, thereafter). The provisions of this section shall be construed consistent
with the provisions of section 110 of the Water Code and chapter 8 of division
1 of the Water Code.
   A.   New applicants for domestic service, which is defined as an existing
non-metered service, may select to maintain the unmetered service and to pay
the established unmetered flat rate. Once an applicant or customer has elected
either a flat or metered rate, it shall be billed for its service under the
selected rate schedule while it remains a customer. All new connections to the
water system shall be metered with a meter of at least one inch (1") in size
and installation of such meters shall be at the sole cost and expense of the
applicant.
      1.   Should a customer remodel, modify, change or alter its premises and
the cost of such remodeling, modification, change or alteration exceeds five
thousand dollars ($5,000.00), the customer shall be required to install a water
meter to measure water use at the customer's premises. The customer shall pay
the total cost of the purchase and installation of the meter, including,
without limitation, the cost of the meter-box.
      2.   Should any Federal, State or local law, regulation or ordinance
mandate the installation of water meters for any type of water use, including,
without limitation, the installation of water meters on currently unmetered
service connections, then on the date any such Federal, State or local law,
regulation or ordinance is passed, adopted or enacted, the installation of the
required water meters shall be at the sole cost and expense of the owner of the
real property upon which the meter is to be installed.
      3.   If a customer's premises are demolished, destroyed or removed from
the real property upon which they are located, reconnection to the water system
shall require a meter and all costs shall be borne by the customer.
      4.   Installation of all new water services, including, without
limitation, water meters, shall be performed by contractors and/or
subcontractors who are duly licensed by the California State Licensing Board.
All methods, materials, work procedures, and workmanship shall conform to City
standards and must be approved by the City's Utilities Director or their
designee.
      5.   Customers who install meters shall only install City- approved
meters, automated meter reading devices, and meter boxes. Determination of
whether a turbine or compound meter is required shall be made by the Utilities
Director or their designee. All meters, automated meter reading devices, and
meter boxes installed to the City's satisfaction shall become and remain the
sole property of the City and shall be serviced and maintained by the City.
      6.   Approved backflow devices that are required to be installed by the
Utilities Director or their designee are required to be tested annually and
repaired by a certified tester approved by the Utilities Director or their
designee, so they remain in good working order at the sole expense of the
customer. If the customer fails to have the backflow device tested or repaired
in the timeframes provided in the service notice from the Water Division, the
City reserves the right (but shall not be required) to test and/or repair the
device at the sole cost of the customer and to charge the customer for costs
incurred and administrative and inspection fees established by a separate City
Council resolution.
      7.   Subsections A1 through A6 of this section shall also apply to any
customer premises located outside of the City limits, but within a County area
receiving water service from the City.
   B.   Applicants for commercial service or industrial service shall be served
under metered rates. (Ord. 2018-07, 9-18-2018)
7-7A-6: WATER TAPS:
All taps to water mains shall be made by the Water Superintendent. No person
shall make any tap or in any other way tamper or meddle with any of the
property of the City waterworks without the written permission to do so by
order of the City Council or the Water Superintendent. (Ord. 8205, 10-5-1982)
7-7A-7: STOPCOCKS:
There shall be a stopcock in every connection at a point designated by the
Water Superintendent. Said stopcock and the box containing the same shall be
for the exclusive use of the City and shall be under its exclusive control. The
City shall not be responsible for damages to any building or its contents from
any break beyond the service box; and the water consumers are hereby required
for their own protection to provide at their own expense another stopcock to be
placed at the first suitable joint beyond the stop or service of the City.
(Ord. 8205, 10-5-1982)
7-7A-8: PROHIBITED ACTS AND CONDITIONS:
   A.   Use Of Water To Other Property: No consumer of water from the City or
any other person shall under any circumstances furnish any water from his
service to any person or upon any lot or property for which the prescribed rate
is not being paid.
   B.   Obstructing Water System: No person shall place on or about any hydrant
or stopcock connecting with the pipes of the waterworks of the City any
building materials or other obstruction which will prevent free access to the
same. (Ord. 8205, 10-5-1982)
7-7A-9: SHUTTING OFF WATER:
   A.   Repairs And Extensions: The City reserves the right to shut off the
water at any time for the purpose of making repairs or extensions to the system
or any other purpose and assumes no responsibility for any damage resulting
from the water being turned off.
   B.   Fires: When an alarm of fire is turned in, the water consumers on the
City mains must immediately turn off all taps, faucets or any means of letting
water run, which may at the time be open, and the water is not to be turned on
again until such fire is known to be extinguished.
   C.   Delinquencies And Non-Payment: The City reserves the right to shut off
the water at any time service charges become delinquent as described in this
article. (Ord. 2018-07, 9-18-2018)
7-7A-10: WATER SERVICE RATES AND CHARGES:
   A.   Powers Of The City Council: The City Council may, by resolution,
further define any of the uses classified herein, resolve any uncertainties
regarding the proper rate under specified conditions, and establish rates for
any use not herein specifically enumerated.
   B.   Rates Established: The monthly rates to be collected by the City for
water supplied from its waterworks to consumers shall be established by
resolution of the City Council in accordance with City ordinance 8205 and the
provisions of Government Code section 54354.5 as they may be amended from time
to time. The City Council in establishing rates may require that services to
premises located outside the City be billed at rates one and one-half (11/2)
times the calculated meter rate for metered services and one and one-half (11/
2) times the established flat rate for metered services. No water service shall
be furnished to any customer free of charge.
   C.   Payment Of Water Rates And Charges: All water charges shall be
collected together with, and not separately from, the charges for any other
utility service rendered by the City, and all charges shall be billed upon the
same bill and collected as one item. All utility service charges shall be
payable upon presentation date at the Office of the Finance Department and
shall be delinquent on the twenty fifth (25th) day of the subsequent calendar
month following the date of presentment.
      1.   The owner or owners of any parcel of real property together with any
and all occupants of such real property shall be jointly liable for all charges
incurred by reason of the use of said water service by any and all occupants of
such real property.
      2.   A fee of twenty five dollars ($25.00) shall be charged on all
returned payments of utility charges.
   D.   Disputed Bills: Should the amount of any bill for service be
questioned, the customer should promptly request an explanation. If the
explanation is not satisfactory or is not understood, the customer must pay the
bill under protest to avoid discontinuance of service. Protests will be
addressed to the Assistant City Manager/Administrative Services Director, must
be in writing, and must state the reasons why the charges are believed to be
incorrect. The Assistant City Manager/Administrative Services Director will
analyze the facts of the case and is authorized to make such adjustments in the
charges as may be necessary to effect an equitable settlement. Failure of a
customer to pay under protest after initial explanation is offered will result
in discontinuance of service without further notice if bill is not paid by the
delinquency date.
   E.   Delinquencies: The City Council may, by resolution, provide for a basic
penalty for nonpayment of the charges within the time and in the manner
prescribed by it. Imposition of said basic penalty shall be in accordance with
the provisions of Government Code section 54348, as amended from time to time.
The City Council also may, by resolution, provide for the imposition of a fee
to pay the costs associated with notices provided pursuant to this section.
      In the event any customer fails to pay the water service charges,
connection fees, or other required charges and fees identified in this section,
and such charges or fees become delinquent pursuant to subsection C of this
section, the City may assess a basic penalty for late payment in the amount of
thirty dollars ($30.00) which amount shall be added to the delinquent charges
and fees, and the Assistant City Manager/Administrative Services Director shall
collect the basic penalty along with the delinquent charges and fees.
      1.   Discontinuance Of Service Of Non-Residential Customers For
Nonpayment: In the event any non-residential customer fails to pay any charges
or fees described in this chapter, including any penalty or interest, by four
o’clock (4:00) P.M. on the due date shown on the City-issued delinquency
notice, the City, in addition to all other remedies it may have, may
discontinue furnishing water service and all other services identified on the
applicable utility bill and shall not resume service until all outstanding
charges and fees, together with any penalties, interest, service charges and/or
connection fees necessitated by the resumption of water service, have been paid
in full. Prior to discontinuing all services identified on the applicable City
utility bill, the City shall send a written delinquency notice to the non-
residential customer advising that all utilities identified on the bill will be
discontinued if payment of the total amount identified in said written notice
is not paid within ten (10) days after the date of the written notice.
      2.   Discontinuance Of Service For Residential Customers For Nonpayment:
In the event any residential customer fails to pay any charges or fees
described in this chapter, including any penalty or interest, then in addition
to all other remedies it may have, the City may discontinue residential water
service to that residential customer in accordance with the City’s Policy on
Discontinuance of Residential Water Service, as the same may be amended from
time to time by the City Council. If the City discontinues water services of a
residential customer for nonpayment, it shall provide the residential customer
with information on how to restore residential water service. Unless otherwise
provided City’s Policy on Discontinuance of Residential Water Service, service
shall not resume until all outstanding charges and fees, together with any
penalties, interest, service charges and/or connection fees necessitated by the
resumption of water service, have been paid in full.
      3.   Reconnections Of Service: Reconnections will only be processed
Monday through Friday from eight o’clock (8:00) A.M. to twelve o’clock (12:00)
noon and one o’clock (1:00) P.M. to four o’clock (4:00) P.M., and will not be
processed on City-observed holidays. Reconnection of service by unauthorized
individuals will result in additional charges established by separate Council
resolution and the incident will be reported to the proper authorities. Any
check not honored by a financial institution that is used to make payment on a
customer’s utility account will result in additional fees established by
separate Council resolution and will be a basis for the disconnection of
service.
      4.   Court Action: In addition to discontinuing all utilities identified
on the applicable City utility bill, the City may file a civil action against
the customer for the collection of any amounts due and unpaid. Such remedy
shall be cumulative and in addition to any other remedy provided in this
chapter or by law. In any such action, the delinquent balances may also be
processed through a collection agency.
      5.   Notice Of Liens: In the event a customer fails to pay in full all
charges, fees or penalties identified in this chapter within ninety (90) days
of the date of any City utility bill, the City shall notify the owner of the
real property receiving the water service, in writing, of such delinquency and
that the delinquency shall be collected pursuant to the provisions of
subsection E6 of this section.
      6.   Collection Through Tax Roll: In the alternative to filing a civil
action against the customer, the City Council, pursuant to the applicable
provisions of the California Health and Safety Code, may elect to have all
delinquent charges, fees and penalties collected on the tax roll in the same
manner, at the same time and by the same persons together with and not
separately from general taxes. Such delinquent charges, fees and penalties
shall thereafter constitute a lien against the lot or parcel of land against
which the charges have been imposed.
      7.   Recording Of Lien: In addition to or in lieu of collecting
delinquent fees through the tax roll, the City may, in accordance with
California Health and Safety Code section 5473.11, as may be amended, record a
lien against the real property for which fees are delinquent.
      8.   Restoration Of Service: The discontinued utility services shall not
be restored until all charges, fees and penalties, including without
limitation, all expenses of removal, discontinuance, disconnection, restoration
and reconnection have been paid. If water service has been discontinued for
failure to pay a utility bill as set forth in subsection E1 or E2 of this
section, the entire amount of the water bill and all fines and penalties
provided hereunder shall be paid in full before water service is restored:
         a.   Service Restoration of water, twenty five dollars ($25.00);
         b.   In addition to any other fees or charges provided in this
section, any customer requesting a turn-on of water on any Saturday, Sunday,
legal holiday or before the hour of eight o'clock (8:00) A.M. or after the hour
of three thirty o'clock (3:30) P.M. of any day shall pay an additional charge
of one hundred twenty dollars ($120.00) for such turn-on.
         c.   Customers who have their water turned off due to nonpayment on a
regularly scheduled water turn-off day will be charged a same day turn-on fee
of sixty dollars ($60.00) to have their water turned on that day. No additional
charge will be assessed to the customer for next day turn-on.
      If water service has been discontinued for a residential customer
pursuant to subsection E2 of this section, and the residential customer is able
to demonstrate to the City that the household income is below two hundred
percent (200%) of the federal poverty line, fees for restoration of service and
interest charges, if applicable, shall be: (i) fifty dollars ($50.00), but not
to exceed the actual cost of reconnection, for reconnection during normal
operating hours; and (ii) one hundred fifty dollars ($150.00), but not to
exceed the actual cost of reconnection, for reconnection during nonoperational
hours; provided that such reconnection fees shall be subject to an annual
adjustment for changes in the Consumer Price Index as set forth in the City’s
Policy on Discontinuance of Residential Water Service.
      9.   Dangerous Or Unsafe Equipment: The City may discontinue water
service without notice to the customer when the apparatus, appliances or
equipment using water, in the sole opinion of the City, is found to be
dangerous or unsafe. The City shall promptly notify the customer of the reasons
for the discontinuance and the corrective action to be taken by the customer
before service can be restored.
      10.   Detrimental Or Injurious To Water Service To Others: The City may
discontinue service without notice to any customer when the use of water
thereon by the apparatus, appliances, equipment or otherwise is found by the
City in its sole discretion, to be detrimental or injurious to water service
furnished to other customers. The City shall promptly notify the customer of
the reasons for the discontinuance and the corrective action to be taken by the
customer before service can be restored.
      11.   Fraudulent Or Unauthorized Use: The City may discontinue water
service without notice to any customer when it is determined by the City, in
its sole discretion, that the customer has obtained water service by fraudulent
means or has diverted the water service for unauthorized use. The City shall
not restore service until the customer has complied with all the City's rules
and regulations, and the City has been reimbursed for the full amount of the
service rendered and the actual cost to the Water Division incurred by reason
of such fraudulent or unauthorized use.
   F.   Collections: Accounts shall be subject to collection of any delinquent
fees and charges in the following manner:
      1.   At the time the fees become delinquent and until such time they are
fully paid, the delinquent account balance, including late charges, shall
constitute an unrecorded lien against the property and, as such, may be
identified during a title search. For commercial businesses, delinquent account
balances, including late charges, may be considered an unrecorded lien against
the business name and/or owner of the business.
      2.   Once a year there may be prepared a report of delinquent fees,
including late charges. The City Council shall fix a time, date and place for
hearing the report and receive any objections or protests thereto.
      3.   The City Council shall cause notice of hearing to be mailed to the
landowners listed on the report not less than fifteen (15) days prior to the
date of the hearing.
      4.   At the hearing, the City Council shall hear any objections or
protests of landowners liable to be assessed for delinquent fees, including
late charges and administrative fees, as set by resolution of the City Council.
The City Council may make revisions or corrections to the report as it deems
just, after which, by resolution, the report shall be confirmed.
      5.   The delinquent fees set forth in the report as confirmed shall
constitute special assessments against the respective parcels of land and are a
lien on the property for the amount of such delinquent fees, including late
charges. A certified copy of the resolution confirming the assessments shall be
filed with the County Recorder and the County Auditor- Controller/Tax Collector
for the amounts of the respective assessments against the respective parcels as
they appear on the current assessment roll. The lien created attaches upon
filing. The assessments shall be collected at the same time and in the same
manner as other Property Taxes and shall be subject to the same penalties and
the same procedure and sale in case of delinquency as provided for such taxes.
All laws applicable to the levy, collection and enforcement of Property Taxes
shall be applicable to such assessments. However, if, for the first year for
which the charges are prescribed, the property served by the City has been
transferred or conveyed to a bona fide purchaser for value, and attached
thereon, prior to the date on which the first installment of County taxes would
become delinquent, the charge will not result in a lien against the real
property, but shall become transferred to the unsecured roll for collection.
   G.   Vacant Premises; Responsibility For Rates And Charges: A customer may
have his or her water service discontinued by giving notice to the Water
Division not less than two (2) days before the effective date of the
discontinuance. Such customer shall be required to pay all water charges until
the effective date identified in such notice. When such notice is not given,
the customer shall be required to pay for water service until two (2) business
days after the Water Division has knowledge that the customer vacated the
premises or otherwise has discontinued water service.
   H.   Disposition Of Funds: The funds received from the collection of the
water service charges or rentals hereinabove set forth shall be deposited with
the City Treasurer and shall be accounted for and be known as the "Water Fund"
and when appropriated by the City Council shall be available for the payment of
interest or principal on any and all bonds issued and outstanding or which may
be issued for water pumping, storage and delivery facilities and to retire such
bonds when they mature and for the payment of cost and expenses of acquisition,
construction, operation, maintenance and repair of the City water system and
the extensions and improvements thereto.
Any payment received for City utility charges in an amount less than the total
charge billed shall be treated as a partial payment for each such charge and
the amount received allocated to the separate departments in the same ratio as
each such charge bears to the whole of the bill. (Ord. 2018-07, 9-18-2018; amd.
Ord. 2020-03, 4-7-2020)
7-7A-11: CROSS-CONNECTIONS:
7-7A-11-1: GENERAL POLICY:
   A.   Purpose: The purpose of this section
7-7A-11 is:
      1.   To protect the public potable water supply of the City from the
possibility of contamination or pollution by isolating within its customers'
internal distribution system(s) or its customers' private water system(s) such
contaminants or pollutants which could backflow or back- siphon into the public
water supply system; and
      2.   To promote the elimination or control of existing cross-
connections, actual or potential, between its customers' in- plant potable
water system(s) and nonpotable water systems, plumbing fixtures and industrial
piping systems; and
      3.   To provide for the maintenance of a continuing system of cross-
connection control which will systematically and effectively prevent the
contamination or pollution of all potable water systems.
   B.   Responsibility: The Director of Public Works shall be responsible for
the protection of the public potable water distribution system from
contamination or pollution due to the backflow or back-siphonage of
contaminants or pollutants through the water service connection. If, in the
judgment of said Director, an approved backflow prevention device is required,
at the City's water service connection to any customer's premises, for the
safety of the water system, the Director or his designated agent shall give
notice in writing to said customer to install such an approved backflow
prevention device at each service connection to his premises. The customer
shall immediately install such approved device or devices at his own expense;
and failure, refusal or inability on the part of the customer to install said
device or devices immediately shall constitute a ground for discontinuing water
service to the premises until such device or devices have been properly
installed. (Ord. 8801, 1-19-1988)
7-7A-11-2: DEFINITIONS:
AIR-GAP: The unobstructed vertical distance through the free atmosphere between
the lowest opening from any pipe or faucet supplying water to a tank, plumbing
fixture or other device and the flood level rim of said vessel. An approved
air-gap shall be at least double the diameter of the supply pipe, measured
vertically, above the top of the rim of the vessel, and in no case less than
one inch (1"). When an air- gap is used at the service connection to prevent
the contamination or pollution of the City's potable water system, an emergency
bypass shall be installed around the air-gap system and an approved reduced
pressure principle device shall be installed in the bypass system.
APPROVED: Accepted by the Director as meeting an applicable specification
stated or cited in this section
7-7A-11 or as suitable for the proposed use.
AUXILIARY WATER SUPPLY: Any water supply on or available to the premises other
than the City's approved public potable water supply. These auxiliary waters
may include water from another public potable water supply or any natural
source(s) such as a well, spring, river, stream, harbor, etc., or "used waters"
or "industrial fluids". These waters may be polluted or contaminated, or they
may be objectionable and constitute an unacceptable water source over which the
City does not have sanitary control.
BACK-SIPHONAGE: The flow of water or other liquids, mixtures or substances into
the distributing pipes of a potable water supply system from any source other
than its intended sources caused by the sudden reduction of pressure in the
potable water supply system.
BACKFLOW: The flow of water or other liquids, mixtures or substances under
pressure into the distributing pipes of a potable water supply system from any
source or sources other than its intended source.
BACKFLOW PREVENTER: A device or means designed to prevent backflow or back-
siphonage.
CONTAMINATION: An impairment of the quality of the potable water by sewage,
industrial fluids or waste liquids, compounds or other materials to a degree
which creates an actual hazard to the public health through poisoning or
through the spread of disease.
CROSS-CONNECTION: Any physical connection or arrangement of piping or fixtures
between two (2) otherwise separate piping systems, one of which contains
potable water and the other nonpotable water or industrial fluids of
questionable safety, through which, or because of which, backflow or back-
siphonage may occur into the potable water system. A water service connection
between a public potable water distribution system and a customer's water
distribution system which is cross-connected to a contaminated fixture,
industrial fluid system or with a potentially contaminated supply or auxiliary
water system constitutes one type of cross-connection. Other types of cross-
connections include connectors such as swing connections, removable sections,
four-way plug valves, spools, dummy sections of pipe, swivel or change-over
devices, sliding multiport tube, solid connections, etc.
CROSS-CONNECTION CONTROL BY CONTAINMENT: The installation of an approved
backflow prevention device at the water service connection to any customer's
premises where it is physically and economically infeasible to find and
permanently eliminate or control all actual or potential cross-connections
within the customer's water system; or, it shall mean the installation of an
approved backflow prevention device on the service line leading to and
supplying a portion of a customer's water system where there are actual or
potential cross-connections which cannot be effectively eliminated or
controlled at the point of cross-connections.
CROSS-CONNECTIONS, CONTROLLED: A connection between a potable water system and
a nonpotable water system with an approved backflow prevention device properly
installed that will continuously afford the protection commensurate with the
degree of hazard.
DIRECTOR OF PUBLIC WORKS: The Director of Public Works, hereafter called
Director, in charge of the Water Department of the City, is invested with the
authority and responsibility for the implementation of an effective cross-
connection control program and for enforcement of the provisions of this
Section
7-7A-11.
DOUBLE CHECK VALVE ASSEMBLY: An assembly of two (2) independently operating
approved check valves with tightly closing shut-off valves on each side of the
check valves, plus properly located test cocks for the testing of each check
valve. The entire assembly shall meet the design and performance specifications
and approval of a recognized and City-approved testing agency for backflow
prevention devices. To be approved, these devices must be readily accessible
for in-line maintenance and testing.
HAZARD, DEGREE OF:
   Hazard, Health: Any condition, device or practice in the water supply system
and its operation which could create, or, in the judgment of the Director, may
create a danger to the health and well-being of the water consumer. An example
of a health hazard is a structural defect, including cross- connections, in a
water supply.
   Hazard, Plumbing: A plumbing-type cross-connection in a consumer's potable
water system that has not been properly protected by a vacuum breaker, air-gap
separation or backflow prevention device. Unprotected plumbing type cross-
connections are considered to be a health hazard.
   Hazard, Pollutional: An actual or potential threat to the physical
properties of the water system or to the potability of the public or the
consumer's potable water system but which would constitute a nuisance or be
aesthetically objectionable or could cause damage to the system or its
appurtenances, but would not be dangerous to health.
   Hazard, System: An actual or potential threat of severe damage to the
physical properties of the City's potable water system or the consumer's
potable water system or of a pollution or contamination which would have a
protracted effect on the quality of the potable water in the system.
INDUSTRIAL FLUIDS SYSTEM: Any system containing a fluid or solution which may
be chemically, biologically or otherwise contaminated or polluted in a form or
concentration such as would constitute a health, system, pollutional or
plumbing hazard if introduced into an approved water supply. This may include,
but not be limited to: polluted or contaminated waters; all types of process
waters and "used waters" originating from the public potable water system which
may have deteriorated in sanitary quality; chemicals in fluid form; plating
acids and alkalies, circulated cooling waters connected to an open cooling
tower and/or cooling towers that are chemically or biologically treated or
stabilized with toxic substances; contaminated natural waters such as from
wells, springs, streams, rivers, bays, harbors, seas, irrigation canals or
systems, etc.; oils, gases, glycerine, paraffins, caustic and acid solutions
and other liquid and gaseous fluids used in industrial or other purposes or for
firefighting purposes.
POLLUTION: The presence of any foreign substance (organic, inorganic, or
biological) in water which tends to degrade its quality so as to constitute a
hazard or impair the usefulness or quality of the water to a degree which does
not create an actual hazard to the public health but which does adversely and
unreasonably affect such waters for domestic use.
REDUCED PRESSURE PRINCIPLE DEVICE: An assembly of two (2) independently
operating approved check valves with an automatically operating differential
relief valve between the two (2) check valves, tightly closing shut-off valves
on either side of the check valves, plus properly located test cocks for the
testing of the check and relief valves. The entire assembly shall meet the
design and performance specifications and approval of a recognized and City-
approved testing agency for backflow prevention assemblies. The device shall
operate to maintain the pressure in the zone between the two (2) check valves
at a level less than the pressure on the City water supply side of the device.
At cessation of normal flow the pressure between the check valves shall be less
than the supply pressure. In case of leakage of either check valve, the
differential relief valve shall operate to maintain this reduced pressure by
discharging to the atmosphere. When the inlet pressure is two (2) pounds per
square inch or less, the relief valve shall open to the atmosphere. To be
approved, these devices must be readily accessible for in-line maintenance and
testing and be installed in a location where no part of the device will be
submerged.
WATER, NONPOTABLE: Water which is not safe for human consumption or which is of
questionable potability.
WATER, POTABLE: Any water which, according to recognized standards, is safe for
human consumption.
WATER, SERVICE CONNECTIONS: The terminal end of a service connection from the
City's potable water system; i.e., where the City loses jurisdiction and
sanitary control over the water at its point of delivery to the customer's
water system. If a meter is installed at the end of the service connection,
then the service connection shall mean the downstream end of the meter. There
should be no unprotected takeoffs from the service line ahead of any meter or
backflow prevention device located at the point of delivery to the customer's
water system. Service connection shall also include water service connection
from a fire hydrant and all other temporary or emergency water service
connections from the public potable water system.
WATER, USED: Any water supplied by the City from the potable water system to a
consumer's water system after it has passed through the point of delivery and
is no longer under the sanitary control of the City.
7-7A-11-3: REQUIREMENTS, WATER SYSTEM:
   A.   The water system shall be considered as made up of two (2) parts: The
City system and the customer system.
   B.   The City system shall consist of the source facilities and the
distribution system, and shall include all those facilities of the water system
under the complete control of the City up to the point where the customer's
system begins.
   C.   The source shall include all components of the facilities utilized in
the production, treatment, storage and delivery of water to the distribution
system.
   D.   The distribution system shall include the network of conduits used for
the delivery of water from the source to the customer's system.
   E.   The customer's system shall include those parts of the facilities
beyond the termination of the City distribution system which are utilized in
conveying City delivered domestic water to the point of use.
7-7A-11-4: INSTALLATION OF WATER SERVICE CONNECTION, MAINTENANCE:
No water service connection to any premises shall be installed or maintained
unless the water supply is protected as required by State laws and regulations
and this Chapter. Service water to any premises shall be discontinued if a
prevention device required by this Chapter is not installed, tested and
maintained, or if it is found that a backflow prevention device has been
removed, by-passed, or if an unprotected cross-connection exists on the
premises. Service will not be restored until such conditions or defects are
corrected.
7-7A-11-5: INSPECTION OF CUSTOMER'S SYSTEM:
The customer's system should be open for inspection at all reasonable times to
authorized representatives of the Public Works Water Division to determine
whether cross-connections or other structural or sanitary hazards, including
violations of these regulations, exist. When such a condition becomes known,
the Director shall deny or immediately discontinue service to the premises by
providing for a physical break in the service line until the customer has
corrected the condition(s) in conformance with State and City statutes relating
to plumbing and water supplies and the regulations adopted pursuant thereto.
7-7A-11-6: BACKFLOW DEVICES:
An approved backflow prevention device shall also be installed on each service
line to a customer's water system at or near the property line or immediately
inside the building being served; but in all cases, before the first branch
line leading off the service line whenever the following conditions exist:
   A.   In the case of premises having an auxiliary water supply which is not
or may not be of safe bacteriological or chemical quality and which is not
acceptable as an additional source by the Director, the City water system shall
be protected against backflow from the premises by installing a backflow
prevention device in the service line appropriate to the degree of hazard.
   B.   In the case of premises on which any industrial fluids or any other
objectionable substance is handled in such a fashion as to create an actual or
potential hazard to the City water system, the City system shall be protected
against backflow from the premises by installing a backflow prevention device
in the service line appropriate to the degree of hazard. This shall include the
handling of process waters and waters originating from the City system which
have been subject to deterioration in quality.
   C.   In the case of premises having (1) internal cross- connections that
cannot be permanently corrected and controlled, or (2) intricate plumbing and
piping arrangements or where entry to all portions of the premises is not
readily accessible for inspection purposes, making it impracticable or
impossible to ascertain whether or not dangerous cross- connections exist, the
City water system shall be protected against backflow from the premises by
installing a backflow prevention device in the service line.
7-7A-11-7: PROTECTIVE DEVICES, DEGREE OF HAZARD:
The type of protective device required under subsections
7-7A-11-6A, B and C shall depend upon the degree of hazard which exists as
follows:
   A.   In the case of any premises where there is an auxiliary water supply as
stated in subsection
7-7A-11-6A of this Section
7-7A-11 and it is not subject to any of the following rules, the City water
system shall be protected by an approved air-gap separation and an approved
reduced pressure principle backflow prevention device.
   B.   In the case of any premises where there is water or substance that
would be objectionable but not hazardous to health, if introduced into the City
water system, the City water system shall be protected by an approved double
check valve assembly.
   C.   In the case of any premises where there is any material dangerous to
health which is handled in such a fashion as to create an actual or potential
hazard to the City water system, the City water system shall be protected by an
approved air-gap separation or an approved reduced pressure principle backflow
prevention device. Examples of premises where these conditions will exist
include sewage treatment plants, sewage pumping stations, chemical
manufacturing plants, hospitals, mortuaries and plating plants.
   D.   In the case of any premises where there are "uncontrolled" cross-
connections, either actual or potential, the City water system shall be
protected by an approved air-gap separation or an approved reduced pressure
principle backflow prevention device at the service connection.
   E.   In the case of any premises where, because of security requirements or
other prohibitions or restrictions it is impossible or impractical to make a
complete in-plant cross- connection survey, the City water system shall be
protected against backflow or back-siphonage from the premises by the
installation of a backflow prevention device in the service line. In this case,
maximum protection will be required; that is, an approved air-gap separation or
an approved reduced pressure principle backflow prevention device shall be
installed in each service to the premises.
7-7A-11-8: APPROVAL OF DIRECTOR:
Any backflow prevention device required herein shall be of model and size
approved by the Director. The term "approved backflow prevention device" shall
mean a device that has been manufactured in full conformance with the standards
established by the American Water Works Association, entitled "AWWA C506-78 -
- Standards for Reduced Pressure Principle and Double Valve Backflow Prevention
Devices", and have met completely the laboratory and field performance
specifications of the Foundation for Cross-Connection Control and Hydraulic
Research of the University of Southern California established by
"Specifications of Backflow Prevention Devices -- 69-2", dated March, 1969, or
the most current issue.
Said AWWA and FCCC&HR standards and specifications have been adopted by the
Director. Final approval shall be evidenced by a certificate of approval issued
by an approved testing laboratory certifying full compliance with said AWWA
standards and FCCC&HR specifications.
The following testing laboratory has been qualified by the Director to test and
certify backflow preventers:
   Foundation for Cross-Connection Control and Hydraulic Research,
   University of Southern California
   University Park
   Los Angeles, CA 90008
Testing laboratories other than the laboratory listed above will be added to an
approved list as they are qualified by the Director.
Backflow preventers which may be subjected to back pressure or back-siphonage
that have been fully tested and have been granted a certificate of approval by
said qualified laboratory and are listed on the laboratory's current list of
"Approved Devices" may be used without further test or qualifications.
7-7A-11-9: INSPECTION AND TESTS:
It shall be the duty of the customer-user at any premises where backflow
prevention devices are installed to have certified inspections and operational
tests made at least once per year. In those instances where the Director deems
the hazard to be great enough, he may require certified inspections at more
frequent intervals. These inspections and tests shall be at the expense of the
water user and shall be performed by the device manufacturer's representative,
by Public Works Water Division personnel or by a certified tester approved by
the Director. It shall be the duty of the Director to see that these timely
tests are made. The customer-user shall notify the Director in advance when the
tests are to be undertaken so that he or his representative may witness the
tests if so desired. These devices shall be repaired, overhauled or replaced at
the expense of the customer-user whenever said devices are found to be
defective. Records of such tests, repairs and overhauls shall be kept and made
available to the Director.
7-7A-11-10: PRESENTLY INSTALLED DEVICES:
All presently installed backflow devices which do not meet the requirements of
this Section
7-7A-11 but were approved devices for the purpose described herein at the time
of installation and which have been properly maintained shall, except for the
inspection and maintenance requirements under Section
7-7A-11-9, be excluded from the requirements of these rules so long as the
Director is assured that they will satisfactorily protect the City system.
Whenever the existing device is moved from the present location or requires
more than minimum maintenance or when the Director finds that the maintenance
constitutes a hazard to health, the unit shall be replaced by a backflow
prevention device meeting the requirements of this Section
7-7A-11. (Ord. 8801, 1-19-88)
7-7A-12: ENFORCEMENT; ENTRY POWERS:
The Water Collector or any authorized officer of the City shall be admitted at
any reasonable hour to all parts of the premises supplied with City water or by
a private source in order to see that the regulations herein contained are
being kept and observed. (1975 Code §§13-1.18, 13-2.06)
7-7A-13: VIOLATIONS AND PENALTIES:
Any person violating any of the provisions of this Article or who interferes or
tampers with or opens, disconnects, connects, uncovers, mutilates or damages
any water pipe or mains, or any connection thereof, or anything appurtenant
thereto or used therewith, without having first obtained permission therefor
from the City Council or the City Water Superintendent, or permitting the same
to be done shall be deemed guilty of an infraction and shall be punishable as
set forth in sections 19c and 19d of the Penal Code of the State of California.
In addition to the criminal penalty as above provided, any person who shall
fail to pay the utility bill as levied and assessed in full within the time
limits prescribed for the payment thereof, or who shall violate any of the laws
of the State of California, the ordinances of the City or the rules and
regulations so established pursuant to this Article, and upon five (5) days'
written notice from the City Water Collector, shall be subject to having any
and all service for which the bill is rendered discontinued, and thereafter, no
such service which has been discontinued for the nonpayment of such service
charges or for the violation of any of the abovementioned State laws or City
ordinances, rules and regulations, shall be re-established until the owner, or
such person, shall have paid all delinquent service charges owed the City by
such person and all expenses incurred by the City in causing such
discontinuance and re-establishment. (Ord. 8205, 10-5-82)
ARTICLE B. SEWER SERVICE RATES AND CHARGES
SECTION:
7-7B-1: Compliance with Provisions
7-7B-2: Definitions
7-7B-3: Powers of Council
7-7B-4: Rules and Regulations
7-7B-5: Sewer Service Fees Established
7-7B-6: Payment of Charges; Delinquencies
7-7B-7: Disposition of Funds
7-7B-8: Vacant Premises
7-7B-9: Discontinuance of Service
7-7B-1: COMPLIANCE WITH PROVISIONS:
On and after the effective date hereof, users of the sewage system to the City
shall pay the monthly rates and fees then in effect and as may be amended from
time to time in accordance with this Article and abide by the regulations
established pursuant to the provisions of this Article.
7-7B-2: DEFINITIONS:
When used in this Article, the following words and terms shall have the
meanings ascribed to them in this Section:
APARTMENT: A place of residence having three (3) or more attached living units.
DWELLINGS: A place of residence designed for habitation by single families.
INDUSTRIAL WASTES: The liquid wastes from industrial processes as distinct from
sanitary sewage.
SANITARY SEWAGE: Sewage discharging from the sanitary conveniences of
dwellings, office buildings, factories or institutions and free from storm
water, surface water and industrial wastes.
UTILITY: A system, plant, works, facilities or undertaking for the collection,
treatment or disposal of sewage or for the obtaining, conserving, treating and
supplying of water and a sanitation or garbage removal or disposal system.
7-7B-3: POWERS OF COUNCIL:
The City Council may by resolution further define any of the uses classified
herein, resolve any uncertainties regarding the proper rate under specified
conditions and establish rates for any use not herein specifically enumerated.
The City Council may by resolution make provisions for:
   A.   The granting of discounts for prompt payment of bills.
   B.   The requiring of deposits or the prepayment of charges in an amount not
exceeding one year's charges either from persons receiving service and using
the facilities of the enterprise or from the owners of property on which or in
connection with which said services and facilities are to be used; provided,
however, that in case of nonpayment of all or part of a bill, said deposits or
prepaid charges shall be applied only insofar as necessary to liquidate the
cumulative amount of such charges plus penalties and costs of collection.
   C.   The requiring of a guaranty by the owner of property that the bills for
service to said property or the occupants thereof will be paid.
The City Council may by resolution provide for a basic penalty for nonpayment
of the charges within the time and in the manner prescribed by it. Imposition
of said basic penalty shall be in accordance with the provisions of Government
Code section 54348 as it may be amended from time to time.
7-7B-4: RULES AND REGULATIONS:
The following regulations shall be applicable to the rates and fees set forth
herein:
   A.   All parcels of real property separately owned shall be considered as
separate units.
   B.   All parcels of real property separated by a street or alley, regardless
of ownership, shall be considered as separate units.
   C.   The owner or owners of any parcel of real property together with any
and all occupants of such real property shall be jointly liable for all charges
incurred by reason of the use of said sewage system by any and all occupants of
such real property.
7-7B-5: SEWER SERVICE FEES ESTABLISHED:
The fees to be charged for the use of the sewer system of the City shall be
established by resolution of the City Council in accordance with the provisions
of the Government Code section 54354.5 as it may be amended from time to time.
(Ord. 8109, 8-18-1981)
7-7B-6: PAYMENT OF CHARGES; DELINQUENCIES:
   A.   Payment Of Sewer Charges: All sewer charges shall be collected together
with and not separately from the charges for any other utility service rendered
by the City, and all charges shall be billed upon the same bill and collected
as one item. All utility service charges shall be payable upon presentation
date at the Office of the City Water Collector in the City Hall and shall be
delinquent on the first day of the calendar month following the date of
presentment.
   B.   Disputed Bills: Should the amount of any bill for service be
questioned, the customer should promptly request an explanation. If the
explanation is not satisfactory or is not understood, the customer must pay the
bill under protest to avoid discontinuance of service. Protests will be
addressed to the Director of Finance, must be in writing, and must state the
reasons why the charges are believed to be incorrect. The Director of Finance
will analyze the facts of the case and is authorized to make such adjustments
in the charges as may be necessary to effect an equitable settlement. Failure
of a customer to pay under protest after initial explanation is offered will
result in discontinuance of service without further notice if bill is not paid
by the delinquency date.
   C.   Delinquency Penalties And Charges: In the event a utility bill is not
paid on or before the tenth day after the bill becomes delinquent, on the
eleventh day, the following fees, in addition to the amount of the utility
bill, shall be charged:
      1.   For the first such delinquency in a twelve (12) month period, five
dollars ($5.00);
      2.   For the second such delinquency in a twelve (12) month period,
fifteen dollars ($15.00); and
      3.   For the third such delinquency in a twelve (12) month period, twenty
five dollars ($25.00), plus a deposit as required by subsection
7-7B-3B of this article.
      4.   A fee of twenty five dollars ($25.00) shall be charged on all
returned checks in payment of utility charges.
   D.   Delinquencies: Accounts shall be subject to collection of any
delinquent fees and charges in the following manner:
      1.   At the time the fees become delinquent and until such time they are
fully paid, the delinquent account balance, including late charges, shall
constitute an unrecorded lien against the property and, as such, may be
identified during a title search. For commercial businesses, delinquent account
balances, including late charges, may be considered an unrecorded lien against
the business name and/or owner of the business.
      2.   Once a year there may be prepared a report of delinquent fees
including late charges. The City Council shall fix a time, date and place for
hearing the report and receive any objections or protests thereto.
      3.   The City Council shall cause notice of hearing to be mailed to the
landowners listed on the report not less than fifteen (15) days prior to the
date of the hearing.
      4.   At the hearing, the City Council shall hear any objections or
protests of landowners liable to be assessed for delinquent fees including late
charges and administrative fees, as set by resolution of the City Council. The
City Council may make revisions or corrections to the report as it deems just,
after which, by resolution, the report shall be confirmed.
      5.   The delinquent fees set forth in the report as confirmed shall
constitute special assessments against the respective parcels of land and are a
lien on the property for the amount of such delinquent fees, including late
charges. A certified copy of the resolution confirming the assessments shall be
filed with the County Recorder and the County Auditor-Controller/Tax Collector
for the amounts of the respective assessments against the respective parcels as
they appear on the current assessment roll. The lien created attaches upon
filing. The assessments shall be collected at the same time and in the same
manner as other Property Taxes and shall be subject to the same penalties and
the same procedure and sale in case of delinquency as provided for such taxes.
All laws applicable to the levy, collection and enforcement of Property Taxes
shall be applicable to such assessments. However, if, for the first year for
which the charges are prescribed, the property served by the City has been
transferred or conveyed to a bona fide purchaser for value, and attached
thereon, prior to the date on which the first installment of County taxes would
become delinquent, the charge will not result in a lien against the real
property, but shall become transferred to the unsecured roll for collection.
   E.   Debt Due To The City: Such delinquent accounts, unpaid deposits and
penalties thereon shall constitute a debt due to the City for which the City
may bring suit in any competent Civil Court against the person or persons who
occupied or, in the case of unoccupied property, who owned the property when
the service was rendered or the deposit became due or against any person
guaranteeing payment of bills, or against any or all of said persons, for the
collection of the amount of the deposit or the collection of delinquent charges
or accounts and all penalties thereon. (Ord. 2018-07, 9-18-2018)
7-7B-7: DISPOSITION OF FUNDS:
The funds received from the collection of the sewer service charges or rentals
hereinabove set forth shall be deposited with the City Treasurer and shall be
accounted for and be known as the "Sewer Fund" and when appropriated by the
City Council shall be available for the payment of interest or principal on any
and all bonds issued and outstanding or which may be issued for sanitary and
sewage facilities and to retire such bonds when they mature, and for the
payment of cost and expenses of acquisition, construction, operation,
maintenance and repair of the City sewage system and the sewer pumping,
treatment and disposal works and extensions and improvements thereto.
Any payment received for City utility charges in an amount less than the total
charge billed shall be treated as a partial payment for each such charge and
the amount received allocated to the separate departments in the same ratio as
each such charge bears to the whole of the bill. (Ord. 8109, 8-18-1981)
7-7B-8: VACANT PREMISES:
Whenever any single-family dwelling is vacant or unused for a period of thirty
(30) days or more, the person to whom the sewer rental is charged may secure a
rebate of his sewer service charges for said period of thirty (30) days or more
and said person to whom the sewer rental is charged may secure a rebate of his
sewer service charges for said period of vacancy by presenting to the City
Water Collector an affidavit setting forth all the facts of vacancy under oath.
If satisfied with the truth of the statements of vacancy, the City Water
Collector shall approve said claim and refund shall be made. No charge shall be
made for a new single-family dwelling until the same is occupied; provided,
however, that a person shall be conclusively presumed to be using the sewer
service when the property is connected to sewer and not disconnected from the
water system. (Ord. 8109, 8-18-1981)
7-7B-9: DISCONTINUANCE OF SERVICE:
Any person who shall fail to pay the utility bill as levied and assessed in
full within the time limits prescribed for the payment thereof, or who shall
violate any of the laws of the State of California, the ordinances of the City
or the rules and regulations so established referring to the discharge of
sewage, and upon five (5) days' written notice from the City Water Collector,
shall be subject to having any and all service for which the bill is rendered
discontinued, and thereafter, no such service which has been discontinued for
the nonpayment of such service charges or for the violation of any of the
abovementioned State laws or City ordinances, rules or regulations shall be re-
established until the owner, or such person, shall have paid all delinquent
service charges owed the City by such persons and all expenses incurred by the
City in causing such discontinuance and re-establishment. (Ord. 8109, 8-18-
1981)
ARTICLE C. WATER AND SEWER CONNECTION FEES
SECTION:
7-7C-1: Purpose
7-7C-2: Scope
7-7C-3: Connection Fees Established
7-7C-4: Disposition Of Funds
7-7C-1: PURPOSE:
Pursuant to the authority of California Health And Safety Code section 5471,
the city council finds and declares that there is a continuing need within the
city to create and accumulate funds for the acquisition, construction,
reconstruction and maintenance of the city's water and sewerage facilities,
including main trunk, interceptor and outfall sewers, distribution mains and
appurtenances associated therewith, and in addition, to finance the repayment
of general obligation bonds and federal grants for prior construction of the
existing water and sewerage treatment facilities. The city council also finds
that these funds have been previously established and collected as water and
sewer connection fees by the authority of resolution 7833 and that it is the
intent of this article to repeal resolution 7833 and to continue to collect
connection fees by virtue of the authority and procedure established in this
article. (Ord. 8614, 10-7-1986)
7-7C-2: SCOPE:
   A.   Applicable Area: The area to which this article shall apply includes
each and every parcel within the city limits of the city as it presently
exists, or as it may hereafter exist, and each and every parcel outside the
city as provided for herein, except to the extent that a building permit is
issued to owners of improved properties which are, at the time of application
for building permit, already connected to the water and sewer system and have
previously paid all connection fees.
   B.   Service Outside City; Public Facilities: Upon written application by a
public agency with public facilities located outside the boundaries of the
city, the city council hereby designates to the city manager the authority to
negotiate the terms and conditions of an agreement with the public agency which
will be subsequently considered by the city council to extend water service
and/or supply to a particular public facility. In so doing, the city manager
shall consider the benefit of the public facility to the citizens of Lemoore
and consult with and obtain review and/or approval of any such agreement by the
city engineer and/or city attorney as applicable. Any such agreement shall be
subject to final approval and ratification by the city council before it
becomes effective.
   C.   Service Outside City; Landowner, Developer, Or Commercial Business:
Upon written application by a landowner, developer, or commercial business
located outside the boundaries of the city, the city council hereby designates
to the city manager the authority to negotiate the terms and conditions of an
agreement with the landowner, developer, or commercial business which will be
subsequently considered by the city council to extend water service and/or
supply to a particular parcel, lot or other facility. In so doing, the city
manager shall consider the benefit to the citizens of Lemoore and consult with
and obtain review and/or approval of any such agreement by the city engineer
and/or city attorney as applicable. Any such agreement shall be subject to
final approval and ratification by the city council before it becomes
effective. Additionally, such extended service and/or supply pursuant hereto is
only authorized for land within the city's sphere of influence and must conform
with all current city ordinances and standards, including the payment of any
and all applicable fees and other charges, current laws, receive the
appropriate approvals of other agencies as required by law, and include a
provision whereby the property owner agrees not to object to or otherwise
oppose the city's annexation of the property owner's property at a future date,
should such an annexation occur. (Ord. 2015-04, 7-7-2015)
7-7C-3: CONNECTION FEES ESTABLISHED:
   A.   Sewer Connection Fee: A sewer connection fee in the sum of five hundred
dollars ($500.00) per residential equivalent, as determined by the city
engineer, shall be paid by each person or entity applying for a building
permit. The said connection fee shall be paid, in full, prior to the issuance
of a building permit.
   B.   Water Connection Fee: A water connection fee in the sum of five hundred
dollars ($500.00) per residential equivalent, as determined by the city
engineer, shall be paid by each person or entity applying for the issuance of a
building permit from the city. The said connection fee shall be paid, in full,
prior to the issuance of a building permit. (Ord. 8614, 10-7-1986)
7-7C-4: DISPOSITION OF FUNDS:
All fees collected in accordance with this article shall be deposited in a
separate capital improvement fund established for the purposes herein
described. (Ord. 8614, 10-7-1986)
ARTICLE D. SEWER USE REGULATIONS
SECTION:
7-7D-1: Short Title
7-7D-2: Purpose and Policy
7-7D-3: Definitions
7-7D-4: Payment of Charges
7-7D-5: Prohibitions and Limitations on Wastewater Discharges to Public Sewers
7-7D-6: Control of Prohibited Wastes
7-7D-7: Industrial Wastewater Monitoring and Reporting
7-7D-8: Industrial Wastewater Discharge Permit System
7-7D-9: Enforcement Procedures
7-7D-10: Penalties and Costs
7-7D-11: Payment of Fees and Charges
7-7D-1: SHORT TITLE:
This Article may be cited as the CITY OF LEMOORE SEWER USE ORDINANCE.
7-7D-2: PURPOSE AND POLICY:
This sewer use Article sets uniform requirements for discharges into the
wastewater collection, transport, and treatment system and enables the City to
meet its contractual obligations to comply with the administrative provisions
of the Clean Water Grant regulations, the water quality requirements set by the
Regional Water Quality Control Board and the applicable effluent limitations,
national standards of performance, toxic and pretreatment effluent standards,
and any other discharge criteria which are required or authorized by State or
Federal law, and to derive the maximum public benefit by regulating the quality
and quantity of wastewater discharge into those systems. This Article provides
for the establishment of a surveillance and enforcement procedure to control
the discharge of certain wastewater and the issuance of permits, which are
generally referred to as industrial wastewater discharge permits, to certain
users. Revenues derived from said industrial wastewater discharge permits
required by this Article shall be used to defray the City's cost of conducting
the source control program and industrial wastewater discharge permit system.
7-7D-3: DEFINITIONS:
Unless otherwise defined herein, terms used in this Article shall have the same
meanings as adopted in the latest edition of Standard Methods for the
Examination of Water and Wastewater, published by the American Public Health
Association, or as set forth in the latest publications of The American Water
Works Association, the Water Pollution Control Federation, the Glossary - Water
and Wastewater Control Engineering, the American Public Health Association, the
American Society of Civil Engineers, the American Water Works Association, and
the Water Pollution Control Federation. Waste constituents and characteristics
shall be measured by standard methods unless expressly stated, or as otherwise
established by Federal or State regulatory agencies. It is intended that these
definitions supplement, expend and add to those provided in other City
ordinances, and in the event of conflict, these definitions shall be
controlling in the interpretation of this Article.
ACT: The "Federal Water Pollution Control Act Amendments" of 1972 (33 U.S.C.
section 1251 et seq.) and any amendments thereto including the "Clean Water Act
of 1977", as well as any guidelines, limitations, and standards promulgated by
the United States Environmental Protection Agency pursuant to the Act.
APPLICANT: The person making application for a permit for a sewer installation
and such applicant shall be the owner of the premises to be served by the sewer
for which a permit is requested or his authorized agent.
BENEFICIAL USES: Uses of the waters of the State that may be protected against
quality degradation.
BIOCHEMICAL OXYGEN DEMAND (BOD): The quantity of oxygen utilized in the
biochemical oxidation of organic matter under standard laboratory procedure in
five (5) days at twenty degrees (20°) centigrade.
BUILDING: Any structure used for human habitation or a place of business,
recreation or other purpose containing sanitary facilities.
BUILDING DRAIN: That part of the lowest horizontal piping of a drainage system
which receives the discharge from drainage piping inside the walls of a
building and which conveys liquid wastes to the building sewer intersecting at
a point two feet (2') from the building foundation.
BUILDING SEWER: A sewer conveying wastewater from the premises of a user to a
community sewer.
CITY: The City of Lemoore.
CITY ATTORNEY: An attorney at law appointed by the City Council to represent
the City.
CITY COUNCIL: The five-person Council constituted and empowered as a group
acting in public meetings to legislate in all matters related to the City's
jurisdiction as established by the laws of the State of California.
COMMERCIAL ESTABLISHMENTS: Any building used for conducting private or public
wholesale or retail transactions involving the exchange of services,
commodities or financial business. Such facilities normally produce domestic
wastes, but may also contain or produce industrial wastes.
COMMUNITY SEWER: A sewer which is owned, operated and/or maintained by the
City, tributary to the treatment facility operated by the City.
COMPATIBLE POLLUTANT: BOD, suspended solids, pH, fecal coliform bacteria,
irrigation quality characteristics, and/or such additional pollutants as are
now or may be in the future specified and controlled in the City's waste
discharge permit issued by the California Regional Water Quality Control Board
for its publicly owned treatment works (POTW).
CONTAMINATION: An impairment of the quality of the waters of the State by waste
to a degree which creates a hazard to the public health through poisoning or
through the spread of disease. Contamination shall include any equivalent
effect resulting from the disposal of wastewater, whether or not waters of the
State are affected.
CONTROLLED SUBSTANCE: Any substance which is a toxic substance or an
incompatible pollutant or which may cause pollution or which may interfere with
or pass through the POTW and interfere with the proper disposal of the effluent
from the POTW.
COOLING WATER: The water discharged from any use such as air conditioning,
cooling or refrigeration, during which the only pollutant added to the water is
heat.
COUNTY: The County of Kings, California.
CRITICAL USER: A user who is required to obtain a permit, as defined in
subsection
7-7D-8A.
DISCHARGE: To pump, to place, to deposit, to permit, or to cause to flow or to
be transported by a flow.
DISCHARGE PERMIT: A permit allowing a specific user to discharge specific
quantities and types of wastewater subject to payment of stipulated fees and
other conditions. See subsection
7-7D-8A herein.
DOMESTIC WASTES: Liquid wastes (a) from the noncommercial preparation, cooking
and handling of food; or (b) containing human excrement and similar matter from
the sanitary conveniences of dwellings, commercial buildings, industrial
facilities and institutions.
GARBAGE: Solid wastes from the domestic and commercial preparation, cooking and
dispensing of food, and from the manufacture, handling, storage and sales of
food.
HOLDING TANK WASTE: Any waste from holding tanks such as vessels, chemical
toilets, industrial process detention tanks, brine tanks, and grease or sand
traps.
INCOMPATIBLE POLLUTANT: Any pollutant which is not a "compatible pollutant" as
defined in this Section or which may pass through the sewerage system and have
a detrimental effect on the final disposal of the effluent from the treatment
plant or which may cause abnormal increase in the operation costs of the
sewerage system.
INDUSTRIAL ESTABLISHMENT: Any building that, in addition to domestic wastes,
discharges industrial wastewater or wastewater containing any of the
constituents referenced in Section
7-7D-5 of this Article.
INDUSTRIAL WASTEWATER: The liquid wastes resulting from the processes employed
in industrial, manufacturing, trade or business establishments, as distinct
from domestic wastes. This includes wastewater from a source other than an
industrial plant or facility which introduces toxic pollutants, as defined in
403 CFR 233.1(w), into publicly owned treatment works, including, without
limitation: medical offices; dental offices; hospitals; schools, research,
educational and commercial laboratories; warehouses; shopping centers; car
washes; print stores; residential, commercial, and public uses of pesticides
and fertilizers; gas stations; and septage collection and disposal facilities.
INFECTIOUS WASTE: Wastes which contain pathogenic organisms.
INSTITUTIONAL FACILITIES: Any public or privately-owned school, publicly-owned
building from which Federal, State, County, City or special district activities
are conducted or offered for public use. Such facilities shall include but not
be limited to schools, hospitals, jails, libraries, offices, equipment yards
and maintenance buildings, laboratories, parks, rubbish stations, detention
homes and fire stations.
INTERFERENCE: An inhibition or disruption of the POTW, its treatment process,
its sludge process, its effluent disposal system for irrigation purposes or any
factor which is a cause of or significantly contributes to either a violation
of any requirement of the POTW's discharge permit, including an increase in the
magnitude or duration of such violation or a violation of the City's agreement
with Westlake Farms for the disposal of the effluent for irrigation purposes.
   An industrial user significantly contributes to such a permit violation or
violation of the City- Westlake Farms disposal agreement whenever such user:
   Discharges a daily pollutant loading in excess of that allowed by contract
with the POTW or by Federal, State or local law;
   Discharges wastewater which substantially differs in nature or constituents
from the user's average discharge; or
   Knows or has reason to know that his discharge, alone or in conjunction with
discharges from other sources, would result in a POTW permit violation or
violation of the City-Westlake Farms disposal agreement.
LATERAL SEWER: That portion of the building drain within a public street.
MANAGER: The City Manager of the City of Lemoore or his designated
representative acting within the scope of the policy directives of the City
Council of the City.
MASS EMISSION RATE: The weight of material discharged to the sewer system
during a given time interval. Unless otherwise specified, the mass emission
rate shall mean pounds per day of a particular constituent or combination of
constituents.
MOBILEHOME: A residence manufactured to be transported on wheels. It normally
required a special permit to be moved, has more than four hundred (400) square
feet of floor space, and is usually sited in a park or development exclusively
zoned for such residences.
MULTIPLE-FAMILY DWELLINGS: Buildings such as duplexes, triplexes, apartments,
et cetera, under a single ownership.
NATURAL OUTLET: A channel, pond, ditch, lake or other body of surface or ground
water.
NUISANCE: Anything which is injurious to health or is indecent or offensive to
the senses or an obstruction to the free use of property so as to interfere
with the comfort or enjoyment of life or property or which may affect an entire
community or neighborhood or any considerable number of persons, although the
extent of the annoyance or damage inflicted upon individuals may be unequal.
OUTSIDE SEWER: A private sewer beyond the limits of the City.
P.C.B.: Polychlorinated biphenols, a group of synthetic organic compounds.
pH: A measure of the hydrogen-ion concentration in a solution, expressed as the
logarithm (base 10) of the reciprocal of the hydrogen-ion concentration in gram
moles per liter.
PASS THROUGH: The discharge of pollutants through the POTW into waters of the
State in quantities or concentrations which are a cause of or significantly
contribute to a violation of any requirement of the POTW's discharge permit,
including an increase in the magnitude or duration of a violation or contribute
to causing a violation of the agreement between the City and Westlake Farms for
the disposal of the effluent for irrigation purposes. An industrial user
significantly contributes to such permit violation where it:
   Discharges a daily pollutant loading in excess of that allowed in its
discharge permit; or
   Discharges wastewater which substantially differs in nature or constituents
from the user's average discharge.
PATHOGENIC ORGANISMS: Bacteria, protozoa, viruses or other life forms which may
cause disease.
PERMIT: Any written authorization required pursuant to this or any other rule,
regulation, ordinance or contract of the City for the installation of any
sewage works, including but not limited to industrial wastewater discharge
permit.
PERSON: Any individual, partnership, firm, association, corporation or public
agency including the State of California and the United States of America.
PLUMBING SYSTEM: The distributing pipes for the water supply; the fixtures and
fixture traps, the soil, waste, and vent pipes; the building drain and building
sewer; and the storm water drainage pipes, with their devices, appurtenances
and connections within and adjacent to the building.
POLLUTION: An alteration of the quality of the waters of the State by waste to
a degree which adversely affects such waters for beneficial use or facilities
which serve such beneficial uses. Pollution may include contamination.
PUBLICLY OWNED TREATMENT WORKS (POTW): A treatment works as defined by section
212 of the Federal Water Pollution Control Act, which is owned by a state or
municipality (as defined by section 502(4) of the Federal Water Pollution
Control Act). This definition includes any devices and systems used in the
storage, treatment, recycling and reclamation of municipal sewage or industrial
wastes of a liquid nature. It also includes sewers, pipes and other conveyances
if they convey wastewater to a POTW.
PREMISES: A parcel of real estate including any improvements thereon which is
determined by the City to be a single entity for purposes of receiving, using
and paying for service.
PRETREATMENT: Application of physical, chemical and biological processes to
reduce the amount of pollutants in or alter the nature of the pollutant
properties in a wastewater prior to discharging such wastewater into the POTW.
PRETREATMENT STANDARDS: All applicable Federal rules and regulations
implementing section 307 of the Act, as well as rules and regulations
promulgated by the State, County or City regulatory agencies, the most
stringent of which shall apply.
PRIVATE SEWER: One which has an independent sewage disposal not connected with
a public sewer and which accommodates one or more services.
PUBLIC SEWER: A sewer in a public right of way or easement owned or controlled
by the City of Lemoore or any sewer constructed by the City of Lemoore.
RATE RESOLUTION: A resolution which provides for the establishment of sewer
service charges; referred to as the City of Lemoore sewer rate resolution.
RESIDENCE or RESIDENTIAL UNIT: Building for occupancy by one or a family of
persons as a permanent or temporary habitat. Normally used to refer to single-
family residence, a house sited physically separate from any other building.
RESIDENTIAL EQUIVALENT: Any discharge of wastewater, expressed in fractions or
multiples of the prevailing quantities of daily emissions of volume, pounds of
BOD and pounds of SS for the average single-family residence as stated in the
currently effective rate resolution.
RESIDENTIAL EQUIVALENT UNIT COST: That unit cost which shall be the basis for
the charge for sewer service as stated in the currently effective "Rate
Ordinance - An Ordinance Providing For the Establishment of Sewer Service
Charges" in the City of Lemoore.
SANITARY WASTEWATER: The water supply of a community after it has been used and
discharged into a sewer.
SEWER: A pipe or conduit for transporting wastewater.
SEWERAGE SYSTEM: The collection, transport, pumping, treatment and disposal
facilities of the City of Lemoore.
SIDE SEWER: That part of the sewer piping beginning at the foundation wall of
any building and terminating in the main sewer.
SIGNIFICANT INDUSTRIAL DISCHARGER: Any industrial user of the City of Lemoore's
wastewater treatment system whose discharge:
   Exceeds five thousand (5,000) gallons per day; or
   Exceeds five percent (5%) of any one of the three (3) daily design
capacities for flow, BOD and suspended solids for the treatment system; or
   Contains a toxic pollutant in toxic amounts as defined in standards issued
under 307(a) of the Federal Water Pollution Control Act and the Toxic
Substances Control Act; or
   Contains a pollutant that may cause interference with or which may pass
through the POTW and thereby produce a harmful effect.
STANDARD INDUSTRIAL CLASSIFICATION (SIC): The compilation of industries and
their discharges of pollutants, which is printed by the United States Office of
Management and Budget in its Standard Industrial Classification Manual.
STORM WATER: Any flow occurring during or immediately following any form of
natural precipitation and resulting therefrom.
STREET: Any public highway, road, street, avenue, alley, way, easement or right
of way.
SUSPENDED SOLIDS (SS): The total suspended matter that floats on the surface
of, is suspended in, or settles from wastewater, or other liquids, and which is
removable by laboratory filtering.
TOTAL IDENTIFIABLE CHLORINATED HYDROCARBONS (TICH): Those organic compounds
that make up a large part of the synthetic carbon compounds included in the
EPA's list of toxic substances.
TOXIC SUBSTANCES: Any toxic material in amounts exceeding standards promulgated
by the Administrator of the United States Environmental Protection Agency
pursuant to section 307(a) of the Act, and the "Toxic Substances Control Act"
(P.L. 94-46i9), and chemical elements or compounds, phenols or other taste or
odor producing substances, or any other substances which are not susceptible to
treatment or which may interfere with the biological process or efficiency of
the treatment and disposal system.
TRAILER: A mobile residence normally set up in a park constructed to provide
utility hookups of such dwellings. Trailers are limited to thirty five feet
(35') in length by the California Motor Vehicle Code and may be towed on the
public highway without a special permit. Such residences have less than four
hundred (400) square feet of floor space.
UNPOLLUTED WATER: Water not containing any pollutants limited or prohibited by
the effluent standards in effect, or water whose discharge will not cause any
violation of receiving water quality standards.
USER: Any person who discharges, causes or permits the discharge of wastewater
into the City of Lemoore's wastewater treatment system.
USER CLASSIFICATION: A classification of user based on the 1972 (or subsequent)
Edition of the Standard Industrial Classification (SIC) Manual prepared by the
Office of Management and Budget.
WASTE: Sewage and any and all other waste substances, liquid, solid, gaseous or
radioactive, associated with human habitation, or of human or animal origin, or
from any reproducing, manufacturing or processing operation of whatever nature,
including such waste placed within containers of whatever nature prior to, and
for purposes of, disposal.
WASTEWATER: Waste and water, whether treated or untreated, discharged into or
permitted to enter a community sewer.
WASTEWATER CONSTITUENTS AND CHARACTERISTICS: The individual chemical, physical,
biological and radiological parameters, including volume and rate of flow and
such other parameters that serve to define, classify or measure the contents,
quality, quantity and strength of wastewater.
WASTEWATER TREATMENT SYSTEM: Any devices, facilities, structures, equipment or
works owned or used by the City of Lemoore for the purpose of the transmission,
storage, treatment, recycling and disposing of industrial and domestic waste.
7-7D-4: PAYMENT OF CHARGES:
All users shall pay the charges and fees required by this Article at the time
and in the amounts and as set forth herein and in the City sewer rate
resolution 1 .
 
Notes
1 1. See also Section
  7-7B-5 of this Chapter.
7-7D-5: PROHIBITIONS AND LIMITATIONS ON WASTEWATER DISCHARGES TO PUBLIC SEWERS:
   A.   Introduction: This Article is applicable to areas within the boundaries
of the City, and to all other areas and entities which by contract are bound to
comply with the ordinances, resolutions, rules and regulations of the City.
   B.   Prohibitions on Wastewater Discharges: Unless otherwise provided in a
special agreement as described in subsection H of this Section or the discharge
permit as described in subsection
7-7D-8A, no person shall discharge or deposit or cause or allow to be
discharged or deposited into the wastewater treatment system any wastewater
which contains or produces the following:
      1.   Oils and Grease:
         a.   Oil and grease concentrations or amounts from industrial
facilities violating Federal pretreatment standards.
         b.   Total fat, wax, grease or oil concentration of animal or
vegetable origin (living sources) of more than one hundred (100) mg/l, whether
emulsified or not, containing substances which may solidify or become viscous
at temperatures between thirty two degrees (32°) and one hundred fifty degrees
(150°) Fahrenheit (0° and 65° centigrade) at the point of discharge into the
system.
         c.   Wax, grease or oil concentration of mineral or petroleum origin
(nonliving sources) of more than one hundred (100) mg/l whether emulsified or
not, or containing substances which may solidify or become viscous at
temperatures between thirty two degrees (32°) and one hundred fifty degrees
(150°) Fahrenheit (0° and 65° centigrade) at the point of discharge into the
system.
      2.   Explosive Mixtures: Liquids, solids or gases which by reason of
their nature or quantity are, or may be, sufficient either alone or by
interaction with other substances to cause fire or explosion or be injurious in
any other way to the sewerage facilities or to the operation of the system.
Prohibited materials include, but are not limited to, gasoline, kerosene,
naphtha, benzene, toluene, xylene, ethers, alcohols, ketones, aldehydes,
peroxides, chlorites, perchlorates, bromates, carbides, formaldehyde, hydrides
and sulfides.
      3.   Noxious Material: Noxious or malodorous solids, liquids or gases,
which either singly or by interaction with other wastes, are capable of
creating a public nuisance or hazard to life, or may be of such nature as to be
sufficient to prevent entry into a sewer for its maintenance and repair.
      4.   Improperly Shredded Garbage: Garbage that has not been ground or
comminuted to such a degree that all particles will be carried freely in
suspension under flow conditions normally prevailing in the public sewers, with
no particle greater than three-eighths inch (3/8") in any dimension.
      5.   Radioactive Wastes: Radioactive wastes or isotopes of such half-life
or in such concentration that they do not comply with regulations or orders
issued by the appropriate authority having control over their use and which
will or may cause damage or hazards to the sewerage facilities or personnel
operating the system.
      6.   Solid or Viscous Wastes: Solid or viscous wastes which will or may
cause obstruction to the flow in a sewer, or otherwise interfere with the
proper operation of the wastewater treatment system. Prohibited materials
include, but are not limited to, grease, uncomminuted garbage, animal guts or
tissues, paunch manure, bones, hair, hides or fleshings, entrails, whole blood,
feathers, ashes, cinders, sand, spent lime, stone or marble dust, polishing
compounds, resin beads, metal, glass, straw, shavings, grass clippings, rags,
spent grains, spent hops, waste paper, wood, plastic, tar, asphalt residues,
residues from refining or processing of fuel or lubricating oil, and similar
substances.
      7.   Toxic Substances: Any toxic substances in amounts exceeding
standards promulgated by the Administrator of the United States Environmental
Protection Agency pursuant to section 307(a) of the Act, and chemical elements
or compounds, phenols or other taste or odor producing substances, or any other
substances which are not susceptible to treatment or which may interfere with
the biological processes or efficiency of the treatment system.
      8.   Unpolluted Waters: Any unpolluted water including, but not limited
to, water from cooling systems or of storm water origin, which will increase
the hydraulic load on the treatment system beyond the limit allowed in the
user's discharge permit.
      9.   Discolored Materials: Wastes with objectionable color not removable
by the treatment process. Such color shall be objectionable if it causes the
plant effluent to fail to meet State or EPA standards for turbidity or light
transmittance, causes complaints from downstream users, or if it causes
pollution to waters of the State.
      10.   Corrosive Wastes: Any waste which will cause corrosion or
deterioration detrimental to the design life expectancy of the treatment
system. All wastes discharged to the public sewer system must have pH value in
the range of six (6.0) to nine (9.0). Materials subject to regulation under
this Section include, but are not limited to, acids, caustics, sulfides,
concentrated chloride and fluoride compounds, and substances which will react
with water to form acidic or alkaline products.
      11.   Interference With Reclamation or Reuse: Any waste which will cause,
threaten to cause, or is capable of causing either alone or by interaction with
other substances in the City's effluent or any other product of the treatment
process, characteristics, residues, sludges or scums, which would cause the
effluent to be unsuitable for reclamation and reuse or to interfere with the
reclamation or reuse thereof.
      12.   Nuisance: Any waste which will cause, threaten to cause, or is
capable of causing either alone or by interaction with other substances a
detrimental environmental impact or a nuisance in the waters of the State or a
condition unacceptable to the City, or any public agency having regulatory
jurisdiction over the City.
      13.   Incompatible Pollutants: Any waste which is not a "compatible
pollutant" as defined in this Article or which may interfere with or may "pass
through" the system or which may cause abnormal increase in the operation costs
of the system.
   C.   Limitations on Wastewater Discharges:
      1.   
Table C1 shows the maximum allowable concentration of certain pollutants for
discharge into the POTW. Dilution of any wastewater discharge for the purpose
of satisfying these requirements shall be considered a violation of this
Article.
TABLE C1
ALLOWABLE CONCENTRATIONS OF POLLUTANTS
 Concentration (mg/l)
                                           Concentration (mg/l)
Ammonia (as N)                             50.0
Arsenic                                    0.1
Bicarbonate (HCO 3)                        200.0
Boron                                      1.5
Cadmium                                    0.01
Chromium (Total)                           0.5
Chromium (Trivalent)                       0.5
Chromium (Hexavalent)                      none
Copper                                     0.5
Cyanide                                    1.0
Lead                                       0.5
Mercury                                    none
Nickel                                     0.5
pH                                         6.0 to 9.0
Phenolic compounds                         1.0
Silver                                     0.05
SARadj                                     9.0
Zinc                                       1.0
Temperature - not to exceed 65.5° C (150° F)
Total Identifiable Chlorinated Hydrocarbon none
Radioactivity - not to exceed limits specified in sections 30285 and 30287 of
the California Administrative Code.
 
      2.   Listed in
Table C2 are certain pollutants which, when discharged to the POTW, must be
reported to the City as a condition of compliance with the users discharge
permit. Maximum concentration limits for these pollutants have not been
determined for general application. The Manager will determine and implement
such limits as he may find necessary to insure compliance with the City's
discharge permit issued by the Regional Water Quality Control Board or to
insure that the discharge from the POTW complies with the City-Westlake Farms
contract for final disposal or to meet more stringent requirements issued by
the United States Environmental Protection Agency regarding new source
discharges.
TABLE C2
CONTROLLED POLLUTANTS
Acenaphthene         Fluorides
Acrolein             Fluoranthene
Acrylonitrile        Formaldehydes
Aldrin/Dieldrin
Aluminum             Guthion
Antimony
Asbestos             Halomethanes
                    Haloethers
                    Heptachlor
Barium               Hexachlorobutadiene
Benzene              Hexachlorocyclohexane
Benzidine             
Beryllium            Iron
                    Isophorone
Carbon Tetrachloride  
Chlordane            Malathion
Chloroform           Manganese
Chlorophenoxy        Mirex
Herbicides           Methoxychlor
Chlorinated Benzenes  
Chlorinated Ethanes  Naphthalene
Chlorinated          Nitrobenzene
Naphthalene          Nitrophenols
Chloroalkyl Ethers   Nitrosamines
2-Chlorophenols       
Chlorophenols        Parathion
Cobalt               PCB's
                    Phthalate Esters
DDT                  P-Dioxin
Demeton              Pentachlorophenol
Dichlorobenzidine    Polynuclear Aromatic
Dichloroethylenes    Hydrocarbons
Dinitrotoluene        
Diphenylhydrazine    Selenium
& Dichloropropane    Surfactants
Dichloropropene       
2,4-Dichlorophenol   Tetrachloroethylene
2,4-Dimethylphenol   Thallium
Dichlorobenzenes     Toluene
                    Toxaphene
Endrin               Toxicity Concentration
Enorin               Trichloroethylene
Ethylbenzene          
Endosulfan           Vinyl Chloride
 
Limitations and prohibitions on wastewater strength contained in this Article,
including those of the preceding Tables C1 and C2, may be supplemented with
more stringent limitations and prohibitions pursuant to subsection
7-7D-8E and the provisions of subsection
7-7D-8E shall, in such cases, be controlling. The City may provide the more
stringent limitations and prohibitions as follows:
         a.   If the City determines that the limitations and prohibitions in
this Article may not be sufficient to protect the operation of the district's
treatment works; or
         b.   If the City determines that the limitations and prohibitions in
this Article may not be sufficient to enable the City's treatment works to
comply with water quality standards or effluent limitations specified in the
City's California Regional Water Quality Control Board waste discharge
requirements, or to meet the requirements of the City-Westlake Farms agreement
for the final disposal of the discharge from the POTW.
      3.   Federal Limitations: Any user who does not comply with the Federal
pretreatment standards as required by section 307 (b) and (c) of the Act and
any applicable regulations thereunder, including those called for by 403 CFR
403.0, violates this Article. The more stringent of the standards will apply
whenever local, State and Federal standards overlap. Violation and prosecution
under this Article does not preclude violation and prosecution by other
affected Federal, State or local agencies in accordance with applicable law.
   D.   Limitations on Point of Discharge: No person shall discharge any
substances directly into a manhole or other opening in a community sewer other
than through an approved building sewer unless, upon written application by the
user and payment of the applicable user charges and fees, the City issues a
permit for such direct discharges.
   E.   Excessive Discharge Rate: No person shall discharge or cause or allow
to be discharged or deposited into the wastewater system any wastewater flowing
at an excessive rate of flow defined as:
      1.   Hydraulic: That average rate of flow during any fifteen (15)
consecutive minutes which shall be greater than five (5) times the average
daily rate of flow, or a monthly flow volume greater than that specified by
connection permit shall be considered excessive.
      2.   Loadings: Those concentrations of pollutants such as toxics, grease
and oil, and other constituents, which in a grab sample are greater by a factor
of five (5) than the average twenty four (24) hour concentration allowed in the
industrial waste permit or a mass emission greater than that specified by
connection permit shall be considered excessive.
      3.   BOD5 and Suspended Solids: Those concentrations of biochemical
oxygen demand and suspended solids which, in a composite sample taken at
intervals of fifteen (15) minutes over a period of four (4) hours, are greater
by a factor of five (5) than the average twenty four (24) hour concentration
allowed in the industrial waste permit or a mass emission greater than that
specified by connection permit shall be considered excessive.
   F.   Holding Tank Waste: A user proposing to discharge holding tank waste
into a community sewer must secure a permit. Unless allowed by the City under
the terms and conditions of the permit, a separate permit must be secured for
each separate discharge. This permit will state the specific location of
discharge, the time of day the discharge is to occur, the volume of the
discharge, and the wastewater constituents and characteristics. If a permit is
granted for discharge of such waste into a community sewer, the user shall pay
the applicable user charges and fees and shall meet such other conditions as
required by the City.
   G.   Infectious Wastes:
      1.   Infectious wastes from hospitals, clinics and mortuaries may be
disposed of to the sanitary sewer system subject to the following limitations
and requirements:
         a.   The material shall be ground by an approved grinder so that the
material shall pass a three-eighths inch (3/8") screen opening.
         b.   The materials must not violate any other requirements of these
rules and regulations or applicable State and/or Federal statutes, laws, and
rules and regulations.
         c.   All paper and plastic items must be excluded before grinding
organic kitchen wastes from hospital food preparations prior to discharge into
the sanitary sewer system.
      2.   The following shall not be discharged to the sanitary sewer system
by any means:
         a.   Hypodermic needles, syringes and associated articles following
their use in hospitals, out-patient clinics, medical and dental offices, etc.
         b.   Portions of the human anatomy, pathologic specimens.
         c.   Wastes excluded by other provisions of this Article except as
specifically permitted in this Section.
      3.   All hospitals within the limits of the City desiring to dispose of a
ground "infectious waste" by discharge into facilities of the City shall first
have a valid discharge permit. All applicants for such permits shall fill out
completely the application form, pay the appropriate fee, receive a copy of the
City's regulations governing discharge of ground hospital wastes, and shall
agree in writing to abide by the regulations. The discharge permit shall be
valid for one year from date of issuance.
      4.   Nothing in this Section shall be construed to limit the authority of
the Health Officer of the County to define wastes as being infectious.
   H.   Special Agreements: Nothing in this Section shall be construed as
preventing any special agreement or arrangement between the City and any user
of the wastewater treatment system whereby wastewater of unusual strength or
character is accepted into the system and specially treated, subject to any
payments or user charges as may be applicable. Any such special agreement must
be approved by the City Council.
   I.   Nonindustrial Users: Hospitals, clinics, schools, commercial
facilities, public agency facilities and any other class of discharger may be
classified as industrial facilities for purposes of applying this Article. The
applicability may be extended to residential users at the sole discretion of
the City in special instances.
7-7D-6: CONTROL OF PROHIBITED WASTES:
   A.   Regulatory Actions: Unless otherwise provided in a special agreement as
described in subsection
7-7D-5H or the discharge permit as described in subsection
7-7D-8A, if wastewaters containing any substance described in Section
7-7D-5 are discharged or proposed to be discharged into the sewer system of the
City or to any sewer system tributary thereto, the Manager and the City
Attorney may take any action necessary to:
      1.   Prohibit the discharge of such wastewater.
      2.   Require a user to demonstrate that in-plant modifications will
reduce or eliminate the discharge of such substances in conformity with this
Article.
      3.   Require pretreatment, including storage facilities, or flow
equalization necessary to reduce or eliminate the objectionable characteristics
or substances so that the discharge will not violate these rules and
regulations.
      4.   Require the person proposing, making, causing or allowing the
discharge to pay any additional cost or expense incurred by the City for
handling and treating excess loads imposed on the treatment system.
      5.   Take such other remedial action as may be deemed to be desirable or
necessary to achieve the purpose of this Article.
   B.   Submission of Plans: Where pretreatment or equalization of wastewater
flows prior to discharge into any part of the wastewater treatment system is
required, detailed plans, specifications and other pertinent data or
information relating to such pretreatment or flow-control facilities shall
first be submitted to the City for review and approval in writing. Such written
approval shall not exempt the discharge of such facilities from compliance with
any applicable code, ordinance, rule, regulation or order of any governmental
authority. Any subsequent alterations or additions to such pretreatment or
flow- control facilities shall not be made without due notice to and prior
approval of the City.
   C.   Pretreatment: Users shall make wastewater acceptable under the
limitations established herein before discharging to the community sewer. Any
facilities required to pretreat wastewater to a level acceptable to the City
shall be designed, purchased, installed, maintained in good working order, and
operated so as to ensure continuous compliance with applicable requirements by
the user at user's own cost and expense. Intermittent operation of pretreatment
facilities during discharge to the POTW is prohibited without written
permission from the Manager.
      1.   Interceptors: Grease, oil and sand interceptors shall be provided
when, in the opinion of the Manager, they are necessary for the proper handling
of the liquid wastes containing grease in excessive amounts, or any flammable
wastes, sand and other harmful ingredients. All interceptors shall be of a
capacity sufficient to provide the appropriate quality of effluent, and shall
be in an easily accessible location for purposes of cleaning and inspection.
      2.   Commercial Garbage Grinders: No owner of a commercial garbage
grinder shall maintain or operate or permit to be maintained or operated any
such grinder which may discharge any waters, wastes or other substances into
the City sewer without first providing, at such person's expense, such
preliminary treatment as may be necessary to reduce the suspended solids, daily
flow or objectionable characteristics or constituents to within the maximum
limits contained in Section
7-7D-5.
      3.   Water Softening Units: In order to minimize salts discharged into
the system, water softening units must be well operated and maintained in
strict accordance with manufacturer's instructions.
   D.   Admission to Property: Whenever it shall be necessary for the purposes
of enforcing this Article, the Manager, upon the presentation of credentials,
may enter upon any property or premises at reasonable times for the purpose of:
      Copying or inspecting any records required to be kept under the
provisions of this Article; or
      Inspecting any monitoring equipment or pretreatment facility or discharge
producing process; or
      Sampling any discharge of wastewater to the treatment works.
      1.   Emergency Admission to Property: The Manager may enter upon the
property at any hour under emergency circumstances. In the event of such
emergency entry, the Manager shall make every effort to immediately notify the
user's designated agent. The granting of consent to admission of the Manager to
the user's property is a condition of use of the City's wastewater system.
   E.   Protection from Discharges Above Permitted Levels:
      1.   Accidental Discharges: Each industrial user shall provide protection
from accidental discharge of prohibited materials or other wastes regulated by
this Article. Facilities to prevent accidental discharge of prohibited
materials shall be provided and maintained at the industrial user's own cost
and expense. Detailed plans showing facilities and operating procedures to
provide this protection shall be submitted to the City for review, and shall be
approved in writing by the Manager before construction of the facility. Review
and approval of such plans and operating procedures shall not relieve the
industrial user from the responsibility to modify his facility as necessary to
meet the requirements of this Article.
      2.   Reporting of Accidental Discharge: If, for any reason, a user does
not comply with or will be unable to comply with any prohibition or limitation
in this Article, the user responsible for such noncompliance shall immediately
notify the City so that corrective action may be taken to protect the treatment
system. In addition, a written report addressed to the City detailing the
characteristics of the discharge and corrective action taken to prevent future
violative discharges, shall be filed by the responsible industrial user within
five (5) days of the occurrence of the noncomplying discharge.
Such notification will not relieve users of liability for any expense, loss or
damage to the sewer system, treatment plant or treatment process, or for any
fines imposed on the City on account thereof under section 13350 of the
California Water Code.
      3.   Penalty for Discharges Above Permitted Levels: All costs incurred by
the City due to discharges by a user beyond the limits stated in its discharge
permit, either in quantity or in constituent make up, whether accidental or
deliberate, shall be reimbursed by the user to the City within fifteen (15)
days after presentation of an invoice setting forth the City's costs. Costs
included in such invoice may include, but shall not be limited to, wages,
benefits, consultants' fees, attorneys' fees, testing, materials, equipment and
incidentals required to successfully treat the excess discharge, as well as any
fines or penalties levied or assessed on the City as a result of such
discharges.
   F.   Preventive Measures: Any direct or indirect connection or entry point
for nonconforming or otherwise deleterious wastes to the user's plumbing or
drainage system shall be eliminated. Where such action is impractical or
unreasonable, the user shall appropriately label such entry points to warn
against discharge of such waste in violation of this Article.
7-7D-7: INDUSTRIAL WASTEWATER MONITORING AND REPORTING:
   A.   Discharge Reports:
      1.   Every significant industrial user shall file a periodic discharge
report on forms provided by the City at such intervals as are designated by the
Manager. The Manager may require any other users discharging or proposing to
discharge into the treatment system to file such periodic reports.
      2.   The discharge report shall include, but, at the discretion of the
Manager, shall not be limited to, nature of process, volume, rates of flow,
mass emission rate, production quantities, hours of discharge operation,
concentrations of controlled pollutants or other information which relates to
the generation of waste. Such reports may also include the chemical
constituents and quantity of liquid materials stored on site even though such
materials are not normally discharged. In addition to discharge reports, the
Manager may require information in the form of industrial discharge permit
applications, self-monitoring reports and other reporting requirements as
stipulated in 40 CFR 403.12.
   B.   Records and Monitoring:
      1.   All industrial users who discharge or propose to discharge
wastewaters to the wastewater treatment system shall maintain such records of
production and related factors, effluent flows and pollutant amounts or
concentrations as in the opinions of the Manager may be required to demonstrate
compliance with the requirements of this Article and any applicable State or
Federal pretreatment standards or requirements.
      2.   Such records shall be made available for inspection and copying upon
request by the Manager. All such records relating to compliance with
pretreatment standards shall be made available to officials of the United
States Environmental Protection Agency upon demand. A summary of such data
indicating the industrial user's compliance with this Article shall be prepared
according to subsection
7-7D-8E and submitted to the City.
      3.   The owner or operator of any premises or facility discharging
industrial wastes into the system shall install and maintain in proper working
order, at his own cost and expense, suitable monitoring equipment on each
connection discharging industrial wastes to facilitate the accurate
observation, sampling and measurement of such wastes.
      4.   The monitoring equipment shall be located and maintained on the
industrial user's premises outside of the building. When such a location would
be impractical or cause undue hardship on the user, the City may allow such
facility to be constructed in the public street, provided there would be no
significant interference with other public uses of the area.
      5.   When more than one user can discharge into a common sewer, the
Manager may require installation of separate monitoring equipment for each
user. When there is a significant difference in wastewater constituents and
characteristics produced by different operations of a single user, the Manager
may require that separate monitoring facilities by installed for each separate
discharge.
      6.   Whether constructed on public or private property, the monitoring
facilities shall be constructed in accordance with the City requirements and
all applicable construction standards and specifications.
      7.   If the monitoring facility is inside the user's fence, there shall
be accommodations to allow access for City personnel, such as a gate secured
with a City lock. There shall be ample room in or near such sampling manhole to
allow accurate sampling and compositing of samples for analysis. The manhole,
sampling and measuring equipment shall be maintained at all times in a safe and
proper operating condition at the expense of the user.
   C.   Confidential Information: Wastewater quantity and characteristics will
not be recognized as confidential information. However, information accepted by
the City as confidential in accordance with the provisions of 40 CFR Part 2
entitled, "Confidentiality of Business Information", shall not be transmitted
to any governmental agency or to the general public by the City until and
unless prior and adequate notification is given to the user; provided, however,
that such portions of the information shall be available for use by the State
or any regulatory agency in judicial review or enforcement proceedings
involving the user concerned.
   D.   Inspection, Sampling and Analysis; General: The City may inspect the
facilities of any user to ascertain whether the purpose of this Article is
being met and all requirements are being complied with. Persons or occupants of
premises where wastewater is created or discharged shall allow the City or its
representative ready access at all reasonable times to all parts of the
premises for the purpose of inspection or sampling or in the performance of any
of their duties. The City shall have the right to set up on the user's property
such devices as are necessary to conduct sampling or metering operations and
every effort will be made so that such devices and operations do not interfere
with the normal business operations of the discharger. Where a user has
security measures in force which would require proper identification and
clearance before entry into their premises, the user shall make necessary
arrangements with their security personnel so that, upon presentation of
suitable identification, representatives of the City will be permitted to enter
without delay for the purposes of performing their specific responsibilities.
      1.   Compliance Determination: Compliance determinations with respect to
Section
7-7D-5 prohibitions and limitations may be made on the basis of either
instantaneous grab samples or composite samples of wastewater. Composite
samples may be taken over a twenty four (24) hour period, or over a longer or
shorter time span, as determined necessary by the Manager to meet the needs of
specific circumstances.
      2.   Analysis of Industrial Wastewaters: Laboratory analysis of
industrial wastewater samples shall be performed in accordance with the current
edition of "Standard Methods", "Methods for Chemical Analysis of Water and
Waste" published by the United States Environmental Protection Agency, or the
"Annual Book of Standards, Part 23, Water, Atmospheric Analysis" published by
the American Society for Testing and Materials. Analysis of those pollutants
not covered by these publications shall be performed in accordance with
procedures established by the State Department of Health.
      3.   Sampling Frequency: Sampling of industrial wastewater for the
purpose of compliance determination with respect to Section
7-7D-5 prohibitions and limitations will be done at random intervals as the
Manager may determine necessary to the program goals.
7-7D-8: INDUSTRIAL WASTEWATER DISCHARGE PERMIT SYSTEM:
   A.   Industrial Wastewater Discharge Permits Required: All significant
industrial users proposing to connect to or discharge into any part of the
wastewater treatment system must first obtain a discharge permit. All existing
significant industrial users connected to or discharging to any part of the
City system must obtain an industrial wastewater discharge permit within sixty
(60) days from and after the effective date of this Article.
Industrial wastewater permits shall be classified as follows:
 
Class I:   1 inspection per year - No Hazard
Class II:  2 inspections per year - Low Hazard
Class III: 3 inspections per year - Hazardous
Class IV:  4 inspections per year - Serious Hazard
 
   B.   Optional Permits: Any nonresidential users may be required to apply for
discharge permits. The Manager may issue a wastewater discharge permit to any
user, upon application, in accordance with the terms of this Section in the
following categories:
      1.   A user who requires the user charges and fees to be based on an
estimation of wastewater flow.
      2.   Any user whose wastewater strength is less than the normal range for
the user classification to which he is assigned because of pretreatment,
process changes or other reasons.
   C.   Permit Application: Users seeking a controlled substance wastewater
discharge permit shall complete and file with the City an application on the
form prescribed by the Manager, and accompanied by the applicable fee. In
support of this application, the user shall submit the following information:
      1.   Name and address of applicant.
      2.   Volume of wastewater to be discharged.
      3.   Wastewater constituents and characteristics including, but not
limited to, those set forth in Section
7-7D-5 as determined by a State-approved analytical laboratory.
      4.   Time and duration of discharge.
      5.   Average and thirty (30) minute peak wastewater flow rates, including
daily and monthly, and seasonal variations, if any.
      6.   Site plans, floor plans, mechanical and plumbing plans and details
to show all sewers and appurtenances by size, location and elevation.
      7.   Description of activities, facilities and plant processes on the
premises including all materials and types of materials which are, or could be,
discharged.
      8.   Each product produced by type, amount and rate of production.
      9.   Number and type of employees, and hours of work.
      10.   Any other information as may be deemed by the Manager to be
necessary to evaluate the permit application.
The Manager will evaluate the data furnished by the user and may require
additional information. After evaluation and acceptance of the data furnished,
the Manager may issue a controlled substance wastewater discharge permit
subject to terms and conditions provided herein.
   D.   Permit Fees and Costs: In compliance with the Federal Water Pollution
Act of 1972, all costs of industrial wastes control are mandated to be charged
to the contributing industrial connections.
 
Classification Initial Permit Modifications
Class I        $100.00        $50.00
Class II       150.00         100.00
Class III      200.00         150.00
Class IV       250.00         200.00
 
The cost of required laboratory analysis to establish user's compliance with
its discharge limits shall be billed to the industrial facility sampled.
   E.   Permit Conditions: Wastewater discharge permits shall be expressly
subject to all provisions of this Article, including subsection H hereof, and
all other regulations, user charges and fees established by the City. The
conditions of controlled substance wastewater discharge permits shall be
uniformly enforced in accordance with this Article, and applicable State and
Federal regulations. Permit conditions will include the following:
      1.   The unit charge or schedule of user charges and fees for the
wastewater to be discharged to the system.
      2.   The average and maximum wastewater constituents and characteristics.
      3.   Limits on rate and time of discharge or requirements for flow
regulations and equalization.
      4.   Requirements for installation of inspection and sampling facilities,
and specifications for monitoring programs.
      5.   Requirements for maintaining and submitting technical reports and
plant records relating to wastewater discharges.
      6.   Daily average and daily maximum discharge rates, or other
appropriate conditions when pollutants subject to limitations and prohibitions
are proposed or present in the user's wastewater discharge.
      7.   Compliance schedules.
      8.   Wastewater analyses by State-approved lab as part of the user's
compliance effort. The user shall pay for the cost of such analyses.
      9.   An amended application must be filed prior to revising any discharge
condition noted in the original application, and written City approval must be
received by the discharger.
      10.   Other conditions to ensure compliance with this Article.
   F.   Notice to Employees: In order that employees of users be informed of
City requirements, users shall make available to their employees copies of this
Article (or a summary thereof approved by the City) together with such other
wastewater information and notices which may be furnished by the City from time
to time directed toward more effective water pollution control. A notice shall
be furnished and permanently posted on the user's bulletin board advising
employees whom to call in case of an accidental discharge in violation of this
Article.
   G.   Duration of Permits and Modification: Permits shall be valid until such
time as they may be modified or revoked by the City. In the event that the user
applies for a modification to the permit, then users shall pay the permit
modification fee set forth in subsection D hereof.
The terms and conditions of the permit may be subject to modification and
change by the City during the life of the permit, as limitations or
requirements as identified in Section
7-7D-5 are modified and changed. The user shall be informed of any proposed
changes in his permit at least thirty (30) days prior to the effective date of
change. Any changes or new conditions in the permit shall include a reasonable
time schedule for compliance. Failure of the City to act upon a valid permit
application or renewal application shall allow for automatic extension of
operations under existing permit conditions.
   H.   Transfer of a Permit: Wastewater discharge permits are issued to a
specific user for a specific operation. A wastewater discharge permit shall not
be reassigned or transferred or sold to a new owner, new user, different
premises or a new or changed operation.
   I.   Revocation of a Permit: Any user who violates the following conditions
of his permit or of this Article, or of applicable State and Federal
regulations, is subject to having his permit revoked. Violations subjecting a
user to possible revocation of his permit include, but are not limited to, the
following:
      1.   Failure of a user to accurately report the wastewater constituents
and characteristics of his discharge.
      2.   Failure of the user to report significant changes in operations, or
wastewater constituents and characteristics.
      3.   Refusal of reasonable access to the user's premises for the purpose
of inspection or monitoring.
      4.   Violation of conditions of the permit.
      5.   Failure to pay user fees.
7-7D-9: ENFORCEMENT PROCEDURES:
   A.   Notification of Violation: Whenever the Manager determines that any
person has violated or is violating this Article, or any prohibition,
limitation or requirement contained herein, he may serve upon such person a
written notice stating the nature of the violation and providing a reasonable
time, not to exceed thirty (30) days, for the satisfactory correction thereof.
   B.   Submission of Time Schedule: The Manager may require the user to submit
for approval, with such modifications as he deems necessary, a detailed time
schedule of specific actions which the user shall take in order to correct a
violation or prevent further violations of requirements.
   C.   Issuance of Cease-and-Desist Order: The Manager may issue an order to
cease and desist, and direct those persons not complying with such
prohibitions, limits, requirements or provisions to:
      1.   Comply forthwith;
      2.   Comply in accordance with a time schedule set forth by the City; or
      3.   Take appropriate remedial or preventive action in the event of a
threatened violation.
   D.   Appeals: Any user, permit applicant or permit holder affected by any
decision, action or determination, including cease-and- desist orders, made by
the Manager, interpreting or implementing the provisions of this Article or any
permit issued hereunder, may file with the City a written request for
reconsideration within ten (10) days of such decision, action or determination,
setting forth in detail the facts supporting the user's request for
reconsideration.
The Manager will review the written submittal and, within ten (10) days of the
receipt of the written request for reconsideration, shall issue a new ruling
which shall modify or confirm the original decision. If the ruling made by the
Manager is unsatisfactory to the person requesting reconsideration, this person
may, within ten (10) days after notification of the City action, file a written
appeal to the City. The written appeal shall be heard by the City Council
within thirty (30) days from the date of filing.
   E.   Hearing: The City will conduct the hearing and take the evidence. In
providing notices of hearings, the City may request the attendance and
testimony of witnesses and the production of evidence relevant to any matter
involved in any such hearings. The City shall make a final ruling on the appeal
within ten (10) days of the close of the meeting.
      1.   Decision in Effect During Appeal: The Manager's decision, action or
determination shall remain in effect during such period of reconsideration and
appeal.
      2.   Order: After the City Council has reviewed the evidence, it may
either confirm, modify or reverse the Manager's decision or it may issue a new
order to the party responsible for the discharge directing that, following a
specified time period, the sewer service be discontinued unless adequate
treatment facilities, devices or other related appurtenances shall have been
installed or existing treatment facilities, devices or other related
appurtenances are properly operated, and such further orders and directives as
are necessary and appropriate.
   F.   Legal Action: Any discharge in violation of the provisions of this
Article or any order of the City shall be considered a public nuisance. If any
person discharges wastewater, industrial wastes or other wastes into the City's
sewerage system contrary to the provision of this Article or any order of the
City, the City Attorney, upon directive of the City, shall commence an action
for appropriate legal and/or equitable relief in the Superior Court of the
County.
   G.   Public Nuisance: Any person creating a public nuisance is guilty of a
misdemeanor.
   H.   Injunction: Whenever a discharge of wastewater is in violation of the
provisions of this Article or otherwise causes or threatens to cause a
condition of contamination, pollution or nuisance, the City may petition the
Superior Court for the issuance of a preliminary or permanent injunction or
both, as may be appropriate in restraining the continuance of such discharge.
   I.   Damage to Public Facilities: When a discharge of wastes causes an
obstruction, damage or any other impairment to City facilities, the City may
assess a charge against the user for the work required to clean or repair the
facility and add such charge to the user's ordinary charges and fees.
7-7D-10: PENALTIES AND COSTS:
   A.   General: A violation of this Article is a misdemeanor punishable by
imprisonment in the County jail not to exceed thirty (30) days or by a fine not
to exceed one thousand dollars ($1,000.00), or by both.
   B.   Correction of Violations and Costs: In order to enforce the provisions
of this Article, the City may correct any violation thereof, and the cost of
such correction may be added to any sewer service charge payable by the user
violating this Article. The cost of correcting violations may include but shall
not be limited to any fines or other costs imposed on the City by any Federal
or State agency or court.
   C.   Method of Collecting Costs: The City shall have the same remedies for
the collection of costs of violations as it has for the collection of normal
sewer service charges.
   D.   Civil Penalties: Any person who discharges pollutants, except as
permitted by waste discharge requirements, or who violates any cease and desist
order, prohibition, waste discharge requirements effluent limitation, water
quality related effluent limitation, national standard of performance,
pretreatment or toxicity standard or who refuses to comply with the
requirements adopted to control the disposal of pollutants shall be subject to
an obligation to reimburse the City for all costs incurred by the City as a
result of such discharges. Costs included may include, but shall not be limited
to, wages, benefits, consultants' fees, attorneys' fees, testing, materials,
equipment and incidentals required to successfully treat the excess discharge,
as well as any fines or penalties levied or assessed on the City as a result of
such discharges.
   E.   Other Criminal Penalties:
      1.   Any person who wilfully or negligently discharges pollutants except
as allowed by waste discharge requirements or who wilfully or negligently
violates any effluent standard, water quality related effluent standard,
national standard of performance, toxicity or pretreatment standard, or who
refuses to comply with the requirements adopted to control the disposal of
pollutants into wells, or who violates any cease and desist order, prohibition
or waste discharge requirement shall be punished by a fine of not more than
twenty five thousand dollars ($25,000.00) nor less than two thousand five
hundred dollars ($2,500.00) for each day in which such violation occurs, or by
imprisonment for not more than one year in the County jail, or by both. If the
conviction is for a violation committed after a first conviction of such person
under this Section, punishment shall be by a fine of not more than fifty
thousand dollars ($50,000.00) for each day in which such violation occurs, or
by imprisonment for not more than two (2) years in the County jail, or by both.
      2.   Any person who knowingly makes any false statement, representation,
record, report, plan or other document filed with a Regional Water Quality
Control Board or the State Water Resources Control Board, or who falsifies,
tampers with or knowingly renders inaccurate any monitoring device or method
required by the laws of the State shall be punished by a fine of not more than
ten thousand dollars ($10,000.00), or by imprisonment in the County jail for
not more than six (6) months, or by both.
   F.   Termination Of Service: The City may revoke any connection permit or
any industrial wastewater discharge permit, or terminate or cause to be
terminated wastewater service to any premises if a violation of any provision
of this Article is found to exist or if a discharge of wastewater causes or
threatens to cause a condition of contamination, pollution or nuisance as
defined in this Article. This provision is in addition to other statutes, rules
or regulations authorizing termination of service for delinquency in payment.
(Ord. 8903, 4-18-1989)
7-7D-11: PAYMENT OF FEES AND CHARGES:
Every user of the POTW shall have an obligation to pay those charges set forth
in the rate resolution, its discharge permit or this Article, as appropriate.
(Ord. 8903, 4-18-1989)
ARTICLE E. WATER CONSERVATION
SECTION:
7-7E-1: Standard Water Conservation Measures
7-7E-2: Water Efficient Landscape Ordinance Adopted
7-7E-3: Findings Of Necessity
7-7E-4: Water Customer
7-7E-5: Application
7-7E-6: Exceptions And Exemptions
7-7E-7: Authorization
7-7E-8: Voluntary Compliance
7-7E-9: Level I Conservation Measures
7-7E-10: Level II Conservation Measures
7-7E-11: Level III Conservation Measures
7-7E-12: Penalties
7-7E-13: Compliance
7-7E-14: Waiver
7-7E-1: STANDARD WATER CONSERVATION MEASURES:
   A.   Definitions: Unless the context requires otherwise, the following
definitions shall be used in the interpretation and construction of this
section:
    DIRECTOR: The director of public works of the city of Lemoore.
   PERSON: Any individual, firm, partnership, association, corporation or
political entity.
   WATER: Any water obtained from the water department of the city of Lemoore.
   B.   Application Of Regulations: The provisions of this section shall apply
to all persons using city supplied water, both inside and outside of the city
limits.
   C.   Regulations: In the use of water supplied by the city of Lemoore, the
following requirements shall apply:
      1.   No person shall keep, maintain, operate, or use any water
connection, hose, faucet, hydrant, pipe, outlet or plumbing fixture which is
not tight and free from leakage, dripping or waste of water.
      2.   No person shall allow excessive water to run or waste from his
property onto streets, highways or adjacent property.
      3.   No person shall wilfully or negligently waste water in any manner.
      4.   Outdoor watering for those with even numbered addresses will be
permitted on Tuesday, Thursday and Saturday, while odd numbered addresses may
water on Wednesday, Friday and Sunday. Monday will be a day on which no outdoor
watering is allowed.
      5.   The public works director may grant a thirty (30) day exception for
new lawns not yet established.
      6.   Prohibition of draining of swimming pools with a capacity in excess
of five thousand (5,000) gallons more than once every two (2) years, except for
structural repairs or to comply with public health standards determined by the
county health officer. Residents with private swimming pools shall file a
written application for a permit prior to draining their pools with the public
works department. The application shall include information as to reason for
draining the pool and in case of repairs, the nature and duration of repairs to
be made and the date on which the pool will be drained.
      7.   Washing of exterior asphalt or concrete areas is prohibited except
for those businesses that are governed by the food and drug administration or
state or county health department requirements that require these areas to be
washed for health purposes. Documentation indicating such regulations must be
provided to the director.
      8.   The use of water for washing cars, boats or other vehicles is
prohibited without the use of a quick acting positive shutoff nozzle on the
hose and the use of buckets for washing with water from the hose used for light
rinsing. These regulations apply to residential customers. Car washes for
fundraising events are prohibited.
      9.   Sprinkle, irrigate or otherwise apply water to any yard, ground,
premises or vegetation on any day of the week between the hours of ten o'clock
(10:00) A.M. and seven o'clock (7:00) P.M. during periods designated as
"daylight savings time" (generally occurring between March and November). (Ord.
2015-06, 7-7-2015)
      10.   Operate water fountains or other decorative water fixtures with
recirculation pumps. (Ord. 2017-10, 9-19-2017)
      11.   All new construction and remodeling or additions to habitable areas
with a valuation in excess of five thousand dollars ($5,000.00) will be
required to install or replace existing faucets and showerheads with low flow
devices and toilets with ultra low flow units. (Ord. 2015-06, 7-7-2015)
7-7E-2: WATER EFFICIENT LANDSCAPE ORDINANCE ADOPTED:
This section should be known as "an ordinance of the City of Lemoore adopting
the California model water efficient landscape ordinance, California Code of
Regulations, title 23, division 2, chapter 2.7" and any amendments thereto by
reference. (Ord. 2015-06, 7-7-2015)
7-7E-3: FINDINGS OF NECESSITY:
It is necessary to minimize the potential for water shortage through the
practice of water conservation pursuant to the provisions of California Water
Code section 375 et seq. It is further necessary to reduce the potential effect
of a water shortage on the residents, businesses and visitors of Lemoore and to
adopt provisions that will significantly reduce the inefficient consumption of
water, thereby extending the available water resources necessary for the
domestic, sanitation, and fire protection of the community to the greatest
extent possible. Nothing in this chapter shall prevent the City from also
declaring a water emergency pursuant to California Water Code section 350, if
circumstances warrant such a declaration. (Ord. 2015-06, 7-7-2015)
7-7E-4: WATER CUSTOMER:
"Water customer", for the purposes of this chapter, shall mean any person,
partnership, business, corporation, special district, public agency, or
association or legal entity to which the City of Lemoore (City) supplies water
or "user" of water supplied by the City. (Ord. 2015-06, 7-7-2015)
7-7E-5: APPLICATION:
This article shall be applicable to all water customers. (Ord. 2015-06, 7-7-
2015)
7-7E-6: EXCEPTIONS AND EXEMPTIONS:
   A.   Exceptions: The City Manager or his or her designee shall grant an
exception from the requirements of this chapter for any of the following
reasons:
      1.   Water use is necessary to public health and safety or for essential
government services; or
      2.   Recycled water is being used; or
      3.   Water use is necessary due to the medical needs of the water
customer; or
      4.   An alternative water source/supply is available for use.
   B.   Exemptions: The City Council may grant an exemption to the requirements
of this chapter, with or without conditions, if it determines that a water
customer would otherwise experience extreme financial hardship that cannot be
mitigated. The City Council shall review any requests for an exemption from
compliance with this chapter. A written request for an exemption must be
submitted to the City Clerk a minimum of two (2) weeks prior to the regularly
scheduled Council meeting at which the exemption is to be considered. If
appropriate, the City Council may require the customer granted an exemption to
reduce water use by other appropriate alternative methods. Notwithstanding any
other provision of this Code, there shall be no right to further administrative
review or appeal of the determination of exemption of the City Council. The
City Council may establish an "exemption processing fee" by resolution. (Ord.
2015-06, 7-7-2015)
7-7E-7: AUTHORIZATION:
The City Council may declare the conservation stage based on a determination
made by the City Manager, or based upon any reduction in water supply or
delivery that the City Council determines in its sole discretion necessitates
water conservation pursuant to this chapter. The City Council may determine and
order water prohibitions and restrictions as outlined herein in the following
levels:
   Voluntary compliance
   Level I conservation measures
   Level II conservation measures
   Level III conservation measures
(Ord. 2015-06, 7-7-2015)
7-7E-8: VOLUNTARY COMPLIANCE:
At this level of the conservation plan, the goal is to inform the public of the
pressing need to conserve water. This can be done through information and
education measures, which can directly affect water use habits of the city's
customer base. While education alone may not produce sustained water savings
like other measures, it can enhance the effectiveness of other measures. Water
bill inserts, pamphlets upon request, partnering with local schools to
encourage water conservation practices, creating workshops for local plumbers,
plumbing fixture suppliers, and builders or landscape and irrigation service
providers are all examples of education and information measures the city can
implement.
The goal of this measure is to have residents and businesses voluntarily comply
with best practice water conservation measures, with the goal of reducing
average water consumption by twenty percent (20%). Water tanks and wells will
be monitored by the water department.
Additionally, landscape watering for municipal parks will be reduced from six
(6) to four (4) days or less per week. (Ord. 2015-06, 7-7-2015)
7-7E-9: LEVEL I CONSERVATION MEASURES:
When pumping water levels drop twenty percent (20%) below the baseline
measurement, the following restrictions shall apply in addition to or supersede
the standard water conservation measures listed in section
7-7E-1 of this article:
   A.   Reduce the number of days for landscape watering to two (2) days per
week. Even numbered addresses would be allowed to water on Tuesday and Saturday
while odd numbered addresses would water on Wednesday and Sunday. No watering
would be allowed on Monday, Thursday or Friday. Additionally, landscape
watering would only be authorized before ten o'clock (10:00) A.M. and after
seven o'clock (7:00) P.M. on designated days.
   B.   Hotels, restaurants, and bars shall only provide drinking water to
customers upon request.
   C.   No water customer shall permit water to leak on his or her premises.
Such leak shall be repaired in a timely manner after written notification by
the city, but in no case in excess of seventy two (72) hours after
notification.
   D.   Reduce landscape watering for municipal parks to two (2) days or less
per week. (Ord. 2015-06, 7-7-2015)
7-7E-10: LEVEL II CONSERVATION MEASURES:
The following restrictions shall be applicable during a high water conservation
alert as declared by the city council and whenever a recommendation has been
made by the city manager in conjunction with the chief plant operator of the
water treatment plant based upon a significant reduction or interruption in
water supply or delivery that necessitates increased water conservation
efforts:
   A.   All prohibitions and restrictions in level I (section
7-7E-9 of this article) shall be in effect.
   B.   Reduce the number of days for landscape watering to one day per week,
depending upon the type of irrigation and the address. The city would be
divided into three (3) sections: one section would be all of the area on the
east side of Lemoore Avenue, another section would be the area north of
Cinnamon Drive from 191/2 Avenue to Lemoore Avenue and the third section would
be the area south of Cinnamon Drive to the west city limits. Watering between
the hours of ten o'clock (10:00) A.M. and seven o'clock (7:00) P.M. is still
prohibited.
   C.   The washing of personal vehicles is restricted to once per week, only
on permitted watering days, and only with the use of the required quick acting
positive shutoff nozzle.
   D.   Hotels are encouraged to implement laundry conservation measures by
encouraging patrons to reuse linens and towels.
   E.   Landscape watering for municipal parks is restricted to one day per
week and restrictions shall be implemented on golf course watering. (Ord. 2015-
06, 7-7-2015)
7-7E-11: LEVEL III CONSERVATION MEASURES:
In the event of a major earthquake, large scale fire, or other so called "act
of nature" which has or could have serious impacts on the city's total
available water storage or delivery capacity, whether storage capacities have
been reduced or not, or in the case of an unanticipated significant reduction
in city water supply, a severe water conservation alert shall be declared by
the city council.
   A.   All previous restrictions noted above in level I and level II shall be
in effect.
   B.   Irrigation of landscapes is prohibited between the hours of eight
o'clock (8:00) A.M. and eight o'clock (8:00) P.M.
   C.   Landscape watering for municipal parks shall be limited to one day per
week.
   D.   Swimming pool refilling or new construction swimming pool filling is
not authorized.
   E.   The city shall discontinue washing city vehicles or equipment except
for health, safety or critical maintenance reasons.
   F.   Restrictions on golf course watering shall be increased. (Ord. 2015-06,
7-7-2015)
7-7E-12: PENALTIES:
   A.   Use Of Water: No water customer of the city shall knowingly use, or
permit the use of, water in a manner contrary to any provisions of this
article, or in an amount in excess of that use permitted by the provisions of
this article.
   B.   Violation; Infraction: Unless otherwise provided, any water customer
violating any provision of this article shall be guilty of an infraction, and
each day or portion thereof such violation is in existence shall be a new and
separate offense.
   C.   Violations: Any water customer determined to be guilty of a first time
violation shall be given a written reminder for compliance. Second and
subsequent violations shall be punishable as follows:
      1.   Standard Conservation Measures And Level I Conservation Measures: A
written notice of such a violation shall be given and a charge shall be added
to the water bill of such person as a onetime penalty as follows:
         a.   Second violation: Twenty five dollars ($25.00).
         b.   Third violation: Fifty dollars ($50.00).
         c.   Fourth violation: One hundred dollars ($100.00).
         d.   Fifth violation: A written notice will be given of a fifth
violation and the consumer shall have a flow restrictor placed in their service
until such time that they can assure the public works director that no more
waste will occur. All costs, including overhead, for this installation shall be
billed to the customer.
      2.   Level II Conservation Measures: A written notice of such a violation
shall be given and a penalty shall be added to the water bill of such person as
a onetime penalty as follows:
         a.   Second violation: Forty dollars ($40.00).
         b.   Third violation: Seventy five dollars ($75.00).
         c.   Fourth violation: One hundred fifty dollars ($150.00).
         d.   Fifth violation: A written notice will be given of a fifth
violation and the consumer shall have a flow restrictor placed in their service
until such time that they can assure the public works director that no more
waste will occur. All costs, including overhead, for this installation shall be
billed to the customer.
      3.   Level III Conservation Measures: A written notice of such a
violation shall be given and a penalty shall be added to the water bill of such
a person as a onetime penalty as follows:
         a.   Second violation: Fifty five dollars ($55.00).
         b.   Third violation: One hundred dollars ($100.00).
         c.   Fourth violation: Two hundred dollars ($200.00).
         d.   Fifth violation: A written notice will be given of a fifth
violation and the consumer shall have a flow restrictor placed in their service
until such time that they can assure the public works director that no more
waste will occur. All costs, including overhead, for this installation shall be
billed to the customer.
   D.   Determination Of Number Of Offenses: To determine whether a violation
is other than a first offense, only notices issued within one year after the
date of the first notice will be considered.
   E.   Enforcement Of Penalties: In addition to the above remedies, the city
manager or his or her designee is empowered to enforce any or all of the
following penalties:
      1.   Place a flow restricting device upon the water service;
      2.   Lock off of a water meter;
      3.   Remove a water meter;
      4.   Shut off the service connection.
   F.   Costs Borne By Customer: All costs or expenses incurred by the city for
enforcement of this section shall be borne by the water customer. No water
service shall be limited or discontinued until the city manager or his or her
designee provides a written notice of intent to so limit or discontinue such
service and the reasons for such decision, and further, provides such water
customer notice of the right to request an administrative review and hearing
pursuant to the procedures set forth in title 1, chapter 10 of this code. (Ord.
2015-06, 7-7-2015)
7-7E-13: COMPLIANCE:
The city manager or his or her designee shall enforce the provisions of this
article. (Ord. 2015-06, 7-7-2015)
7-7E-14: WAIVER:
To apply for a full or partial waiver of the mandatory water conservation
requirements to accommodate your disability, you must submit a letter
explaining your need for additional water use based on your disability. Send
your letter requesting a waiver of the mandatory water conservation
requirements to the city manager.
The city will consider each application for a full or partial waiver of the
water restrictions on an individual basis. The city may request that you
provide medical information to support your need for an exemption to the
current water restrictions. Responses to waiver requests will be provided in
thirty (30) days. All waiver requests that have been granted are subject to
review and cancellation. If any waivers are obtained based on inaccurate
information, applications may be subject to fines and additional charges. (Ord.
2015-06, 7-7-2015)
CHAPTER 8
CABLE TELEVISION FRANCHISES AND REGULATIONS
SECTION:
Part I. General Provisions
7-8-1: Authority And Intent
7-8-2: Definitions
7-8-3: Franchise To Install And Operate
7-8-4: Term Of The Franchise
7-8-5: Franchise Area
7-8-6: FCC Or California Public Utilities Commission Jurisdiction
7-8-7: Franchise Transfer
7-8-8: Geographical Coverage
7-8-9: Nonexclusive Franchise
7-8-10: Rights Reserved To Grantor
Part II. Application For And Granting Of Franchises
7-8-11: Grant Of Franchise
7-8-12: Application - Required
7-8-13: Application - Contents
7-8-14: Setting For Public Hearing
7-8-15: Notice Of Hearing
7-8-16: Comments By Interested Persons
7-8-17: Conduct Of Hearing
7-8-18: Decision After Hearing
Part III. Franchise Requirements
7-8-19: Minimum Service Standards And Programming Requirements
7-8-20: Franchise Fee
7-8-21: Bond; Letter Of Credit
7-8-22: Construction And Maintenance Requirements
7-8-23: Technical Standards
7-8-24: Rates
7-8-25: Indemnity
7-8-26: Insurance
Part IV. Reporting Requirements
7-8-27: Records Required
7-8-28: Grantor's Right To Inspect
7-8-29: Plant Performance Reports
7-8-30: Public Reports
7-8-31: Reports
Part V. Enforcement
7-8-32: Notice Of Violation
7-8-33: Default
7-8-34: Dispute Resolution - Appeal Of Declaration Of Default
7-8-35: Advisory Arbitration Procedure
7-8-36: Appeal Of Arbitrator's Decision
7-8-37: Appeal To City Council
7-8-38: Available Remedies
7-8-39: Judicial Review
7-8-40: Receivership And Foreclosure
7-8-41: Waivers
7-8-42: Rights Of Individuals
7-8-43: Resident Rights
7-8-44: Poles
7-8-45: Separability
Part VI. Performance Standards And Review
7-8-46: Franchise Agreement Provisions
7-8-47: Customer Service
7-8-48: Billing Procedures
7-8-49: Complaint Procedures
7-8-50: System Audit
PART I. GENERAL PROVISIONS
7-8-1: AUTHORITY AND INTENT:
The Council finds that the development of cable television and communications
systems has the Potential of having great benefit and positive impact upon the
people of the City. Because of the complex and rapidly changing technology
associated with cable television, the Council further finds that the public
convenience, safety and general welfare can best be served by establishing
regulatory powers which should be vested in the City or such persons as the
City shall designate. (Ord. 9501, 5-2-1995)
7-8-2: DEFINITIONS:
For the purpose of this Chapter, the following terms, phrases, words and their
derivations shall have the meaning given in this Section or in other provisions
of this Chapter. Words used in the present tense include the future, words in
the plural number include the singular number, and words in the singular number
include the plural number. Words not defined in this Section or elsewhere in
this Chapter shall be given their common and ordinary meaning.
ACT: The Communications Act of 1934 (47 USC section 151 et seq.), as amended by
the Cable Communications Policy Act of 1934 (Public Law No. 98-549, 93 Stat.
2779 (1984)), the Cable Television Consumer Protection and Competition Act of
1992 (Public Law No. 102-385, 106 Stat. 1460 (1992)) and all other amendments
and successors thereto.
BASIC CABLE SERVICE: The lowest priced level of service which includes the
retransmission of local television broadcast signals (as authorized) and Public
Educational and Governmental Access Programming channels, and any additional
video programming signals or service added to such level of service by a
grantee.
CABLE SERVICE: The transmission to subscribers of video programming or other
programming services and subscriber interaction, if any, which is required for
the selection of such video programming of other programming services.
CABLE SYSTEM OR SYSTEM: A system of antennas, cables, wires, lines, fiber optic
cables, towers, waveguides or other conductors, converters, pedestals,
equipment or facilities, used for distributing video programming to home
subscribers, and/or producing, receiving, amplifying, storing, processing, or
distributing audio, video, digital or other forms of signals.
CHANNEL OR CABLE CHANNEL: A portion of the electromagnetic frequency spectrum
which is used in a cable system and which is capable of delivering either one
National Television Standards Committee ("NTSC") video signal, a number of
audio, digital or other nonvideo signals, or some combination of such signals.
CITY: The City of Lemoore.
COUNCIL: The City Council of the City.
DWELLING UNIT: Any building or portion thereof which contains living
facilities, including provisions for sleeping, eating, cooking and sanitation,
for not more than one family, or a congregate residence for ten (10) or less
persons.
FCC REGULATIONS: The regulations promulgated by the FCC from time to time
pursuant to the Act, codified in title 47 of the Code of Federal Regulations,
and all amendments and successors thereto.
FRANCHISE: An initial authorization, or renewal thereof, issued hereunder which
authorizes the construction or operation of a cable system.
GRANTEE: Any person receiving a franchise pursuant to this Chapter and under
the granting franchise agreement, and its successors, transferees or assignees.
GRANTOR: The City as represented by the Council or any delegate acting within
the scope of its jurisdiction and authority.
GROSS REVENUES: All cash, credits, property of any kind or nature,
compensation, or other consideration received directly or indirectly by the
grantee, its affiliates, subsidiaries, parent and any person in which the
grantee has a financial interest, or from any source whatsoever, arising from
or attributable to the sale or exchange of cable service by the grantee. Gross
revenues shall include but not be limited to basic service monthly fees, pay
tiers, premium channels, pay-per-view fees, leased channel fees, converter
rental or sales, advertising revenue, any other payments by subscribers or
users of the grantee's cable system directly or indirectly made to or received
by any person who has contracted to provide cable service on the cable system,
and such other revenues as agreed to in the franchise agreement. The gross
revenues shall not include: 1) the amount of any refunds, credits, or other
payments made to subscribers or users; 2) any taxes on cable service furnished
by the grantee imposed directly or indirectly on any subscribers or users by
any municipal corporation, political subdivision, state or other governmental
unit and collected by the grantee for the governmental unit; 3) the sale or
transfer of tangible property; 4) the sale or transfer of the franchise; 5) the
issuance, sale, or transfer of corporate stocks, bonds, or other securities; 6)
equipment deposits; 7) uncollected bad debt; and 8) such other revenues
expressly excluded in the franchise agreement. The gross revenues shall not be
reduced for any purposes other than provided herein.
INSTALLATION: The connection of the system from feeder cable to subscriber's
terminals.
LOCAL ORIGINATION PROGRAMMING: Programming created, produced, purchased, or
otherwise acquired by the grantee for distribution to subscribers.
OTHER PROGRAMMING SERVICE: Information that a grantee makes available to all
subscribers generally.
PERSON: An individual, partnership, association, joint stock company, trust,
corporation or governmental entity.
PUBLIC, EDUCATIONAL AND GOVERNMENTAL ("PEG") ACCESS PROGRAMMING:
Programming created and produced by members of the public who are residents of
the City; programming created, produced, or acquired by representatives of the
educational community acting in their official capacity; or programming
created, produced, or acquired by representatives of the City acting in their
governmental capacity.
PUBLIC PROPERTY: Any real property owned by the City other than a street and
which is dedicated for uses compatible with cable system operations.
SERVICE AREA OR FRANCHISE AREA: The entire geographic area within the City
designated in a franchise agreement as the area in which the grantee is
authorized to offer and provide cable service.
STATE: The State of California.
STREET: The surface of and the space above and below any public street, road,
highway, freeway, lane, path, public way, alley, court, sidewalk, boulevard,
parkway, drive, easement or right of way now or hereafter held by the City, or
dedicated for use by the City, use by the general public, or use compatible
with cable system operations.
VIDEO PROGRAMMING: Programming provided by, or generally considered comparable
to programming provided by, a television broadcast station. (Ord. 9501, 5-2-
1995)
7-8-3: FRANCHISE TO INSTALL AND OPERATE:
   A.   A franchise granted by the City under the provisions of this Chapter
shall permit constructing, operating and maintaining a system in the service
area, including the right to erect, install, construct, repair, replace,
reconstruct and retain in, on, over, under, upon, across and along the streets
and public property as expressly specified in the franchise agreement such
lines, cables, fiber optics, conductors, ducts, conduits, vaults, manholes,
amplifiers, appliances, pedestals, attachments and other property and equipment
as are necessary and appropriate to the operation of the system.
   B.   It shall be unlawful for any person to construct, install or operate a
cable system in the City within any street or within any other right of way
within the City without a properly granted franchise awarded pursuant to the
provisions of this Chapter, which franchise is in full force and effect. A
violation of this subsection shall be a misdemeanor punishable pursuant to the
provisions of Title 1, Chapter 4, of this Code.
   C.   In using any streets, public property or other public area or ways, the
grantee shall ensure:
      1.   That the safety, functioning and appearance of the street, public
property or other public area or way will not be adversely affected by
installation or construction of facilities necessary for the cable system;
      2.   That the cost of the installation, construction, operation or
removal of such facilities will be borne by the grantee of the subscriber, or a
combination of both; and
      3.   That the Grantor will be justly compensated by the grantee for any
damages to any of its streets, public property or other public areas or ways
caused by the installation, construction, operation or removal of such
facilities by the grantee. (Ord. 9501, 5-2-1995)
7-8-4: TERMS OF THE FRANCHISE:
   A.   Term: A franchise granted hereunder shall be for a term established in
the franchise agreement.
   B.   Renewal: The City may establish by resolution a process for renewing
any franchise, which process shall be subject to applicable law. (Ord 9501, 5-
2-1995)
7-8-5: FRANCHISE AREA:
The franchise area shall include all areas within the territorial limits of the
City, and within any area henceforth added to the territorial limits of the
City during the term of the franchise, in each case as designated in the
franchise agreement as the areas in which the grantee is authorized to provide
cable service. (Ord. 9501, 5-2-1995)
7-8-6: FCC OR CALIFORNIA PUBLIC UTILITIES COMMISSION JURISDICTION:
This Chapter shall be construed in a manner consistent with all applicable
Federal and State laws. Whenever the Federal Communications Commission ("FCC")
or Public Utilities Commission ("PUC") of the State or any other Federal or
State agency shall now or hereafter exercise any paramount jurisdiction over
any specific provisions of this Chapter, such paramount jurisdiction shall
preempt or preclude the exercise of like jurisdiction by the Grantor only if
the action by such jurisdiction specifically preempts the Grantor's exercise of
jurisdiction. (Ord. 9501, 5-2-1995)
7-8-7: FRANCHISE TRANSFER:
   A.   The franchise shall not be sublet or assigned, nor shall any of the
rights or privileges therein granted or authorized be leased, assigned, sold or
transferred, either in whole or in part, nor shall title thereto, either legal
or equitable, or any right, interest or property therein, pass to or vest in
any person, except the grantee, either by act of the grantee or by operation of
law, without the prior written consent of the Grantor, which consent shall not
be unreasonably withheld, provided the proposed assignee or transferee has
established the information specified in subsection C of this Section. Such
consent shall not be required for: 1) assignments or transfers between or among
wholly-owned subsidiaries of the grantee or affiliates of the grantee which are
controlled or wholly owned by the same parent, or 2) assignments in trust,
mortgage or other hypothecation, in whole or in part, to secure indebtedness.
The granting of such consent shall not render unnecessary any subsequent
consent. Upon the receipt of all reasonably necessary information requested by
it, the Grantor shall approve, disapprove or conditionally approve the request
within a reasonable period of time, in accordance with applicable law. For any
sublease, assignment, lease, sale or other transfer described in this
subsection A, including those for which consent is not required, within thirty
(30) days after the effective date of the sublease, assignment, lease, sale or
other transfer the grantee shall file in the office of the City Clerk all
documents reasonably necessary to evidence the transfer.
   B.   The requirements of subsection
7-8-7A shall also apply to a transfer in the control of the grantee. The word
"control" as used herein shall mean actual working control in whatever manner
exercised.
   C.   The transferee shall be required to establish that it possesses the
legal, financial and technical qualifications to operate and maintain the
system and comply with all franchise requirements for the remainder of the term
of the franchise.
   D.   Any financial institution having a pledge of the grantee or its assets
for the advancement of money for the construction and/or operation of the cable
system shall have the right to notify the Grantor that it or its designee
satisfactory to the Grantor shall take control of and operate the cable system
and assume all obligations of the franchise and the franchise agreement, in the
event of a grantee default in its financial obligations. Within thirty (30)
days after assuming such control, the financial institution shall also submit
to the Grantor a plan for such operation that will ensure continued cable
service and compliance with all franchise requirements during the term the
financial institution exercises control over the system. (Ord. 9501, 5-2-1995)
7-8-8: GEOGRAPHICAL COVERAGE:
All dwelling units within residential and commercial areas within the franchise
area shall be provided with access to cable service from the system, subject to
any line extension requirements in the franchise agreement. (Ord. 9501, 5-2-
1995)
7-8-9: NONEXCLUSIVE FRANCHISE:
Any franchise granted hereunder shall be nonexclusive. The Grantor may grant at
its sole option one or more franchises in accordance with applicable law.
Nothing herein shall be construed to require the Grantor to grant a franchise.
(Ord. 9501, 5-2-1995)
7-8-10: RIGHTS RESERVED TO GRANTOR:
   A.   There is hereby reserved to the Grantor every right it may have in
relation to its power of eminent domain over the grantee's franchise and
property.
   B.   Except as otherwise provided in the franchise agreement, neither the
granting of any franchise nor any provisions thereof or of this Chapter shall
constitute a waiver or bar to the exercise of any governmental right or power
by the Grantor.
   C.   No right or power in, or duty retained by or imposed upon, the Grantor,
or any commission, officer, employee, department or board of the Grantor, shall
be assigned or transferred by the Grantor to any other officer, employee,
department or board of the Grantor without thirty (30) days prior notice to the
grantee.
   D.   The Grantor shall have the right to inspect all construction or
installation or other physical work performed by the grantee in connection with
the franchise and to make such tests as the Grantor shall find necessary to
ensure compliance with the terms of the franchise and other pertinent
provisions of law, so long as the inspection and testing does not unreasonably
interfere with the grantee's operations.
   E.   Consistent with applicable law, at the expiration of the term or any
renewal term or extension for which the franchise is granted, or upon its
lawful revocation, expiration, or termination, the Grantor shall have the right
to require the grantee to remove, at the grantee's expense, all portions of the
system and any other property used or useful in the system from all streets,
public property and other public areas and ways within the franchise area
within a reasonable period of time not to exceed three hundred sixty (360) days
after the effective date of the revocation, expiration or termination, unless
the Council grants a longer period. In the event of such removal, the grantee
shall promptly restore, at its own cost and expense, all streets, public
property and other public areas and ways from which any portion of the system
or such other property has been removed to a condition satisfactory to the
Director of Public Works.
   F.   The Grantor shall have the right to intervene in any suit, proceeding
or other judicial or administrative proceeding to which the grantee is a party
and in which the Grantor has any material interest.
   G.   The Grantor shall have the right, upon reasonable notice, to inspect,
obtain copies (except as provided below) of and audit on the grantee's local
premises, at any time during normal business hours, all relevant information
that is reasonably necessary for the exercise of the Grantor's regulatory
authority, and any such grantee records kept at another place shall, upon
reasonable notice, be made available at the grantee's premises within Kings
County for the Grantor's inspection or copying, so long as the inspection does
not unreasonably interfere with the grantee's operations, and provided further
that the Grantor may copy the grantee's confidential trade secrets or
proprietary information only when it is essential, in the Grantor's sole
discretion, to its regulatory function. The Grantor shall pay all reasonable
costs for copying any relevant information needed. The Grantor shall maintain
as confidential and shall not disclose any such information which the grantee
has identified in writing as proprietary, to the extent permitted by law.
   H.   The Grantor shall have the right to amend any or all portions of this
Chapter: 1) as necessary or appropriate to preserve public health or safety, or
2) for any other reason so long as such amendment does not increase the
material burden nor diminish the rights of the grantee. (Ord. 9501, 5-2-1995)
PART II. APPLICATION FOR AND GRANTING OF FRANCHISES
7-8-11: GRANT OF FRANCHISE:
The terms of this Part II shall not apply to applications for renewal of a
franchise unless required by the franchise renewal process resolution as
adopted by the Council pursuant to subsection
7-8-4B.
   A.   The Grantor may grant a franchise to any person who offers to provide a
cable system under and pursuant to this Chapter.
   B.   Consistent with applicable law, no provision of this Chapter shall
require the granting of a franchise when, in the sole opinion of the Grantor,
it is in the public interest not to do so.
   C.   The purpose of a franchise and franchise agreement shall be to identify
and authorize its specific grantee and to identify and specify those terms,
conditions, definitions, itemizations, specifications and other particulars of
the agreement between the Grantor and the grantee which it represents. In so
doing, a franchise or franchise agreement may clarify, extend and interpret the
provisions of this Chapter. Where a franchise or franchise agreement and this
Chapter conflict, both shall be liberally interpreted to achieve a common
meaning or requirement. In the event this is not possible within reasonable
limits, the terms of this Chapter shall prevail.
   D.   The award of a franchise authorizing the use of streets, public
property or public areas or ways for private purposes shall be deemed
consideration by the grantee in the form of agreement to provide the system and
cable service offered in accordance with the provisions hereof and of the
franchise agreement.
   E.   Neither this Chapter nor a franchise granted under it shall relieve a
grantee of any requirement of the Grantor or of any ordinance, rule, regulation
or specifications of the Grantor now or hereafter in effect, including, but not
limited to, the payment of all normal permit and inspection fees, so long as
the ordinance, rules, regulations or specifications do not materially conflict
with or alter the express terms of this Chapter, the franchise and the
franchise agreement.
   F.   No privilege shall be granted or conferred by a franchise except those
specifically prescribed herein or in the franchise agreement.
   G.   Any person who provides a system or cable service as defined herein
shall be deemed a grantee and shall not do so except in accordance with a
franchise granted hereunder. If such grantee uses distribution channels
furnished by a telephone company or other public utility, the grantee shall
nevertheless be required to comply with all of the provisions of this Chapter.
(Ord. 9501, 5-2-1995)
7-8-12: APPLICATION - REQUIRED:
Any person desiring a franchise shall file an application with the City. A
nonrefundable application fee established by the City shall accompany the
application to cover all costs associated with processing and reviewing the
application, including without limitation costs of administrative review;
financial, legal and technical evaluation of the applicant; consultants
(including technical and legal experts and all costs incurred by such experts);
notice and publication requirements with respect to the consideration of the
application; and document preparation expenses. In the event such costs exceed
the application fee, the applicant shall pay the difference to the City within
thirty (30) days following receipt of an itemized statement of such costs from
the City. In the event such application fee exceeds the amount of such costs,
the City shall refund the amount of the excess to the applicant within thirty
(30) days following completion of the proceedings relating to such application.
(Ord. 9501, 5-2-1995)
7-8-13: APPLICATION - CONTENTS:
An application for a franchise shall contain, where applicable:
   A.   The name and legal status of the applicant and the address of the
applicant's business office that will be responsible for the applicant's
operations within the City.
   B.   Designation of the specific area proposed to be served.
   C.   Resume of prior history of the applicant, including the expertise of
the applicant in the cable television field.
   D.   List of the partners, general and limited, if the applicant is a
partnership and a list of the persons involved if the applicant is a joint
venture.
   E.   List of the names and addresses of stockholders of applicant and
percentage of stock owned or controlled by each shareholder. List shall include
all persons having a legal or equitable interest in five percent (5%) or more
of the applicant's voting stock.
   F.   List of officers, directors and managing employees of applicant,
together with a description of education and business background of each such
person.
   G.   A current financial statement of the applicant verified by an audit of
an independent certified public accountant or otherwise certified to be true,
complete and correct to the reasonable satisfaction of the City.
   H.   A proposed construction schedule.
   I.   A street map of the area proposed to be served showing the location of
proposed or existing headend site (antenna site) and business office, including
a detailed description of all streets and public property or other public areas
or ways within or on which the applicant proposes to install, operate and
maintain its cable system.
   J.   Proposed rates and charges and a copy of the proposed service agreement
between the applicant and its subscribers.
   K.   Itemized list of all electronic equipment to be used, channels to be
provided, pay TV or additional service, and type of converter.
   L.   Market survey of the area and financial projections for operation of
the cable system covering a period of at least ten (10) years.
   M.   The names and addresses of any parent or subsidiary of the applicant or
any other business entity owning or controlling the applicant in whole or in
part, or owned or controlled in whole or in part by the applicant.
   N.   A signed certification by an authorized officer or other representative
of the applicant indicating whether any principal, officer, director or
managing employee:
      1.   Has ever been convicted of a felony or held liable for acts
involving violation of any tax or securities law, or is presently under any
indictment for any such acts;
      2.   Has ever had a judgment in an action for bankruptcy, fraud, deceit
or misrepresentation entered against him or them by any court of competent
jurisdiction; or
      3.   Has pending any legal claim, lawsuit or administrative proceeding
arising out of or involving any cable television system or cable services.
   O.   Any reasonable additional requirements or information that the City
deems to be applicable. (Ord. 9501, 5-2-1995)
7-8-14: SETTING FOR PUBLIC HEARING:
The Grantor may, by advertisement or any other means, solicit and call for
applications for franchises, and may determine and fix any date upon or after
which the same shall be received by the Grantor, or the date before which the
same must be received, or the date after which the same shall not be received,
and may make any other determinations and specify any other requirements for
the soliciting, calling for, making and receiving of such applications.
Upon receipt of any application for a franchise, the Council shall refer the
same to the City Manager, who shall prepare a report and make his
recommendations respecting such application.
The City Clerk shall set applications for hearing at a time and date approved
by the Council. (Ord. 9501, 5-2-1995)
7-8-15: NOTICE OF HEARING:
Not less than fifteen (15) days before the hearing, the City Clerk shall give
notice to the applicant in writing of the time, date and place of hearing. The
City Clerk shall serve such notice upon the applicant either by first-class
mail, postage-prepaid, or by personal delivery to the address of the
applicant's business office stated in the application. (Ord. 9501, 5-2-1995)
7-8-16: COMMENTS BY INTERESTED PERSONS:
Any time after the filing of an application as provided in this Chapter, and
prior to the hearing thereon, any person interested may file with the City
Clerk written comments, protests, and/or suggestions, either for or against the
granting of the franchise or to suggest any terms and conditions which should
be included in the franchise. (Ord. 9501, 5-2-1995)
7-8-17: CONDUCT OF HEARING:
At the time and place set for the hearing or at the time and place to which the
hearing may be continued by the Council, the Council shall hear the applicant,
who may present any relevant evidence to show why the franchise should be
granted and why certain terms or conditions should be imposed or not imposed on
such franchise if granted, and also shall hear testimony or statements of other
persons who may attend the hearing. (Ord. 9501, 5-2-1995)
7-8-18: DECISION AFTER HEARING:
Within sixty (60) days after the close of the hearing, the Council shall make a
decision based on the application and the evidence received at the hearing as
to whether or not the application should be granted, and, if granted, subject
to what conditions. The Council may grant one or more franchises or may decline
to grant any franchise. The Council shall send a copy of its decision to the
applicant. (Ord. 9501, 5-2-1995)
PART III. FRANCHISE REQUIREMENTS
7-8-19: MINIMUM SERVICE STANDARDS AND PROGRAMMING REQUIREMENTS:
   A.   Minimum service standards, programming requirements (including without
limitation for local origination programming and for PEG access programming)
and standards governing consumer protection and response by the grantee to
subscriber complaints not otherwise provided for in this Chapter may be
established in the franchise agreement as permitted by applicable law, and the
grantee shall comply with such standards in the operation of the cable system.
   B.   The selection, creation, production, purchase or other acquisition of
local origination programming shall be exclusively within the editorial
discretion of the grantee, except as may be provided otherwise in the franchise
agreement or applicable law.
   C.   The grantee shall not exercise any editorial control over PEG access
programming except as otherwise specified in the franchise agreement or
required by law, and the Grantor may exercise control over such programming as
is permitted under applicable law.
   D.   At such time as it is allowable by law, the Grantor may by resolution
require the grantee to add a fee, separate and apart from the franchise fee
established in the franchise agreement, to its monthly rates for basic cable
service for the purpose of providing operational support for PEG access
programming. The Grantor may set this fee in an amount consistent with the
City's public access needs and section 76.925 of the FCC Regulations. The
grantee shall be given thirty (30) days' advance written notice prior to the
introduction of the resolution and shall have the right to appear before the
Council on the matter. The grantee may petition the Grantor for reduction or
elimination of this PEG access programming operational support fee if the
grantee establishes that it is suffering a competitive disadvantage or undue
financial burden. (Ord. 9501, 5-2-1995)
7-8-20: FRANCHISE FEE:
   A.   Beginning with the effective date of the franchise, the grantee shall
pay to the Grantor the franchise fee set forth in the franchise agreement, or
in the absence thereof, the maximum amount permitted by applicable law.
   B.   Payments due to the Grantor under this provision shall be computed
quarterly for the preceding calendar quarter, and shall be said within thirty
(30) days of the close of each calendar quarter. The payment shall be
accompanied by a report showing the basis for the computation and such other
relevant facts as may be required by the Grantor to determine the accuracy of
the payment.
   C.   No acceptance of any payment by the Grantor shall be construed as a
release or as an accord and satisfaction of any claim the Grantor may have for
further or additional sums payable as a franchise fee under this Chapter or for
the performance of any other obligation of the grantee. All amounts paid shall
be subject to audit and recomputation by the Grantor as subject to conditions
specified in the franchise agreement.
   D.   In the event that any payment or recomputed amount under this Section
is not made on or before the due date, the grantee shall pay as additional
compensation to the Grantor:
      1.   An interest charge, computed from such due date, at an annual rate
equal to the maximum interest rate then allowed by law; and
      2.   A sum of money equal to ten percent (10%) of the amount due in order
to defray those additional expenses and costs incurred by the Grantor by reason
of delinquent payment. (Ord. 9501, 5-2-1995)
7-8-21: BOND; LETTER OF CREDIT:
   A.   The grantee shall, at all times during the term of the franchise and
any renewal thereof, maintain in effect and keep on file with the Grantor a
bond running to the Grantor in the amount established in the franchise
agreement with sureties and other terms to be approved by the Grantor. The bond
shall provide that it will not be canceled or materially altered without at
least thirty (30) days' prior notice to the Grantor. The bond shall be
available to the Grantor to satisfy any amount due the Grantor from the grantee
which arises in accordance with the terms and conditions of this Chapter, the
franchise or the franchise agreement. The Grantor shall have the right to
suspend the franchise during any period that the grantee fails to maintain the
bond in full force and effect and to invoke any other remedies, including the
assessment of monetary damages under Section
7-8-38 of this Chapter.
   B.   At the option of the Grantor, the grantee may be required in the
franchise agreement to post an irrevocable letter of credit in lieu of the
bond. Such letter of credit must be issued by a bank or other credit agency and
on such other terms approved by the Grantor, in the amount specified in the
franchise agreement. The letter of credit shall incorporate wording approved by
the Grantor so that the Grantor is able to draw such sums from time to time as
the Grantor may find necessary to satisfy any defaults of the grantee or to
meet any payments due the Grantor under or in connection with this Chapter, the
franchise or the franchise agreement upon ten (10) days' written notice. The
letter of credit shall further provide for sixty (60) days' written notice by
certified mail by its issuer to the Grantor of any pending expiration or
cancellation, or other language acceptable to the Grantor. The notice shall
without further cause constitute a reason for the Grantor to withdraw the full
sum under the letter of credit to be held in the accounts of the Grantor until
such letter of credit is reestablished to the satisfaction of the Grantor. The
grantee shall pay all fees or other charges required to keep such letter of
credit in full force and effect at all times during the term of the franchise
agreement and any renewal thereof. Within thirty (30) days after any withdrawal
by the Grantor under the letter of credit, the grantee shall restore the letter
of credit to its original amount. Except as expressly provided otherwise in
this subsection B, provisions in this Section applicable to a bond shall also
apply to a letter of credit.
   C.   Nothing in this Section or in any bond or letter of credit accepted by
the Grantor hereunder, nor any amounts recovered by the Grantor under such bond
letter of credit, shall excuse faithful and full performance by the grantee of
all obligations under this Chapter, the franchise and the franchise agreement
or impair any other rights or remedies of the Grantor. (Ord. 9501, 5-2-1995)
7-8-22: CONSTRUCTION AND MAINTENANCE REQUIREMENTS:
   A.   The system shall be constructed, maintained and/or rebuilt in
accordance with the provisions of the franchise agreement and all construction
standards and requirements of the Grantor. Construction components and
techniques and system technical and performance standards shall be in
accordance with this Chapter, the franchise agreement and applicable law.
   B.   The grantee shall adhere to all building and zoning requirements
currently or hereafter in effect and shall obtain all required permits. The
grantee shall arrange the facilities of its system, on both public and private
property (including streets and public property), in such a manner as to cause
no unreasonable interference with the use of such property by any person. The
grantee shall provide at least forty eight (48) hours' notice to all affected
property owners and the Grantor prior to installing any facilities of the
system upon easements located on private property. The Grantor shall not modify
its construction requirements subsequent to the completion of construction so
as to require reconstruction or retrofit unless the public health and safety so
require.
   C.   Cable and related facilities shall be installed underground at the
grantee's cost where all existing utilities are already underground. Previously
installed aerial cable and related facilities shall be installed underground at
the grantee's pro rata cost in concert with other utilities when all such other
utilities convert their facilities in the same area from aerial to underground.
   D.   Any and all streets, public property and other public areas and ways
disturbed or damaged by the grantee or its contractors during the term of the
franchise shall be restored within the time limits specified by the Grantor, at
the grantee's expense, to a condition comparable to their condition prior to
the disturbance or damage unless otherwise authorized in writing by the
Grantor.
   E.   Methods of construction, installation and maintenance of the grantee's
cable system shall comply with the National Electrical Safety Code to the
extent that such code is consistent with local law affecting the construction,
installation and maintenance of electric supply and communication lines.
   F.   Grantee may cut or trim trees and vegetation interfering with clearance
requirements of the National Electrical Safety Code or any other applicable
Federal, State or local law, regulation or standard.
   G.   Upon order by the Grantor, the grantee shall relocate its facilities at
the grantee's sole expense in order to accommodate the widening, relocation,
change of grade or any other work or improvement of a public street or right of
way. Nothing in a franchise shall prevent the Grantor from constructing,
repairing or altering any public work. If any property of the grantee
interferes with the construction, maintenance or repair of any public
improvement, all such property shall be removed or replaced in such manner as
directed by the Grantor so that the same shall not interfere with the public
work. Such removal or replacement shall be at the sole expense of the grantee.
   H.   In the event it is necessary to temporarily move or remove any property
of the grantee at the Grantor's direction for a public purpose in order
lawfully to move a large object, vehicle, building or other structure, the
grantee shall move, upon reasonable notice and at its sole expense, its
property as may be required by the Grantor to facilitate such movements. No
such movement shall be deemed a taking of the grantee's property. Nothing
herein shall limit the right of the grantee to seek reimbursement from any
person other than Grantor.
   I.   In the event it is necessary temporarily to move or remove any of the
grantee's property in order for any person other than the Grantor lawfully and
for a nonpublic purpose to move a large object, vehicle, building or other
structure over the streets of the Grantor, upon thirty (30) days' prior notice
by the person to the grantee, the grantee shall move at the expense of the
person requesting the temporary removal such of the grantee's facilities as may
be required to facilitate such movement.
   J.   The grantee shall at all times take reasonable precautions, including
without limitation all precautions required by applicable Federal, State or
local laws or regulations, for preventing failures and accidents which are
likely to cause damage or injury to the public, to employees of the Grantor or
the grantee, or to public or private property.
   K.   All lines, equipment, and facilities within the service area shall at
all times be kept and maintained in a safe and suitable condition, in good
order and repair, and in full compliance with all applicable Federal, State and
local laws and regulations. In the event that the grantee's facilities create
an unsafe condition, the grantee shall upon notice correct such unsafe
condition. The Grantor shall be the sole judge of an unsafe condition.
   L.   In all cases other than those specified in subsections G, H, I, J or K
of this Section, the grantee shall be eligible for relocation compensation to
the same extent as the Grantor compensates any utility companies.
   M.   Upon the failure, refusal or neglect of the grantee to cause any
construction, repair or other work necessary to comply with the terms of this
Chapter, the franchise agreement or any other requirement of the Grantor, the
Grantor may, but shall not be required to, cause such work to be completed in
whole or in part. The Grantor shall give the grantee reasonable notice of its
intent to exercise this power and fifteen (15) days thereafter to cure. After
completion of the work in whole or in part, the Grantor shall cause to be
submitted to the grantee an itemized statement of the costs thereof. The
grantee shall pay to the Grantor the costs in the itemized statement within
thirty (30) days of presentment. (Ord. 9501, 5-2-1995)
7-8-23: TECHNICAL STANDARDS:
   A.   The grantee shall construct, install, operate and maintain its system
in accordance with all FCC technical standards as set forth in the franchise
agreement.
   B.   The Grantor may specify additional technical requirements in the
franchise agreement. (Ord. 9501, 5-2-1995)
7-8-24: RATES:
The Grantor may regulate any rate charged by the grantee to the extent
permitted and in the manner required by applicable law. (Ord. 9501, 5-2-1995)
7-8-25: INDEMNITY:
The grantee shall indemnify, defend, and hold harmless the Grantor, its
Council, boards, commissions, officers, officials, employees and agents from
and against all liability, loss, damage, expense, costs (including without
limitation attorneys' fees and other costs and fees in litigation) of every
nature (whether in contract, tort or strict liability, including without
limitation personal injury, death at any time and property damage) arising out
of or in connection with the grantee's or any of its employees', agents' or
contractors' performance of work, or failure to comply with any of the
obligations, under this Chapter or the franchise agreement, except such loss or
damage which is caused by the sole negligence or wilful misconduct of the
Grantor or its officials, employees or agents acting within the scope of their
employment or authority. The indemnity provisions of this Section shall be
implemented pursuant to Section
7-8-26 of this Chapter and the terms of the franchise agreement, provided that
the grantee's obligations under this Section
7-8-25 shall not be limited by any insurance provided or held by the grantee.
(Ord. 9501, 5-2-1995)
7-8-26: INSURANCE:
   A.   On or before commencement of any activity by the grantee pursuant to a
franchise, the grantee shall obtain policies of liability, workers'
compensation, property and defamation insurance from companies authorized to
transact business in the State by the Insurance Commissioner of the State.
   B.   The policies of liability and property insurance shall:
      1.   Be issued to the grantee and name the Grantor and its Council,
boards, commissions, officers, officials, agents and employees as additional
insureds;
      2.   Indemnify for all liability for personal and bodily injury, death
and damage to property arising from activities conducted and premises used
pursuant to this Chapter or the franchise agreement by providing coverage
therefor, including but not limited to coverage for:
         a.   Negligent acts or omissions of the grantee or its employees,
contractors, or agents, or
         b.   Use of motor vehicles;
      3.   Provide a combined single limit for comprehensive general liability
and comprehensive automobile liability insurance in the amount provided for in
the franchise agreement;
      4.   Be noncancelable and nonamendable without thirty (30) days' prior
written notice thereof directed to the Grantor; and
      5.   Contain such other provisions as required by the franchise
agreement.
   C.   The policy of workers' compensation insurance shall:
      1.   Have been previously approved as to substance and form by the
Insurance Commissioner of the State;
      2.   Cover all employees of the grantee who in the course and scope of
their employment are to conduct the franchise operations;
      3.   Provide for every benefit and payment presently or hereinafter
conferred by the Labor Code of the State upon an injured employee, including
vocational rehabilitation and death benefits;
      4.   Contain such other provisions as required by the franchise
agreement.
   D.   The dollar amounts of all insurance policies shall be those specified
in the franchise agreement.
   E.   The grantee shall file with the City Clerk prior to commencement of
operations either certified copies of these insurance policies or a certificate
of insurance for each of the required policies executed by the company issuing
the policy or by a broker authorized to issue such a certificate, certifying
that the policy is in force and providing the following information with
respect to the policy:
      1.   The policy number;
      2.   The date upon which the policy will become effective and the date
upon which it will expire;
      3.   The names of the named insureds and any additional insured required
by this Chapter or the franchise agreement;
      4.   The subject of the insurance;
      5.   The type of coverage provided by the insurance;
      6.   Amount or limit of coverage provided by the insurance; and
      7.   A provision that the policy shall not be canceled or amended without
at least thirty (30) days' prior written notice to the Grantor.
Each insurance policy and certificate must be acceptable in form and substance
to the City Attorney.
   F.   The grantee shall not commence operations until the grantee has
complied with all provisions of this Section and with the specific insurance
provisions in the franchise agreement.
   G.   In the event the grantee fails to procure and maintain any of the
above-described insurance policies in full force and effect, it shall be deemed
a material default of the franchise agreement. The Grantor, upon forty eight
(48) hours' notice to the grantee, shall have the right to procure the required
insurance and recover the cost thereof from the grantee. The Grantor shall also
have the right to invoke any and all remedies, including the assessment of
monetary damages under Section
7-8-38 of this Chapter, or institute any revocation procedures pursuant to this
Chapter. (Ord. 9501, 5-2-1995)
PART IV. REPORTING REQUIREMENTS
7-8-27: RECORDS REQUIRED:
   A.   The grantee shall at all times maintain:
      1.   A record of all written complaints received and interruptions or
degradation or service experienced for the preceding two (2) years, provided
that such complaints result in or require a service call or concern the conduct
of an employee of the grantee;
      2.   A full and complete set of plans, records and "as-built" maps
showing the location of the cable system, exclusive of subscriber service drops
and equipment provided in subscribers' homes; and
      3.   Information regarding all complaints received, the type of
complaint, the date of the acknowledgement and summary of action taken.
Such information shall be maintained for a period of one year and made
available to the Grantor within thirty (30) days of a request from the Grantor.
   B.   Upon request by the Grantor, the grantee shall maintain and from time
to time provide to the Grantor additional information, records and documents
related to the franchise or the franchise agreement. (Ord. 9501, 5-2-1995)
7-8-28: GRANTOR'S RIGHT TO INSPECT:
   A.   Upon reasonable notice from the Grantor, the grantee shall permit
examination, by any duly authorized representative of the Grantor, of all
property or facilities of the grantee used or useful in the construction,
rebuild or operation of the cable system, and all records relating to the
franchise, the franchise agreement, the cable system and the grantee, subject
to subsection
7-8-10G of this Chapter. (Ord. 9501, 5-2-1995)
7-8-29: PLANT PERFORMANCE REPORTS:
The grantee shall submit to the Grantor all FCC proof-of- performance or other
technical performance reports and the Cumulative Leakage Index test for the
system within thirty (30) days after the due date for filing of same at the
FCC. (Ord. 9501, 5-2-1995)
7-8-30: PUBLIC REPORTS:
If the grantee is publicly held, upon request of the Grantor, the grantee shall
submit to the Grantor a copy of the grantee's annual and other periodic
reports, including but not limited to 10-K reports, and those of its parent,
within forty five (45) days after the due date for the filing of such reports.
(Ord. 9501, 5-2-1995)
7-8-31: REPORTS:
   A.   All reports, filings, documents or responses required of the grantee
under this Chapter or the franchise agreement shall be provided by the grantee
to the Grantor within the period required therefor and shall contain the
information specified in this Chapter or the franchise agreement.
   B.   The wilful refusal, failure or neglect of grantee to file any of the
reports, filings, documents or responses required as and when due under this
Chapter shall, at the Grantor's option, be deemed a material breach of the
franchise agreement and may subject the grantee to all remedies, legal or
equitable, which are available to the Grantor under this Chapter, the franchise
agreement or otherwise.
   C.   Any materially false or misleading statement or misrepresentation made
knowingly and wilfully by the grantee in any report, filing, document or
response required under this Chapter or under the franchise agreement shall, at
the Grantor's option, be deemed a material breach of the franchise and may
subject grantee to all remedies, legal or equitable, which are available to
Grantor under this Chapter, the franchise agreement or otherwise. (Ord. 9501,
5-2-1995)
PART V. ENFORCEMENT
7-8-32: NOTICE OF VIOLATION:
The Grantor shall provide the grantee with a written notice of violation(s) by
the grantee of this Chapter or the franchise agreement upon which the Grantor
proposes to take corrective action. The notice shall specifically describe the
nature and scope of the alleged violation(s) by the grantee. The grantee shall
have sixty (60) days from receipt of such written notice to respond by
correcting the violation to the Grantor's satisfaction or, in the alternative,
by demonstrating to the Grantor's satisfaction that such violation has not in
fact occurred by submitting in writing a plan acceptable to the Grantor to
correct the violation. If the Grantor fails to object in sixty (60) days after
receiving the grantee's response to the notice of violation, the matter shall
be deemed resolved. (Ord. 9501, 5-2-1995)
7-8-33: DEFAULT:
If the grantee fails to disprove or correct the violation or to submit to the
Grantor a plan to correct the violation as provided for in Section
7-8-32, the Grantor may declare the grantee to be in default, which declaration
of default shall be in writing and shall specify the nature of the violation
and any proposed remedy sought by the Grantor as provided in Section
7-8-38. Upon receipt of the declaration of default, the grantee may request
additional time in which to cure the violation, which extension of time may be
granted by the Grantor at its sole discretion. (Ord. 9501, 5-2-1995)
7-8-34: DISPUTE RESOLUTION - APPEAL OF DECLARATION OF DEFAULT:
The grantee may appeal a declaration of default by the Grantor directly to the
Council pursuant to Section
7-8-37 or may elect to invoke advisory arbitration pursuant to Section
7-8-35. A notice of appeal under Section
7-8-37 or a notice of appeal to advisory arbitration under Section
7-8-35 shall be in writing and shall state the appeal, the nature of the
dispute between the parties, and the remedy or relief sought by the grantee,
and shall include a copy of the declaration of default. The grantee's notice of
appeal shall be filed with the City Clerk within thirty (30) calendar days
after receipt by the grantee of the declaration of default as provided in
Section
7-8-33 of this Chapter. (Ord. 9501, 5-2-1995)
7-8-35: ADVISORY ARBITRATION PROCEDURE:
   A.   Within thirty (30) days after the grantee has filed a notice of appeal
to advisory arbitration as provided in Section
7-8-34, the parties shall jointly select an arbitrator to hear the dispute. The
parties shall use their best efforts to obtain an arbitrator who is an
individual knowledgeable in the area of cable television. If the parties are
unable to agree on an arbitrator within thirty (30) days, a list of three (3)
arbitrators shall be obtained from the American Arbitration Association (AAA)
by the grantee and each party shall have the right to strike one name within
twenty (20) days of receipt of the list. The remaining arbitrator shall hear
the dispute.
   B.   Within thirty (30) days following selection of the arbitrator, the
arbitration hearing shall commence, unless the time for hearing is extended by
mutual agreement of the parties. The hearing shall be conducted so as to afford
the parties full due process rights, including the right to introduce evidence,
call witnesses on their behalf and cross-examine adverse witnesses.
   C.   The hearing shall be recorded by audio taping or by a certified court
reporter. Either party may request preparation of a transcript of the
proceedings. Upon approval by both parties, such transcript shall be deemed to
be a legally sufficient record of the arbitration hearing for any and all
purposes. Cost of transcript preparation shall be borne by the requesting
party.
   D.   Within thirty (30) days following the conclusion of the hearing, the
arbitrator shall prepare and submit to the parties written findings and
conclusions, including the arbitrator's recommendation for relief, remedy or
resolution to the dispute.
   E.   The decision of the arbitrator shall be advisory only and shall not be
binding upon the parties. Either party may appeal the arbitrator's decision to
the Council pursuant to Section
7-8-36 below.
   F.   Except as provided in subsection C of this Section with respect to
preparation of a transcript, the costs of the arbitration shall be borne
equally by the parties. The costs of the arbitration shall include without
limitation the fees of the arbitrator and the costs of the court reporter or
audio recording costs. (Ord. 9501, 5-2-1995)
7-8-36: APPEAL OF ARBITRATOR'S DECISION:
   A.   Within thirty (30) days after issuance of the arbitrator's written
decision, either party may submit to the City Clerk a notice of appeal from the
arbitrator's decision seeking administrative review by the Council. The notice
shall be in writing, shall state the grounds for the appeal, the nature of the
dispute between the parties and the remedy or relief sought by the appellant,
shall include a copy of the arbitrator's findings and conclusions, and may
include a transcript of the hearing. Within thirty (30) days of filing of such
notice of appeal by either party, the Council shall schedule an administrative
review which shall in no event occur later than sixty (60) days following the
filing of the written notice of appeal from the arbitrator's decision.
   B.   An administrative review pursuant to this Section shall be conducted in
the manner set in the franchise agreement.
   C.   An administrative review before the Council pursuant to this Section
shall constitute the final level of administrative review by the Grantor under
this Section and Section
7-8-35 of this Chapter and shall represent the exhaustion of administrative
remedies by the parties. The Council's decision shall be final. The written
decision of the Council shall be served by the Grantor upon the grantee by
certified mail. (Ord. 9501, 5-2-1995)
7-8-37: APPEAL TO CITY COUNCIL:
   A.   In lieu of electing advisory arbitration, the grantee may appeal the
declaration of default directly to the Council by submitting to the City Clerk
a notice of appeal for a hearing before the Council. The notice of appeal shall
be in writing, shall state the grounds for the appeal, the nature of the
dispute between the parties and the remedy or relief sought by the grantee, and
shall include a copy of the declaration of the default.
   B.   Within thirty (30) days after the filing of such notice of appeal, the
Council shall schedule an evidentiary hearing at which the parties shall be
afforded full due process rights, including the right to introduce evidence,
call witnesses on their behalf and cross-examine adverse witnesses. The hearing
shall be held within sixty (60) days after the filing of the notice of appeal.
The parties shall receive written notice of the scheduled hearing no later than
thirty (30) days in advance of the hearing date.
   C.   Within thirty (30) days following the conclusion of the evidentiary
hearing, the Council shall issue its written findings and decision to the
parties. The Council's decision shall be final. The written findings and
decision shall be personally served by the Grantor upon the grantee by
certified mail.
   D.   An evidentiary hearing before the Council pursuant to this Section
shall constitute the final level of administrative review under this section
and shall represent the exhaustion of administrative remedies by the parties.
(Ord. 9501, 5-2-1995)
7-8-38: AVAILABLE REMEDIES:
Following completion of the applicable proceedings pursuant to this Part V, the
Grantor may proceed to take all necessary steps to obtain the remedy sought,
which may include:
   A.   Liquidated Damages: Liquidated damages as provided for in the franchise
agreement may be assessed against the grantee.
   B.   Collection From Performance Bond Or Letter Of Credit: The Grantor may
proceed against the grantee's performance bond or letter of credit to collect
its actual or liquidated damages.
   C.   Revocation Of Franchise: The Council may revoke the grantee's franchise
pursuant to the Procedures set forth in this Part V only if the Council makes a
specific finding that the grantee committed a material violation of this
Chapter or the franchise agreement as the term "material" is defined in the
franchise agreement. Upon revocation of the franchise pursuant to the
appropriate action by the Council, the Grantor may require the grantee, at the
Grantor's sole option:
      1.   To forthwith remove its structures and facilities from the Grantor's
streets, public property and other public areas and ways and restore them to
their prior condition within a reasonable time and comply with all applicable
requirements of subsection
7-8-10E of this Chapter, all at the grantee's expense. If the grantee fails to
comply with such requirements, the Grantor may cause the removal and
restoration to be completed, in which case the Grantor shall be entitled to
collect all costs thereof from the grantee. Any such cost shall constitute a
lien upon all structures, facilities, or other property of the grantee within
the franchise area;
      2.   To abandon its structures and facilities in place; or
      3.   To sell the cable system to a third party unaffiliated with the
grantee.
   D.   Other Relief: The Grantor may initiate any action or proceeding in law
or equity (including suit for injunctive relief or actual damages) which the
Grantor deems appropriate to enforce the City's rights under this Chapter or
franchise agreement. (Ord. 9501, 5-2-1995)
7-8-39: JUDICIAL REVIEW:
Final decisions of the Council following administrative review shall be subject
to judicial review. (Ord. 9501, 5-2-1995)
7-8-40: RECEIVERSHIP AND FORECLOSURE:
   A.   A franchise granted hereunder shall, at the option of the Grantor,
cease and terminate one hundred twenty (120) days after appointment of a
receiver or receivers, or trustee or trustees, to take over and conduct the
business of the grantee, whether in a receivership, reorganization, bankruptcy
or other action or proceeding, unless such receivership or trusteeship shall
have been vacated prior to the expiration of the one hundred twenty (120) days,
or unless: 1) such receivers or trustee(s) shall have, within one hundred
twenty (120) days after their election or appointment, fully complied with all
material terms and provisions of this Chapter, the franchise and the franchise
agreement and shall have remedied all material defaults under the franchise or
franchise agreement or provided a plan for the remedy of such defaults which is
satisfactory to the Grantor; and 2) such receiver(s) or trustee(s) shall,
within one hundred twenty (120) days after election or appointment, execute an
agreement, duly approved by the court having jurisdiction in the premises,
whereby such receiver(s) or trustee(s) assume and agree to be bound by each and
every term, provision and limitation of this Chapter, the franchise and the
franchise agreement.
   B.   In the case of a foreclosure or other judicial sale of the system, or
any material part thereof, the Grantor may serve notice of termination upon the
grantee and the successful bidder at such sale, in which event the franchise
and all rights and privileges of the grantee under this Chapter, the franchise
and the franchise agreement shall cease and terminate thirty (30) days after
service of such notice, unless: 1) the Grantor shall have approved the transfer
of the franchise, as and in the manner that this Chapter provides; and 2) such
successful bidder shall have covenanted and agreed with the Grantor to assume
and be bound by all terms and conditions of this Chapter, the franchise and the
franchise agreement. (Ord. 9501, 5-2-1995)
7-8-41: WAIVERS:
The Council may waive, in its sole discretion, any provision of the franchise
or the franchise agreement, subject to applicable law. Any such waiver shall
apply only to such provision and only in the instance in which it is given.
(Ord. 9501, 5-2-1995)
7-8-42: RIGHTS OF INDIVIDUALS:
   A.   The grantee shall not deny cable service, deny access to the cable
system, or otherwise discriminate against subscribers, channel users, or
general citizens on the basis of race, color, religion, national origin, age,
gender, marital status or disability, or because of the income of the residents
of the local area in which such persons reside. The grantee shall comply at all
times with all other applicable Federal and State laws and regulations, and all
executive and administrative orders, relating to nondiscrimination, including
without limitation section 51 of the California Civil Code and section 53066.2
of the California Government Code.
   B.   The grantee shall adhere to the applicable equal employment opportunity
requirements of the section 634 of the Act (47 USC 554), and applicable State
and City regulations, as now written or as amended from time to time. (Ord.
9501, 5-2-1995)
7-8-43: RESIDENT RIGHTS:
   A.   Definitions: For purposes of this Section only, the following terms
shall have the following meanings:
    DEVELOPER: Each party responsible for the acquisition, ownership,
construction, management or operation of a residential subdivision.
   EASEMENT: The streets, highways, alleys, rights of way, easements and riser
paths of any subdivision which are dedicated or to be designated for public
utility use, whether by formal instrument of dedication or by actual use in the
delivery of utility services to residents.
   SUBDIVISION:
      1.   A residential real estate development;
      2.   A condominium or cooperative mobilehome or multi-unit apartment; or
      3.   Any other multi-unit dwelling.
   B.   Access To Subdivisions:
      1.   The grantee shall have the right to use the easements of any
subdivision for the construction, installation, maintenance and repair of a
cable system.
      2.   The developer of each subdivision for which a tentative map or
parcel map is required pursuant to State law shall identify on the map land
dedicated or to be dedicated to public utility and cable system use so as to
provide the grantee a path from which to extend cable service to each
residential parcel in the subdivision.
      3.   Each developer shall assure that the grantee is provided timely
access to:
         a.   Jointly-used trenches, at the time that the trenches are opened
for utility and/or cable system installation. Access shall be provided on a
cost shared basis, without discrimination among users; and
         b.   Underground easements and all riser paths used for the
installation of utility and/or cable system facilities. Access shall be
provided prior to the paving or sealing of any pertinent street (if within the
street right of way) and shall be offered at all other locations no later than
the time of installation of telephone or electrical power facilities.
   C.   Procedures:
      1.   A developer shall assure delivery of reasonable advance notice to
the grantee of intended subdivision construction, and timely notice (within 14
days) after the issuance of work permits related to use of subdivision
easements by utilities or the cable system.
      2.   A developer shall assure delivery to the grantee of thirty (30)
days' advance notice of the opening of joint-use trenches by utilities and the
use or underground easements and of riser paths by utilities or the cable
system.
      3.   All notices sent to the grantee hereunder by a developer shall be
sent by registered mail, return receipt requested, to the grantee's general
manager or system manager, or to the address on file with the Grantor. No
developer may omit notice without written confirmation from the Grantor that
there is no grantee able to provide cable service to that subdivision.
      4.   If the grantee fails to install its conduit within a shared trench
within five (5) working days of the date trenching is available, as designated
in the developer's notice, the grantee shall be responsible for all costs of
reopening the trench. Separate trenches created by the grantee for distribution
plant shall be installed during any period of installation by multiple
grantees, and as contiguous as reasonably practicable to other utility
trenches.
   D.   Residents' Choice Of Grantee:
      1.   Each resident of a subdivision shall be provided with the continuing
option to receive cable service from any grantee.
      2.   No developer shall enter into an agreement which has the purpose or
effect of interfering with a resident's free and complete exercise of the
rights under this subsection D or enter into any arrangement with a third party
to do so.
   E.   Remedies: Any developer who violates this Chapter shall be subject to
all remedies available to the Grantor under any development entitlement, permit
or authorization received or held by developer from the Grantor. (Ord. 9501, 5-
2-1995)
7-8-44: POLES:
The franchise or the franchise agreement shall not relieve the grantee of any
obligations involved in obtaining pole or conduit space from any department of
the Grantor, utility company, or other persons who maintain facilities in
streets or rights of way. Subject to applicable law, the grantee shall
negotiate the lease of pole space and facilities from the existing pole owners
for all aerial construction. The grantee shall not erect any pole on or along
any street or public right of way in an area in which there are existing aerial
utility facilities. If additional poles in such an area are necessary, the
grantee shall negotiate with a public utility for their installation. Any such
installation shall require the advance written approval of the Grantor. If
poles or facilities are not made available consistent with section 767.5 of the
California Public Utilities Code, the grantee may erect its own poles subject
to the Grantor's approval. (Ord. 9501, 5-2-1995)
7-8-45: SEPARABILITY:
If any provision of this Chapter is held by any court or by any Federal or
State agency of competent jurisdiction to be invalid as conflicting with any
Federal or State law, rule or regulation now or hereafter in effect, or is held
by such court or agency to be modified in any way in order to conform to the
requirements of any such law, rule or regulation, such provision shall be
considered a separate, distinct and independent part of this Chapter, and such
holding shall not affect the validity or enforceability of any other provisions
hereof. (Ord. 9501, 5-2-1995)
PART VI. PERFORMANCE STANDARDS AND REVIEW
7-8-46: FRANCHISE AGREEMENT PROVISIONS:
The requirements of this Part VI shall be in addition to and without limitation
on the consumer protection and customer service requirements set forth in the
franchise agreement. (Ord. 9501, 5-2-1995)
7-8-47: CUSTOMER SERVICE:
   A.   The grantee shall provide each new customer with all the following
written information at the time any cable service is initiated for that
customer:
      1.   The time allowed to pay outstanding bills;
      2.   Grounds for termination of service and steps the grantee must take
before terminating service;
      3.   How the customer can resolve billing or service disputes;
      4.   The steps necessary to have service reconnected after involuntary
termination;
      5.   The fact that customers shall have the right to speak with a
supervisor, and if none is available at the time a customer calls, a supervisor
shall return the customer call within one working day;
      6.   How to contact the appropriate regulatory authority;
      7.   Any other information required by applicable law.
   B.   In addition, at least once each calendar year, the grantee shall notify
each customer that information concerning each above item is available from the
grantee upon request.
   C.   The grantee shall maintain at least one office in Kings County or at
such other location approved in writing by the Grantor. The office shall be
open during all normal business hours (as defined in section 76.309(c)(4)(A) of
the FCC Regulations), but in no case less than forty eight (48) hours per week,
including at least three (3) hours per weekend. The grantee shall have a
publicly listed non-toll-charge telephone number operated so as to receive and
record customer complaints and requests on a twenty four (24) hour basis.
   D.   The grantee shall maintain sufficient maintenance personnel to respond
to repairs relating to outages or other requests for installation or service
within the time periods specified in the franchise agreement.
   E.   The grantee shall provide a telephone system and office personnel
sufficient to handle customer calls within the requirements of the franchise
agreement. (Ord. 9501, 5-2-1995)
7-8-48: BILLING PROCEDURES:
   A.   The grantee's billing procedures for residential customers shall meet
the following minimum requirements:
      1.   Bills for cable service shall be rendered monthly, unless otherwise
authorized by the customer and the grantee. The bill shall be mailed on or
promptly after its date. All bills shall include a telephone number, street
address and mailing address for billing inquiries or disputes.
      2.   In the event of a dispute between the customer and grantee regarding
a bill, the grantee shall promptly, but in no event more than thirty (30) days
after becoming aware of the dispute, make such investigation as is required by
the particular case and report the results to the customer. In the event the
dispute is not resolved to the satisfaction of the customer, the grantee shall
inform the customer of the complaint procedures set forth in the franchise
agreement.
      3.   Bills shall be presented in a clear, concise, accurate and
understandable fashion, consistent with Federal law.
      4.   The grantee may establish an arrangement, for those customers that
consent in writing, to pay their bills by electronic funds transfers.
   B.   The grantee may establish separate billing procedures for commercial
accounts. Such billing procedures shall be set out in the written agreement
between grantee and the commercial establishment.
   C.   The grantee shall comply with such other billing requirements as are
mutually agreed to in the franchise agreement. (Ord. 9501, 5-2-1995)
7-8-49: COMPLAINT PROCEDURES:
   A.   The grantee shall receive and acknowledge any customer complaint made
in person, by telephone or mail, or referred by the Grantor, within the time
period established in the franchise agreement.
   B.   The grantee shall make available to the complainant information
regarding the complainant's ability to take the complaint to the Grantor's
representative if it is not resolved by the grantee.
   C.   The Grantor may determine, adjust, settle or compromise any complaint,
controversy, dispute or charge arising from the franchise, the franchise
agreement or the cable system. The Grantor may delegate this authority to the
City Manager or his or her designee. If any person is dissatisfied with the
decision of such official or officials, such person may appeal the decision of
such official or officials to the Council within ten (10) days of such decision
for a final determination, adjustment, settlement or compromise. (Ord. 9501, 5-
2-1995)
7-8-50: SYSTEM AUDIT:
   A.   The Grantor may require that performance audits of the grantee and the
grantee's cable system be conducted at intervals specified in the franchise
agreement. The purpose of the audit shall be to verify the grantee's compliance
with all requirements of this Chapter and the franchise agreement.
   B.   Upon completion of the audit, the grantee shall meet with the Grantor
to review the results of the audit within thirty (30) days of the Grantor's
request. Within thirty (30) days after that meeting, the Grantor may issue
findings with respect to the adequacy of the performance of the grantee. If
inadequacies are found, the Grantor may direct the grantee, and the grantee
shall be obligated, to correct them within specified time periods.
   C.   The participation by the Grantor and the grantee in the audit and
review process shall not waive any rights they may have under applicable law.
(Ord. 9501, 5-2-1995)
CHAPTER 9
INDIVIDUAL OFF-SITE IMPROVEMENT REVOLVING FUND
SECTION:
7-9-1: Fund Established
7-9-2: Purpose
7-9-3: Construction Standards
7-9-4: Advances; Applications and Agreements
7-9-5: Advances; Assessment as Taxes
7-9-6: Deposits
7-9-1: FUND ESTABLISHED:
An Off-Site Improvement Revolving Fund in the sum of ten thousand dollars
($10,000.00) for financing and paying for the installation of off-site
improvements such as curbs, gutters, sidewalks and water and sewer extension
and services in the City is hereby established, and the Director of Finance is
directed to transfer from the General Fund into the Individual Single-Family
Off-Site Improvement Revolving Fund the sum of ten thousand dollars
($10,000.00).
7-9-2: PURPOSE:
The Individual Single-Family Off-Site Improvement Revolving Fund shall be used
and expended only to provide moneys to construct or pay fees for off-site
improvements in public street rights of way in the City adjacent to the real
property of such individual single-family lot owners thereof as may elect to
cause these improvements to be built, erected, constructed and completed and
payment thereof to be made from the Individual Single-Family Off- Site
Improvement Revolving Fund in accordance with the provisions of this Chapter.
7-9-3: CONSTRUCTION STANDARDS:
All off-site improvements installed as provided in this Chapter shall be
constructed in conformity with the standard plans and specifications of the
City and to the satisfaction of the City Engineer.
7-9-4: ADVANCES; APPLICATIONS AND AGREEMENTS:
Any owner of real property desiring to finance the construction of off-site
improvements from the Off-Site Improvement Revolving Fund shall make a written
application therefor to the City Manager. If such application is accepted and
approved, the City and the owner shall enter into a written recordable
agreement for the payment for such construction from said Fund. Such owner
shall, by such agreement, obligate himself to repay to the City all sums paid
from said Fund for such construction in monthly, quarterly, semi-annual or
yearly payments as shall be approved by the City, with the entire amount
thereof to be fully repaid to the City within a period of not exceeding five
(5) years from the date of such agreement, and on such terms and under such
conditions as may be set forth in such written agreement, with all unpaid
balances to bear interest at the rate of seven percent (7%) per annum from the
date of such agreement. Such agreement shall provide that any installment
payments, with accruing interest as specified and set up in such agreement,
remaining unpaid for thirty (30) days after the due date thereof may be
assessed as taxes against the real property of the owner or applicant, and that
the entire balance due under such contract and unpaid shall constitute a
special assessment against the parcel of real property thus benefitted, and
shall be a lien on the property for the amount thereof with the accruing
interest, and shall continue to be a lien thereon until the full amount thereof
and all accruing interest is paid and discharged in full. The agreement shall
be recorded.
7-9-5: ADVANCES; ASSESSMENT AS TAXES:
The Director of Finance,on or before the first Monday in March of each year,
shall cause to be filed with the County Auditor a description of the property,
together with the name of the owner or reputed owner thereof, against which
such special assessment shall be made, and the installments then due and
unpaid, with accruing interest, together with all other sums of money due and
unpaid under such agreement, may be assessed as taxes against the owner or
reputed owner of the real property, and the amount of money so assessed shall
bear the same penalties and interest as taxes regularly assessed on default of
payment thereof.
7-9-6: DEPOSITS:
All moneys received by the City under such written agreements or assessed or
collected by the City shall be deposited in the Off- Site Improvement Revolving
Fund. (Ord. 8701, 2-3-87)
CHAPTER 10
CITY MAINTENANCE DISTRICTS
SECTION:
7-10-1: Authority
7-10-2: Definitions
7-10-3: Compliance With Proposition 218; Incorporation Of Landscaping And
Lighting Act
7-10-4: Authorized Services
7-10-5: Services Existing Before District Formation Or Annexation
7-10-6: Extraterritorial Jurisdiction
7-10-7: Compliance With Chapter
7-10-8: Nonexclusivity
7-10-9: Construction
7-10-10: Coordination With Subdivision Approvals
7-10-1: AUTHORITY:
The city is a municipal corporation organized and existing under its charter
and the “home rule” provisions of the state constitution (article XI, section
5), with the power to make and enforce all laws and regulations respecting
municipal affairs, subject only to any restrictions and limitations provided in
its charter and in the state constitution. The city council finds that
financing police and fire protection services, and the maintenance of certain
public facilities and improvements, through special tax or assessment districts
or otherwise, is necessary, essential, a public purpose and a municipal affair.
(Ord. 2012-01, 4-17-2012; amd. Ord. 2024-03, 6-18-2024)
7-10-2: DEFINITIONS:
With regard to landscaping and lighting districts formed under the Landscaping
and Lighting Act of 1972 and for all purposes of interpreting and applying this
chapter, the following terms shall have the following meanings, unless the
context clearly requires otherwise:
DISTRICT: Any assessment district formed pursuant to this chapter.
IMPROVEMENTS: Any one or combination of the following:
   A.   Any improvement described in section 22525 of the California Streets
and Highways Code.
   B.   Any city street, highway, road, alley, lane, boulevard, pedestrian
mall, parkway, bike path, trail or easement.
   C.   Any other governmental property or facilities which the city is
authorized by law to finance, purchase, construct, expand, improve,
rehabilitate, own, operate or contribute money to.
LANDSCAPING AND LIGHTING ACT: The Landscaping and Lighting act of 1972 (the
“The 1972 Act”), California Streets And Highways Code section 22500 et seq., as
amended from time to time.
PROPOSITION 218: Article XIIIC and XIIID of the California constitution.
SERVICES: Any or all of the following:
   A.   Maintaining, servicing, repairing, replacing, operating, caring for or
preserving any “improvement” defined in this chapter, including, but not
limited to, any of the following:
      1.   Maintaining, servicing, repairing, replacing, operating or caring
for any street, highway, road, alley, lane, boulevard, pedestrian mall,
parkway, bike path, trail, easement or other way dedicated to public use or
used by the public, and all appurtenances and improvements therein, including,
but not limited to, paving, surfaces, curbs, gutters, medians, street and
traffic signs, other signage, streetlights, traffic signals, hydrants, sound
walls, drains, tunnels, sewers, curbs, gutters, sidewalks, conduits, culverts,
landscaping and hardscaping.
      2.   Maintaining, servicing, repairing, replacing, operating or caring
for any landscaping, hardscaping, lighting or signage next to any right of way
or other way dedicated to public use or used by the public and described in
subsection A1 of this definition, or next to any canal, basin or ditch.
   B.   Establishing and maintaining a reasonable reserve for repair and
replacement under subsection A of this definition.
With regard to community facilities districts formed under the Mello-Roos
Community Facilities Act of 1982 and for all purposes of interpreting and
applying this chapter, the following terms shall have the following meanings,
unless the context clearly requires otherwise:
COMMUNITY FACILITIES ACT: The Mello-Roos Community Facilities Act of 1982 (the
“1982 Act”), California Government section 53311 et seq., as amended from time
to time.
DISTRICT: Any special tax district formed pursuant to this chapter.
IMPROVEMENTS: Any one or combination of the following:
   A.   Any improvement described in section 53313.5 of the California
Government Code.
   B.   Any park, recreation, parkway, and open space facilities, police
stations, fire stations, libraries, child care centers, utilities facilities,
or flood control facilities.
   C.   Any other governmental property or facilities which the city is
authorized by law to finance, purchase, construct, expand, improve,
rehabilitate, own, operate or contribute money to.
PROPOSITION 218: Article XIIIC and XIIID of the California constitution.
SERVICES: Any Services described in section 53313 of the California Government
Code. Services include, but are not limited to, any or all of the following:
   A.   Police Services- includes the estimated and reasonable costs of
providing police services, including but not limited to (i) the costs of
contracting for police, (ii) the salaries and benefits of City staff, if the
City directly provides police services, (iii) the expense related to equipment,
apparatus, and supplies related to these services and authorized by the Act,
and (iv) City overhead costs associated with providing such services within the
CFD.
   B.   Fire Protection Services- includes the estimated and reasonable costs
of providing fire protection services, including but not limited to (i) the
costs of contracting for fire personnel, (ii) the salaries and benefits of City
staff, if the City directly provides fire protection services, (iii) the
expense related to equipment, apparatus, and supplies related to these services
and authorized by the Act, and (iv) City overhead costs associated with
providing such services within the CFD.
   C.   Landscaping and Lighting Maintenance- includes the labor, material,
administration, personnel, equipment and utilities (i.e., water and power)
necessary to maintain public landscaping and lighting improvements for, within,
or associated with the CFD, including trees, turf, ground cover, shrubs, weed
removal, irrigation systems, sidewalk, drainage facilities, lighting, signs,
monuments, graffiti removal, walkways, and associated appurtenant facilities
located within, or associated with, the CFD.
   D.   Park Maintenance- includes the estimated and reasonable costs of
providing public park maintenance for, within, or associated with the CFD,
including but not limited to (i) the costs of contracting for park maintenance
services, including trees, plant material, restrooms, irrigation systems,
sidewalks, drainage facilities, weed control, lighting, and parking lot
maintenance, (ii) the salaries and benefits of City staff, including
maintenance staff, that directly provide park maintenance services, (iii) the
expense related to equipment, apparatus, and supplies related to these services
and authorized by the Act, (iv) utility costs such as water, sewer, lighting
and power and (v) City overhead costs associated with providing such services.
   E.   Drainage Maintenance- includes the labor, material, testing, reporting,
remediation, permitting, general administration, personnel, equipment and
utilities necessary to maintain public drainage improvements for, within, or
associated with the CFD, including drain inlets, filters, detention basin,
storm drain pipeline, and associated appurtenant facilities located within, or
associated with, the CFD.
   F.   Street Maintenance - includes the labor, material, administration,
personnel, equipment and utilities necessary to maintain public streets,
streetlights and associated appurtenant facilities for, within, or associated
with the CFD, including City overhead costs associated with providing such
services within the CFD. (Ord. 2012-01, 4-17-2012; amd. Ord. 2023-04, 8-1-2023;
Ord. 2024-03, 6-18-2024)
7-10-3: COMPLIANCE WITH PROPOSITION 218; INCORPORATION OF LANDSCAPING AND
LIGHTING ACT:
All districts established and assessments levied pursuant to this chapter shall
comply with the requirements of Proposition 218. The mode, manner and
procedures for financing services, for establishing assessment districts, for
levying and collecting assessments and for issuing bonds under this chapter
shall be the mode, manner and procedures specified in Proposition 218 and,
except as otherwise provided in this chapter, the Act. The provisions of the
Act are, to that extent, incorporated in this chapter, provided that those
provisions are not in conflict with the provisions of this chapter. Except as
may be otherwise determined by the City Council with respect to an individual
assessment district, the rate and methodology for determining the maximum
amount of assessments levied under this chapter shall include an annual
adjustment for inflation based on increases in the "Employee Cost Index for
State and Local Government Employees" published by the U.S. Bureau of Labor
Statistics or such other index as may be adopted by the U.S. Bureau of Labor
Statistics in replacement thereof. (Ord. 2012-01, 4-17-2012)
7-10-4: AUTHORIZED SERVICES:
A district and assessments levied therein may finance services specified in the
Act or "services" as defined in this chapter. The scope of services authorized
to be financed under this chapter shall be as defined in this chapter and not
limited by the scope of services specified in the Act. (Ord. 2012-01, 4-17-
2012)
7-10-5: SERVICES EXISTING BEFORE DISTRICT FORMATION OR ANNEXATION:
In addition to financing new services in the territory of a district, to the
greatest extent permitted by Proposition 218, assessments imposed in a district
pursuant to this chapter may finance:
   A.   Services that were being provided in the territory of the district
before the district was established or the territory annexed to the district;
   B.   Services that are in addition to existing services or that supplant
existing services. (Ord. 2012-01, 4-17-2012)
7-10-6: EXTRATERRITORIAL JURISDICTION:
A district may be established under this chapter within the territorial
jurisdiction of the City or, on compliance with the procedures in California
Streets and Highways Code sections 5115 through 5118, may extend beyond the
territorial limits of the City. (Ord. 2012-01, 4-17-2012)
7-10-7: COMPLIANCE WITH CHAPTER:
Any proceedings taken, assessment levied or bonds issued under this chapter
shall not be held invalid because of failure to comply with the provisions of
this chapter, provided the failure is not a constitutional defect. (Ord. 2012-
01, 4-17-2012)
7-10-8: NONEXCLUSIVITY:
The procedures in this chapter are not exclusive, but are alternative to any
other procedures provided in this Code or under State law. (Ord. 2012-01, 4-17-
2012)
7-10-9: CONSTRUCTION:
This chapter shall be liberally construed. (Ord. 2012-01, 4-17-2012)
7-10-10: COORDINATION WITH SUBDIVISION APPROVALS:
The following procedures, unless otherwise provided by law, shall be utilized
to ensure coordination with approved subdivisions of land.
   A.   Tentative Map Approval And Conditioning: The Planning Commission shall
approve the tentative map as provided in title 8, chapter 7, "Land Division",
of this Code. The tentative map shall be conditioned such that the subdivider
agrees to participation in any public facilities maintenance district(s)
required by the City. Public facilities maintenance district(s) shall be
required even when some or all facilities will be maintained by a homeowners'
association. (Ord. 2017-06, 5-16-2017)
   B.   Subdivision Specific Activities: Prior to approval of a subdivision
within a public facilities maintenance district(s) and prior to recordation of
the final map, the following procedures shall be observed:
      1.   A letter from the developer requesting inclusion in a public
facilities maintenance district(s) shall be submitted to the Planning
Department and copies shall be forwarded to the City Engineer and department
responsible for public facilities maintenance districts.
      2.   Five (5) sets of improvement and four (4) sets of landscape plans,
as required by title 8, chapter 7, "Land Division", of this Code shall be
submitted to the Planning Department and forwarded to Public Works, City
Engineer, and the department responsible for public facilities maintenance
district(s) for review and approval.
      3.   The approved landscape plans shall be forwarded to the City Engineer
and to the department responsible for public facilities maintenance district
(s).
      4.   The City Clerk shall request, and the City Engineer shall prepare,
an engineer's report for annual long term maintenance costs, except as
otherwise provided in section 22608.2, for the subdivision pertinent district
boundary or zone modifications.
      5.   The City Clerk shall send a notice regarding the proposed assessment
to the developer, and a ballot, and shall schedule the public hearing before
the City Council.
      6.   Upon receipt of an affirmative ballot from the subdivider, the City
Council shall approve the Engineer's report and direct the Engineer to include
the proposed assessment zone in the City's annual resolution of intention to
levy assessments. The initial annual proposed assessment for an approved
subdivision of land may be deferred by the City Council and levied and
collected in the fiscal year in which construction of improvements is scheduled
to commence or the fiscal year after which construction actually commences.
      7.   The department responsible for public facilities maintenance
district(s) and the Planning Department shall, prior to submittal of the final
map and subdivision agreement to the City Council for approval, jointly
recommend to the City Manager the terms and timing of any initial reimbursement
for assessment due to the subdivider because of one (1) year maintenance of
landscaping only (not including local street maintenance, wall maintenance, or
electrical maintenance and operation costs).
      8.   Upon acceptance of such agreement by the subdivider, the final map
and subdivision agreement may be accepted and recorded.
   C.   Yearly Levy Of Assessments:
      1.   On or before August 15 of each calendar year unless otherwise
provided by law, the City Clerk shall prepare for the City Council, and the
Council shall pass, a resolution of intention to levy assessments for all
subdivisions for which engineer's reports have been approved and final maps
recorded.
      2.   The City Engineer shall prepare a district boundary map(s) for
inclusion with the resolution.
      3.   The City Clerk shall file the revised boundary map(s) and Council
resolution of intention with the County.
   D.   Acceptance Of Improvements:
      1.   The department responsible for public facilities maintenance
districts shall conduct an initial inspection of landscaping upon installation.
      2.   One (1) year after landscaping is installed, inspected, and accepted
by the City, the department responsible for public facilities maintenance
districts shall reinspect before accepting the improvements for maintenance.
(Ord. 2012-01, 4-17-2012)
CHAPTER 11
PUBLIC PARKS AND RECREATIONAL AREAS
SECTION:
7-11-1: Title
7-11-2: Purpose
7-11-3: Definitions
7-11-4: Compliance With Rules
7-11-5: Hours Of Operation
7-11-6: Closure For Emergency
7-11-7: Regulations For Parks And Recreational Areas
7-11-8: Sports Leagues
7-11-9: Consumption Of Alcoholic Beverages
7-11-10: Penalties
7-11-1: TITLE:
The title of this chapter shall be PUBLIC PARKS AND RECREATIONAL AREAS. (Ord.
2008-09, 11-4-2008)
7-11-2: PURPOSE:
Regulating the use of city parks and city recreational areas is necessary to
promote the safety, comfort and convenience of the public's use and enjoyment
of any park or recreational area and the use and enjoyment of any building,
structure, equipment or apparatus thereon. (Ord. 2008-09, 11-4-2008)
7-11-3: DEFINITIONS:
As used in this chapter, the following words and terms shall have the meanings
ascribed to them in this section:
ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGE: Alcohol, spirits, liquor, wine, beer and any liquid or
solid containing alcohol, spirits, wine or beer, and which contains one-half of
one percent (0.5%) or more of alcohol by volume and which is fit for beverage
purposes either alone, when diluted, mixed or combined with other substances.
AMPLIFIED SOUND: Music, speech or sound projected and transmitted by electronic
equipment including amplifiers.
DIRECTOR: The director of parks and recreation services of the city or his/her
designated representative.
INFLATABLE STRUCTURE: Any structure filled with air or water, which is used to
bounce and jump upon for recreational purposes, such as "bounce houses".
PARK: Any public area owned or controlled by the city, and used for
recreational purposes.
POLICE CHIEF: The chief of police of the city or his/her designated
representative.
RECREATIONAL AREA: A playground, swimming pool, recreation center, golf course,
or any other area in the city, owned or used by the city and devoted to active
or passive recreation. (Ord. 2008-09, 11-4-2008)
7-11-4: COMPLIANCE WITH RULES:
It shall be the duty of every person to see that the provisions of this chapter
are observed and to call to the attention of the director, all foremen and
employees in public parks, any police officer or other employee of the city,
any violation thereof. (Ord. 2008-09, 11-4-2008)
7-11-5: HOURS OF OPERATION:
All parks and recreational areas under the jurisdiction of the city, either by
ownership or lease-contract for use, with the exception of the Lemoore golf
course and the Lemoore High School swimming pool, shall be open to the public
every day of the year between the hours of sunrise and ten (10:00) P.M.
   A.   From ten (10:00) P.M. to sunrise all restrooms or other facilities
within the park shall be closed and locked.
   B.   This section shall not apply to organizations or groups which first
obtain a permit from the director for night use of a city park or city
recreational facility. (Ord. 2008-09, 11-4-2008; amd. Ord. 2024-09, 11-5-2024)
7-11-6: CLOSURE FOR EMERGENCY:
   A.   In any emergency or when the director shall determine that the public
interest, public health, public morals, or public safety demands such actions,
any park or recreational area or portion thereof may be declared closed to the
public by the director at any time and for any interval of time, either
temporarily or at regular and stated intervals, daily or otherwise, and either
entirely or merely to certain uses, as the director finds reasonably necessary.
   B.   No person shall enter an area posted as "Closed To The Public" nor
shall any person use or abet the use of any area in violation of posted
notices. (Ord. 2008-09, 11-4-2008)
7-11-7: REGULATIONS FOR PARKS AND RECREATIONAL AREAS:
   A.   No person in a park or recreational area shall:
      1.   Take into, exhibit, or use any air gun, slingshot, firecracker,
torpedo, rocket, or other fireworks or other articles of like character;
however, air guns may be taken into, exhibited, and used in a recreational area
should that area contain an air gun range. (Ord. 2013-01, 2-19-2013)
      2.   Play or practice golf or archery or fly motor driven model aircraft
except in areas specifically designated and posted for such a purpose.
      3.   Play or bet at or against any game which is played, conducted, dealt
or carried on for money, chips, shell, credit, or any other representative of
monetary value.
      4.   In or within fifty feet (50') of any covered area or playground
area, possess or smoke a lighted or burning tobacco or tobacco related product,
or any other lighted weed or plant, including, but not limited to, cigars,
cigarettes and pipes; or dispose of any lighted or unlighted tobacco or tobacco
related product in any place other than a designated waste disposal container.
      5.   Engage in any disorderly conduct or behavior in breach of the public
peace.
      6.   Ride any horse or other animal or propel any vehicle, cycle, or
automobile elsewhere than on the roads or drives provided and marked for such
purpose.
      7.   Go upon any planter area, lawn or grass plot where prohibited by the
director and which prohibition is indicated by sign, or in the absence of such
sign, where it is clear that going upon the planter area, lawn or grass plot
will damage such area.
      8.   Operate generators and small engine motors in any public park or
recreation area. This provision shall not apply to city personnel acting in
their official capacity.
      9.   Operate motorized watercraft within the boundaries of any city park
during flooding conditions.
      10.   Operate, clean, repair, or bring to the park a grill, smoker,
cooker, or deep fryer which is large enough to require a trailer mount.
      11.   Swim, bathe, wade in, fish, or pollute the water of any fountain,
pond, lake, or stream, unless posted otherwise.
      12.   Bring into any park or recreation area any food or beverage
container made of glass; nor cause any object made of glass to be broken in any
such area.
      13.   Five (5) hour parking limit during park hours. No parking of any
vehicle while the park is closed between the hours of ten (10:00) P.M. and
Sunrise.
   B.   The following acts are prohibited without prior written permission from
the director:
      1.   Claim exclusive use of, prevent the use by others of, nor reserve
for use any park area.
      2.   Violate the regulation that use of the individual barbecue areas
together with tables and benches follows generally the rule of "first come,
first served".
      3.   Sell any tickets for a performance or activity or seek contributions
for a performance or activity, whether conducted in the park or elsewhere.
      4.   Distribute any handbills or circulars or post, place, or erect any
bills, notices, papers, or advertising devices or matter of any kind.
      5.   Sell, or offer for sale, any merchandise or thing whatsoever.
      6.   Practice, carry on, conduct, or solicit for any trade, occupation,
business, or profession.
      7.   Conduct commercial activities in any park or recreation area.
      8.   Install, or use a sound amplification system in any park or
recreation area, or otherwise violate the provisions of title 9, chapter 17 of
this code.
      9.   Operate a water slide within any park or recreation area.
      10.   Operate air filled or water filled inflatable structures.
         a.   When approved of use by the director, permittees are prohibited
from using motor vehicles to transport or assist in transporting the inflatable
structure onto the park area.
         b.   Reservation and notification is necessary to ensure adequate time
for city staff to unlock and make available park power outlets for use in
operating the inflatable structure(s). (Ord. 2008-09, 11-4-2008; amd. Ord.
2024-09, 11-5-2024)
7-11-8: SPORTS LEAGUES:
The director, with the approval of the city manager, shall have authority to
promote the use of city owned parks and recreation areas for the benefit of the
people of the city by organizing, carrying on, conducting and maintaining
regularly scheduled and planned athletic contests and games under the
supervision of such director, under rules and regulations to be adopted by such
director, which, among others, shall include the following:
   A.   Organized and sponsored athletic teams may be assigned exclusive use of
parks and recreational areas for the carrying on and conducting of athletic
contests and exhibitions, at which the public shall be admitted without charge,
except that voluntary contributions may be collected under the direct
supervision of the director of such contests.
   B.   All of such regularly scheduled athletic contests, games or events
shall be carried on and conducted under the supervision and control of the
director.
   C.   The director may, if it is deemed advisable, require each competing
team or contestant to pay an entry fee either for a single contest or for a
series of contests in league activity. Competing teams shall not receive any
traveling expenses or other direct payment from the city for their
participation in any contest.
   D.   Concession sales may be allowed with the prior written permission of
the director. (Ord. 2008-09, 11-4-2008)
7-11-9: CONSUMPTION OF ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES:
No person shall bring into any park or recreation area, or possess or consume
in any park or recreation area, any alcoholic beverage, without a valid alcohol
use permit, obtained pursuant to title 5, chapter 2 of this code. (Ord. 2008-
09, 11-4-2008)
7-11-10: PENALTIES:
   A.   Any person who violates any of the provisions in this chapter shall be
guilty of a misdemeanor.
   B.   Notwithstanding the classification of a violation of this chapter as a
misdemeanor, at the time an action is commenced to enforce the provisions of
this chapter, the trial court, upon recommendation of the prosecuting attorney,
may reduce the charge of the offense from a misdemeanor to an infraction
pursuant to section 19.6 of the California Penal Code. (Ord. 2008-09, 11-4-
2008)
CHAPTER 12
ENCROACHMENTS
ARTICLE A. PURPOSE, APPLICABILITY, AND DEFINITIONS
SECTION:
7-12A-1: General Purpose
7-12A-2: Applicability
7-12A-3: Definitions
7-12A-1: GENERAL PURPOSE:
This chapter establishes regulations for and the process to allow encroachments
on public property, including within the public right of way. The purpose of
these regulations and permit processes is to establish standards for the
protection of the public health, safety, and general welfare, including traffic
and pedestrian safeguards. (Ord. 2012-01, 4-17-2012)
7-12A-2: APPLICABILITY:
It shall be unlawful for any person to place, erect, or maintain, or to permit
the placement, erection, maintenance, or existence of any encroachment upon,
over, or under any public property without prior approval from the city. The
city provides for two (2) types of encroachments into the public right of way
as described below and provided in articles B and C of this chapter:
   A.   Encroachment permits: Short term encroachments, such as construction
fencing, concrete, utility installation and replacement, awnings, and
semipermanent fencing; and
   B.   Encroachment agreements: Long term and permanent encroachments, such as
outdoor seating along public sidewalks, planters, decks, columns, balconies,
fencing, and other structures, primarily in the downtown. (Ord. 2012-01, 4-17-
2012)
7-12A-3: DEFINITIONS:
For the purposes of this chapter, the following terms, phrases, and words shall
have the following definitions:
CITY MANAGER: The city manager of the city, or his or her designee.
ENCROACHMENT: Going upon, over, or under public property, or placing any
facility upon, along, across, over, or under public property, or using any
public property in such a manner as to prevent, obstruct, or interfere with the
use of that public property. Encroachments include, but are not limited to,
buildings, fences, signs, trees, plants, and underground facilities, or any
excavations on public right of way.
FACILITY: Any pipe, pipeline, tube, hose, main, service, trap, vent, manhole,
meter, gauge, regulator, valve, conduit, wire, tower, pole, pole line, anchor,
cable, junction box, transformer, or any other material, structure, public
improvement, or object of any kind or character, including a building, portion
of a building, or any other structure, whether enumerated herein or not, which
is or may be lawfully constructed, used, operated, left, placed, or maintained
in, upon, along, across, under, or over any public right of way.
IMPROVEMENT STANDARDS: The city adopted standard specifications for public
works improvements as adopted by the city council and as may be amended from
time to time.
PUBLIC PROPERTY: Public street, roadway, place, alley, sidewalk, parkway,
square, plaza, right of way, or any other similar public property dedicated to
public use.
PUBLIC WORKS DIRECTOR: The public works director of the city, or his or her
designee.
UTILITY: Any private company and/or corporation operating under regulation of
the public utilities commission, or municipal/county department or other
governmental agency engaged in providing a particular service to the general
public. (Ord. 2012-01, 4-17-2012)
ARTICLE B. ENCROACHMENT PERMIT (SHORT TERM ENCROACHMENTS)
SECTION:
7-12B-1: Purpose
7-12B-2: Encroachment Permit Required When
7-12B-3: Blanket Permits For Utility Work
7-12B-4: Application Contents And Processing
7-12B-5: Liability And Performance Surety
7-12B-6: Operation Standards For Encroachments
7-12B-7: Action After Permit Expiration
7-12B-8: Revocation
7-12B-9: Appeal
7-12B-10: Enforcement
7-12B-1: PURPOSE:
The purpose of this article is to establish the standards for and the process
for reviewing and deciding encroachment permits for short term encroachments
within and on public property. (Ord. 2012-01, 4-17-2012)
7-12B-2: ENCROACHMENT PERMIT REQUIRED WHEN:
An encroachment permit shall be required prior to the start of any work by any
utility, agency, or private party, other than the city, on public property
within the public right of way including, but not limited to, the following:
   A.   Trenching across public right of way for installation of water, sewer,
storm drain, cable, and other underground utilities;
   B.   Construction of curb, gutter, sidewalk, driveway, and roadway pavement;
   C.   Traffic and pedestrian control measures related to construction within
or adjacent to the public right of way;
   D.   The use and crossing of existing public sidewalks by construction
equipment (e.g., front loaders, bobcats, forklifts) during the construction of
a new building, for additions to existing buildings, or landscaping or grading;
and
   E.   Awnings over sidewalks in downtown or semipermanent fencing in
residential areas. (Ord. 2012-01, 4-17-2012)
7-12B-3: BLANKET PERMITS FOR UTILITY WORK:
The designated approving authority for encroachment permits may issue a blanket
encroachment permit for utilities to conduct work, including ongoing or
emergency repairs or replacement of equipment, on or within public property.
Such blanket permits shall only be issued on a yearly basis and shall only
authorize excavation or work on existing facilities. Blanket permits shall not
be issued for installation of new facilities. (Ord. 2012-01, 4-17-2012)
7-12B-4: APPLICATION CONTENTS AND PROCESSING:
   A.   Application Contents: Application for an encroachment permit shall be
made to the department of public works and shall include all of the following:
      1.   An application form, as provided by the department of public works.
      2.   Plans or sketches necessary to describe the encroachment.
      3.   If required prior to the permit being issued, agreement by the
applicant that insurance, indemnification, and performance security
requirements must be satisfied prior to a permit being issued.
      4.   Payment of a permit fee as established by resolution of the city
council.
   B.   Approving Authority, Permit Issuance, And Expiration: The designated
approving authority for encroachment permits shall be the public works
director. The approving authority may impose conditions on the permit in order
to ensure the safety of the public and to protect and preserve the public
property.
The permit, if issued, will be prepared and issued when fees have been paid,
insurance documents and performance security have been reviewed and accepted,
and the applicant has signed the permit. Each permit shall identify an
expiration date by which all work shall be completed and the encroachment shall
be vacated. The approving authority may grant extensions of time, provided
satisfactory reasons for issuance of an extension are presented by the
applicant as determined by the approving authority. (Ord. 2012-01, 4-17-2012)
7-12B-5: LIABILITY AND PERFORMANCE SURETY:
   A.   Liability:
      1.   The applicant for an encroachment permit shall defend, indemnify,
and hold harmless the city, its council members and other elected and appointed
officials, officers, agents, employees, and representatives from liability for
any award, damages, costs, and fees incurred by the city and/or awarded to any
plaintiff in an action arising out of or in connection with the applicant's
work to be performed under the encroachment permit. Applicant shall provide a
defense for the city in any such action.
      2.   The above requirement shall be included on the application form for
the encroachment permit and the applicant shall acknowledge this requirement
prior to approval of the encroachment permit by the designated approving
authority.
   B.   Insurance Requirement: The approving authority may require the
applicant to obtain, prior to issuance of the encroachment permit, and maintain
for the duration of the permit, liability insurance coverage. The insurance
shall meet the following minimum requirements; however, the city manager may
reduce or waive these requirements if, in his or her opinion after consultation
with the city's risk management agent, a lesser degree of insurance would still
provide adequate protection to the city given the nature of the project:
      1.   The insurance shall be commercial liability coverage at least as
broad as CG 00 01 or its equivalent;
      2.   Coverage is provided by a commercial carrier with no less than an
A.M. Bests' rating of A:VII;
      3.   Any self-insured retention or deductible amount shall be disclosed
and approved by the city prior to the issuance of the encroachment permit;
      4.   Liability limits of no less than one million dollars ($1,000,000.00)
per occurrence and a two million dollar ($2,000,000.00) aggregate; and
      5.   With an endorsement naming the city of Lemoore as an additional
insured.
   C.   Performance Surety: The applicant shall provide performance surety for
the work covered under the encroachment permit in a form acceptable to the
public works director, including, but not limited to, cash, a bond, letter of
credit, or other acceptable mechanism. The amount of the surety shall be as
established in the improvement standards so as to reimburse the city for the
costs of restoring the public property to either its original condition or to
complete the work in the event the applicant fails to do so. (Ord. 2012-01, 4-
17-2012)
7-12B-6: OPERATION STANDARDS FOR ENCROACHMENTS:
   A.   Traffic Routing And Protection:
      1.   It shall be the applicant's responsibility to place and maintain
barriers and warning devices necessary for safety of the general public.
      2.   Barriers, signs, lights, and other warning and safety devices shall
comply with the requirements of the "Manual Of Warning Signs, Lights, And
Devices For Use In Performance Of Work Upon Highways", issued by the state of
California, department of transportation, and any additional requirements as
specified by the approving authority.
      3.   The applicant shall take appropriate measures to ensure that during
the performance of construction work on streets, traffic conditions are as near
normal as practicable at all times so as to minimize inconvenience to the
occupants of the adjoining property and to the general public. The applicant
shall conform to the requirements of the improvement standards, as applicable.
The applicant shall provide a traffic control plan to be approved by the public
works director when requested by the approving authority.
      4.   When traffic conditions permit, or the extent of the work requires,
the approving authority may, by written approval, permit the closing of streets
and alleys to all traffic for a period of time as prescribed by the approving
authority. The approval may require that the applicant provide approved detours
and give notification to various public agencies and to the general public. In
such cases, the approval shall not be valid until notice is given. Prior to
issuance of the written approval, the applicant shall prepare a traffic detour
plan for review and approval by the approving authority.
   B.   Structural Clearance: The encroachment shall be performed and conducted
so as to not unreasonably interfere with access to fire hydrants, fire
stations, fire escapes, water valves, sewer manholes, underground vaults, valve
housing structures, and all other vital equipment designated by the approving
authority.
   C.   Protection And Relocation Of Existing Utilities:
      1.   The applicant shall inform themselves as to the existence and
location of all utility facilities likely to be encountered by their
operations. Applicants shall contact an underground service alert service and
provide the ticket number for the project and contact phone number for the
service on all project plans.
      2.   The emergency contact names and phone numbers for all utility
providers in the area of the work to be performed under the permit shall be
printed on all plans.
      3.   All utility facilities affected by any excavation or other
construction work shall be supported and protected by the applicant with
methods approved by the utility facility owner. Should an existing facility be
damaged by the applicant's operations, and for this purpose pipe coating or
other encasement or devices are to be considered as part of a facility, the
applicant shall promptly notify the owner of the damaged facility. All
facilities damaged by the applicant's operations shall be repaired as directed
by the owner and the expense of such repairs shall be charged to the applicant.
      4.   Unless the law otherwise provides, relocation of an existing utility
facility shall be performed in accordance with a plan approved by the utility
owner. No facility owned by the city shall be moved to accommodate the
applicant's project unless the cost of such work is borne by the applicant and
the work is approved by the city.
   D.   Abandonment Of Existing Facilities:
      1.   Whenever a facility is abandoned, except the abandonment of service
lines designed to serve single properties, the person owning, using,
controlling, or having an interest therein shall file with the approving
authority a drawing or written statement indicating, in detail, the location of
the facility to be abandoned. At the time of such abandonment, the approving
authority may determine what portion, if any, of the abandoned facility shall
be removed or otherwise treated.
      2.   Whenever a driveway approach is abandoned, or can no longer be
justified by the use made of the abutting property, the approving authority may
require removal of any associated driveway, apron, or curb depression, and
restoration of any existing curb, gutter, or sidewalk across the driveway
width.
   E.   Site Cleanup: The applicant shall regularly clean the work area of
earth, rock, rubbish, and other debris. All cleanup operations shall occur at
the expense of the applicant and meet national pollutant discharge elimination
system (NPDES) standards and be to the satisfaction of the approving authority.
   F.   Protection Of Watercourses: The applicant shall provide and maintain
adequate waterways for all surplus water, including stormwater, runoff pumped
from excavations, flushings, or other water resulting from the applicant's
operations. All water leaving the site shall conform to the national pollutant
discharge elimination system (NPDES) and local, state, and federal laws and
regulations regarding pollution prevention.
   G.   Preservation Of Monuments: No monument set for the purpose of locating
or preserving the lines of any street, property, or subdivision, including
precise survey reference points or permanent survey bench marks within the
city, shall be removed or disturbed by any person who has not first obtained
written permission from the approving authority. Permission to remove, disturb,
or replace monuments shall only be granted upon the condition that the removal,
disturbance, or replacement of any monument be done under the supervision of a
registered civil engineer or licensed land surveyor. Any expenses incurred by
the city for the proper replacement of monuments shall be paid by the
applicant. (Ord. 2012-01, 4-17-2012)
7-12B-7: ACTION AFTER PERMIT EXPIRATION:
It is unlawful for a person to place, erect, or maintain, or to permit the
placement, erection, maintenance, or existence of any encroachment after the
encroachment permit has expired or after the encroachment permit has been
revoked. (Ord. 2012-01, 4-17-2012)
7-12B-8: REVOCATION:
The designated approving authority is authorized to cancel any permit for good
and sufficient cause, including violation of any provision of this code, the
improvement standards, or noncompliance with any condition of approval for the
encroachment permit. (Ord. 2012-01, 4-17-2012)
7-12B-9: APPEAL:
In the event the application for the permit is denied in whole or in part, or
the conditions imposed by the approving authority are unacceptable to the
applicant, the applicant may appeal the decision to the city council within ten
(10) days of receiving notice of the decision.
Appeals shall be in writing, shall state the specific reasons and grounds
asserted for relief, and shall be filed with the city clerk within ten (10)
calendar days after the date of the action being appealed. If an appeal is not
filed within the time or in the manner prescribed above, the right to review of
the action against which the complaint is made shall be deemed to have been
waived. (Ord. 2012-01, 4-17-2012)
7-12B-10: ENFORCEMENT:
   A.   Inspections: The public works director shall make inspections and shall
establish rules and regulations reasonably necessary to enforce and carry out
the intent of this article.
   B.   Enforcement: This article shall be enforced pursuant to the provisions
of title 1, chapter 4, "Penalty Provisions", of this code. (Ord. 2012-01, 4-17-
2012)
ARTICLE C. ENCROACHMENT AGREEMENT (LONG TERM ENCROACHMENTS)
SECTION:
7-12C-1: Purpose
7-12C-2: Encroachment Agreement Required When
7-12C-3: Application Contents And Processing
7-12C-4: Liability And Performance Deposits
7-12C-5: Standards For Encroachments
7-12C-6: Execution Of Agreement
7-12C-7: Cancellation Of Agreement
7-12C-1: PURPOSE:
The purpose of this article is to establish the process for application,
review, and approval of long term encroachments on public property through the
execution of encroachment agreements. (Ord. 2012-01, 4-17-2012)
7-12C-2: ENCROACHMENT AGREEMENT REQUIRED WHEN:
An encroachment agreement shall be required prior to the start of any work or
placement of any long term private improvements (other than utilities) on
public property including, but not limited to, the following:
   A.   Permanent cafe or restaurant seating and planters along a public
sidewalk within the downtown;
   B.   Balconies, arcades, galleries, and other portions of buildings within
public sidewalks within the downtown; and
   C.   Other cases of structures encroaching into the public right of way.
(Ord. 2012-01, 4-17-2012)
7-12C-3: APPLICATION CONTENTS AND PROCESSING:
   A.   Application Contents: Application for an encroachment agreement shall
be made to the department of public works and shall include all of the
following:
      1.   An application form, as provided by the department of public works.
      2.   Plans or sketches necessary to describe the encroachment.
      3.   A copy of the approved planning permit authorizing the encroachment,
if any.
      4.   A copy of the approved building permit authorizing construction of
the encroachment, if any.
      5.   Acknowledgment by the applicant that insurance, indemnification, and
performance security requirements must be satisfied prior to an agreement being
issued.
      6.   Payment of an agreement fee as established by resolution of the city
council.
   B.   Approving Processing: The designated approving authority for
encroachment agreements shall be the public works director. The approving
authority shall execute encroachment agreements after review and recommendation
by the planning director for conformance with title 9, "Zoning", of this code
and any applicable planning permits, and the building official for conformance
with the city adopted building code. (Ord. 2012-01, 4-17-2012)
7-12C-4: LIABILITY AND PERFORMANCE DEPOSITS:
   A.   Liability:
      1.   The applicant for an encroachment agreement shall indemnify and
defend and hold harmless the city, its council members and other elected and
appointed officials, officers, agents, employees, and representatives from
liability for any award, damages, costs, and fees incurred by the city and/or
awarded to any plaintiff in an action arising out of or in connection with the
applicant's work to be performed under the encroachment agreement. Applicant
shall provide a defense for the city in any such action.
      2.   The above requirement shall be included within the text of the
encroachment agreement.
   B.   Insurance Requirement: As a requirement to execution of an encroachment
agreement, the city may require the applicant to hold liability insurance for
the duration of the agreement. The insurance shall meet the following minimum
requirements; however, the city manager may reduce or waive these requirements
if, in his or her opinion after consultation with the city's risk management
agent, a lesser degree of insurance would still provide adequate protection to
the city given the nature of the project:
      1.   The insurance shall be commercial liability coverage at least as
broad as CG 00 01 or its equivalent;
      2.   Coverage is provided by a commercial carrier with no less than an
A.M. Bests' rating of A:VII;
      3.   Any self-insured retention or deductible amount shall be disclosed
and approved by the city prior to the issuance of the encroachment agreement;
      4.   Liability limits of no less than one million dollars ($1,000,000.00)
per occurrence and a two million dollar ($2,000,000.00) aggregate; and
      5.   With an endorsement naming the city of Lemoore as an additional
insured. (Ord. 2012-01, 4-17-2012)
7-12C-5: STANDARDS FOR ENCROACHMENTS:
Encroachments under encroachment agreements shall conform to all applicable
development standards of title 9, "Zoning", of this code, the city adopted
building code, and any applicable planning permits. (Ord. 2012-01, 4-17-2012)
7-12C-6: EXECUTION OF AGREEMENT:
   A.   Form Of Encroachment Agreement: Encroachment agreements shall be in a
form satisfactory to the city attorney.
   B.   Execution Of Encroachment Agreement: Encroachment agreements shall be
executed by the city manager or designee.
   C.   Record Of Encroachment Agreement: Encroachment agreements shall be kept
on record in the office of the city clerk.
   D.   Issuance Of Subsequent Permits: No subsequent permit, including, but
not limited to, building permits, shall be issued until execution of the
encroachment agreement. (Ord. 2012-01, 4-17-2012)
7-12C-7: CANCELLATION OF AGREEMENT:
The city may cancel any encroachment agreement for good and sufficient cause,
including violation of any provision of this code, the improvement standards,
planning permit, building permit, or noncompliance with any condition of
approval for the encroachment agreement. (Ord. 2012-01, 4-17-2012)
CHAPTER 13
SIDEWALK AREA MAINTENANCE AND REPAIR
SECTION:
7-13-1: Purpose And Applicability
7-13-2: Definitions
7-13-3: Owner's Duty To Maintain And Repair Sidewalk Areas
7-13-4: Liability For Injuries To Public
7-13-5: Notice To Repair
7-13-6: Failure To Make Required Repairs
7-13-7: Exception For City Installed And Maintained Trees
7-13-1: PURPOSE AND APPLICABILITY:
It is the purpose of this chapter to provide sidewalk area maintenance and
repair procedures which are alternative and supplementary to the procedures set
forth in Streets and Highways Code, division 7, part 3, chapter 22, commencing
at section 5600, as those sections now exist or may hereafter be amended or
renumbered. The City, in each instance, may follow the procedures set forth in
the Streets and Highways Code or those set forth in this chapter, or some
combination thereof. In the event of any conflict between the provisions of the
Streets and Highways Code and this chapter, the provisions of this chapter
shall control. (Ord. 2018-05, 7-17-2018)
7-13-2: DEFINITIONS:
For purposes of this chapter, the following definitions apply:
DEFECTIVE SIDEWALK: Means a sidewalk area where, in the judgment of the
Director, the vertical or horizontal line or grade is altered or displaced to
the extent that a safety hazard exists, or the sidewalk area is in such a
condition as to endanger property or persons using the sidewalk area in a
reasonable manner, or is in such a condition as to interfere with the public
convenience in the use thereof.
DIRECTOR: Means the Public Works Director, or his/her designee; "Director"
shall have the same meaning as the terms "Superintendent of Streets" and "City
Engineer" as those terms are utilized in the Streets and Highways Code section
5600 et seq.
LOT, LOTS OR PORTIONS OF A LOT: Means a parcel of real property located within
the City adjacent to or fronting on any portion of a sidewalk area, and when
used in connection with the phrase, "adjacent to or fronting on the defective
sidewalk", or variation thereof, shall refer to the property in front of or
along the side of the defective sidewalk.
MAINTAIN AND REPAIR: Shall mean maintenance so that the sidewalk area remains
in a condition that is not dangerous to property or persons using the sidewalk
area in a reasonable manner and in a condition that will not interfere with the
public convenience in use of the sidewalk area, and shall include, but not be
limited to: maintenance and repair of sidewalks including grinding, removal and
replacement of sidewalks; maintenance and repair of curbs and gutters; removal
and filling or replacement of parking strips; removal of weeds and/or debris;
supervision and maintenance of permissible signs and removal of impermissible
signs; tree root pruning and installing root barriers; trimming of trees,
shrubs and/or ground cover including areas within park strips and between the
property line of the adjacent property and the street pavement line.
OWNER: Means any person owning a lot, lots, or portions of a lot within the
City, adjacent to or fronting on any portion of a sidewalk area.
PERSON: Shall include a natural person, joint venture, joint stock company,
partnership, association, club, company, corporation, business, trust,
organization, or the manager, lessee, agent, servant, officer or employee of
any of them.
SIDEWALK AREA: Means that portion of a street between the street pavement line
and the adjacent property line, including curbs and gutters, sidewalks, a park
or parking strip, bulkheads, retaining walls, or other works for the protection
of any sidewalk area. (Ord. 2018-05, 7-17-2018)
7-13-3: OWNER'S DUTY TO MAINTAIN AND REPAIR SIDEWALK AREAS:
The owner of a lot, lots or portions of a lot adjacent to or fronting on any
portion of a sidewalk area shall maintain the sidewalk area in a safe and non-
dangerous condition, and shall repair such sidewalk area and pay the costs and
expenses therefor, including, but not limited to, charges for the City's costs
of inspection and administration whenever the City undertakes sidewalk
maintenance and repair pursuant to sections
7-13-5 and
7-13-6 of this chapter, and including the costs of collection and placing any
assessment lien on the property due to failure of the owner to promptly pay
such costs. The procedures set forth in Streets and Highways Code sections 5600
et seq., shall apply to the imposition and collection of costs and assessments.
(Ord. 2018-05, 7-17-2018)
7-13-4: LIABILITY FOR INJURIES TO PUBLIC:
The owner required by section
7-13-3 of this chapter to maintain and repair the sidewalk area shall owe a
duty to members of the public to keep and maintain the sidewalk area in a safe
and non- dangerous condition. If, as a result of the failure of any property
owner to maintain the sidewalk area in a safe and non- dangerous condition as
required by section
7-13-3 of this chapter, any person suffers injury to or damage to person or
property, the owner shall be liable to such person for the resulting damage or
injury. (Ord. 2018-05, 7-17-2018)
7-13-5: NOTICE TO REPAIR:
Where the Director has actual notice of the existence of a defective sidewalk,
the Director may give written notice to repair the defective sidewalk to the
owner of the lot, lots or portions thereof adjacent to or fronting on the
defective sidewalk. Service of the notice to repair shall be by either regular
U.S. mail or by personal service. The notice to repair shall particularly
specify what work is required to be done and how the same is to be done and
what materials shall be used in the repair; that if the owner proceeds to
undertake the repair by private contract, his/her activities will be governed
by the provisions of this chapter; the time period within which the repair must
be commenced by the owner; and that if the repair is not commenced within such
time period and prosecuted diligently without interruption to completion, the
Director may proceed with the repair, and the cost shall be a lien on the
property upon the owner's failure to timely reimburse the City for such cost
pursuant to section
7-13-6 of this chapter. The materials and construction work shall be in strict
conformance with the applicable portions of the City's standard specifications
as they now exist, or as they may hereafter be amended.
For the purposes of this section, the owner is deemed to timely commence the
repair of the defective sidewalk by the filing of an application for an
encroachment permit with the Planning and Development Services Department
within the time period specified in the notice to repair. (Ord. 2018-05, 7-17-
2018)
7-13-6: FAILURE TO MAKE REQUIRED REPAIRS:
If the person(s) provided with a notice to repair fails to commence the repairs
within the time period specified in said notice, or timely commences the repair
but fails to diligently prosecute the same without interruption to completion,
the Director may thereafter cause the City to make the required repairs and
bill the person(s) for the cost thereof. If such person(s) fails to pay the
cost within the time period specified in the payment invoice, the unpaid sum
shall be a lien on the lot, lots or portions thereof adjacent to or fronting on
the defective sidewalk. (Ord. 2018-05, 7-17-2018)
7-13-7: EXCEPTION FOR CITY INSTALLED AND MAINTAINED TREES:
Notwithstanding the provisions of sections
7-13-3 and
7-13-4 of this chapter, the owner of a lot, lots or portions of a lot adjacent
to or fronting on any portion of a sidewalk area shall not be required to
repair any defective sidewalk if its condition was caused by a City planted and
maintained tree in any street, right-of-way, park or other public place. (Ord.
2018-05, 7-17-2018)
CHAPTER 14
COST SHARING SIDEWALK REPAIR PROGRAM
SECTION:
7-14-1: Purpose
7-14-2: Definitions
7-14-3: Eligibility
7-14-4: Reimbursement
7-14-1: PURPOSE:
In order to incentivize and assist the community in repairing and maintaining
sidewalks for the overall benefit of the public, the cost sharing sidewalk
repair program is hereby adopted to outline a process for reimbursing funds to
the property owner for the cost of repairing sidewalks adjacent to their
property. (Ord. 2018-05, 7-17-2018)
7-14-2: DEFINITIONS:
For the purposes of this chapter, unless otherwise apparent from the contact,
certain words and phrases used in this chapter are defined as follows:
CURB: Shall mean a stone or concrete edging to a street, sidewalk, or path.
DRIVE APPROACH: Shall mean a drive way or the area between the street and a
defined area of private property intended for the ingress and egress of
vehicles.
ELIGIBLE AREA: Shall mean a sidewalk, curb, gutter or drive approach located
within City limits.
GUTTER: Shall mean a groove or channel for flowing liquid, adjacent to the
street, sidewalk, path, or curb.
SIDEWALK: Shall mean a paved, surfaced or leveled area, usually separated from
the street, used as a pedestrian walkway. (Ord. 2018-05, 7-17-2018)
7-14-3: ELIGIBILITY:
In order to be eligible for the program, applicants must adhere to all the
following conditions:
   A.   The proposed work or construction must be to an eligible area only.
   B.   An application must be submitted and approved prior to work and/or
construction on the eligible area. If a person has multiple properties, an
individual application must be received for each property.
   C.   A licensed concrete contractor is required for any and all curb, gutter
or drive approach work.
   D.   After approval of an application has been granted and the work on the
eligible area completed, receipts/invoices for the work must be received within
sixty (60) days of approval.
   E.   All proper permits must be on file with the City of Lemoore Public
Works.
   F.   A City inspection must be completed prior to reimbursement being issued
to ensure the new sidewalk meets all City standards and regulations. (Ord.
2018-05, 7-17-2018)
7-14-4: REIMBURSEMENT:
The City of Lemoore will share the cost of repairing sidewalks adjacent to the
applicant's property in the form of a reimbursement after the work is complete.
Program funds will be limited to the current year's budget, and will be issued
on a first-come first-serve basis. The reimbursable amount will be as follows:
   A.   The maximum total amount to be reimbursed per application will be two
thousand five hundred dollars ($2,500.00) in one or more of the following
reimbursement categories:
      1.   For repairs being completed by the property owner, the applicant may
be reimbursed a flat amount of ten dollars ($10.00) per square foot. Receipts
for materials must be submitted.
      2.   For repairs being completed by a hired licensed concrete contractor
or hired handyman, the applicant may be reimbursed fifty percent (50%) of the
invoice. Invoice must include square footage of repaired section.
      3.   The cost of permits or inspections may be submitted for fifty
percent (50%) reimbursement.
      4.   If in the event that a tree must be removed and replaced to repair
the sidewalk, the cost of removal and replacement may be submitted for fifty
percent (50%) reimbursement if all the following conditions are met:
         a.   A permit to remove the tree is on file. This permit is issued at
no cost.
         b.   The replacement tree is on the City approved tree list. (Ord.
2018-05, 7-17-2018)
TITLE 8
BUILDING AND DEVELOPMENT REGULATIONS
CHAPTER 1
BUILDING CODES
ARTICLE A. BUILDING CODE
SECTION:
8-1A-1: California Building Code Adopted
8-1A-2: Amendments To Code
8-1A-3: Violation And Penalties
8-1A-1: CALIFORNIA BUILDING CODE ADOPTED:
This article shall be known as "an ordinance of the city of Lemoore adopting by
reference the California code of regulations title 24, 2022 edition, and the
2022 California building code part 2 (volumes 1 and 2), including appendices A,
F, G, H, I, J, and K referencing the 2015 international building code", one
copy of which is on file at the office of the building department, and which
may be hereinafter referred to as such or as "said code" or "code".
All of the provisions and sections of said 2022 California building code, title
24, part 2 (volumes 1 and 2) as compiled by the International Conference Of
Building Officials, with the exception of those provisions in section 8-1A-2 of
this article, are hereby adopted by reference as the building code and
ordinance of the city. (Ord. 2016-14, 12-6-2016)
8-1A-2: AMENDMENTS TO CODE:
   A.   Fees for building permits and inspections are in the city of Lemoore
master user fee schedule as approved by the city council.
   B.   Section 108.4.2 Fees of the California building code shall be amended
to include the following:
      Fees. Investigations Fees. Work Without A Permit.
      Housing Inspections And Letters Of Compliance. Upon request for a housing
inspection, the applicant shall be charged a fee as contained in the master
user fee schedule. Fee to be paid to the development services department to
cover the costs of the housing inspection and letter of compliance.
   C.   Section 202 of the California building code, part 2, vol. 1 "Grade
(Adjacent Ground Elevation)" is hereby amended as follows:
      Grade (Adjacent Ground Elevation). The elevation for the finished ground
or surfacing adjacent to the exterior structural walls shall be at least twelve
inches (12") above the highest elevation of the street curbing which fronts on
or borders the lot or building site. Due to unusual terrain conditions,
deviations from this requirement may be granted by the building official. (At
building site where street curbing has not been installed along the adjoining
street, the city engineer shall determine the future curb elevation as a base
of establishing the grade.)
      1.   All on-site water must surface drain at 1% slope to city right-of-
way.
      2.   All water shall be maintained on-site until it reaches city right-
of-way.
      3.   If surface drainage is blocked by sidewalk or other obstruction,
alternate method of drainage must be approved by the city of Lemoore before
installation.
   D.   Section 1511.3.2 of the California building code, part 2, vol. 1 is
hereby added to read as follows:
      Section 1511.3.2 Roof Sheathing. When finish roof sheathing material is
removed to the existing spaced sheathing, a minimum 3/8 inch (9mm) thick
plywood sheathing shall be installed. The sheathing shall be installed such
that the edges align over rafters and individual spaced sheathing boards. The
sheathing shall be attached to the existing spaced sheathing and rafters with
minimum 8d sinker common nails at 6 inches on center at all supported edges and
8d sinker nails at 12 inches on center at intermediate supports.
   E.   Section 1907.1 exception no. 1 of the California building code, part 2,
vol. 2 is hereby amended to read as follows:
      Exception: A vapor retarder is not required:
      1.   For detached structures accessory to occupancies in group R-3, such
as utility buildings or other unheated facilities.
(Ord. 2016-14, 12-6-2016)
8-1A-3: VIOLATION AND PENALTIES:
Any person who violates any of the provisions of this article shall be guilty
as set forth in section
8-1N-1 of this chapter. (Ord. 2008-02, 2-19-2008)
ARTICLE B. PLUMBING CODE
SECTION:
8-1B-1: California Plumbing Code Adopted
8-1B-2: Amendments To Code
8-1B-3: Violation And Penalties
8-1B-1: CALIFORNIA PLUMBING CODE ADOPTED:
This article shall be known as "an ordinance of the city of Lemoore adopting
the 2022 California plumbing code referencing the 2016 uniform plumbing code",
a copy of which is on file at the office of the development services
department, and which may hereinafter be referred to as such or as "said code"
or "code".
All the provisions and sections of said California plumbing code, 2022, title
24, part 5 as compiled by the International Association Of Plumbing And
Mechanical Officials, with the exception of those provisions in section
8-1B-2 of this article, are hereby adopted by reference as the plumbing code
and ordinance of the city. (Ord. 2016-14, 12-6-2016)
8-1B-2: AMENDMENTS TO CODE:
   A.   Schedule Of Fees: Fees for plumbing permits and inspections are in the
city of Lemoore master user fee schedule.
   B.   Amendments: Section 609.3 of said California plumbing code, 2016
edition, shall be deleted and the following substituted in its place:
"Section 609.3 Ferrous piping including coated galvanized piping shall not be
permitted under a concrete slab resting on the ground."
(Ord. 2016-14, 12-6-2016)
8-1B-3: VIOLATION AND PENALTIES:
Any person who violates any of the provisions of this article shall be guilty
as set forth in section
8-1N-1 of this chapter. (Ord. 2008-02, 2-19-2008)
ARTICLE C. ELECTRICAL CODE
SECTION:
8-1C-1: California Electrical Code Adopted
8-1C-2: Amendments To Code
8-1C-3: Violation And Penalties
8-1C-4: Permit Process For Electric Vehicle Charging Systems
8-1C-1: CALIFORNIA ELECTRICAL CODE ADOPTED:
This article shall be known as "an ordinance of the city of Lemoore adopting
the California electrical code, 2022 edition, referencing the 2014 national
electrical code, published by the National Fire Protection Association", a copy
of which is on file in the office of the development services department and
which may be hereinafter referred to as such or "said code" or "code".
All the provisions and sections of said California electrical code, 2022, title
24, part 3, as compiled by the National Fire Protection Association with the
exception of those provisions in section 8-1C-2 of this article, are hereby
adopted by reference as the electrical code and ordinance of the city. (Ord.
2016-14, 12-6-2016; amd. Ord. 2023-01, 2-21-2023)
8-1C-2: AMENDMENTS TO CODE:
   A.   Schedule Of Fees: Fees for electrical permits and inspections are in
the city of Lemoore master user fee schedule. (Ord. 2016-14, 12-6-2016; amd.
Ord. 2023-01, 2-21-2023)
8-1C-3: VIOLATION AND PENALTIES:
Any person who violates any of the provisions of this article shall be guilty
as set forth in section
8-1N-1 of this chapter. (Ord. 2008-02, 2-19-2008; amd. Ord. 2023-01, 2-21-2023)
8-1C-4: PERMIT PROCESS FOR ELECTRIC VEHICLE CHARGING SYSTEMS:
Consistent with Government Code Section 65850.7, the Building Official shall
implement an expedited, streamlined permitting process for electric vehicle
charging stations, and adopt a checklist of all requirements with which
electric vehicle charging stations shall comply with in order to be eligible
for expedited review. The expedited, streamlined permitting process and
checklist may refer to the recommendations contained in the most current
version of the "Plug-In Electric Vehicle Infrastructure Permitting Checklist"
of the "Zero-Emission Vehicles in California: Community Readiness Guidebook" as
published by the Governor's Office of Planning and Research. The City's/
County's adopted checklist shall be published on the City's/County's website.
   A.   Permit Application Processing:
      1.   Prior to submitting an application for processing, the applicant
shall verify that the installation of an electric vehicle charging station will
not have specific, adverse impact to public health and safety and building
occupants. Verification by the applicant includes but is not limited to:
electrical system capacity and loads; electrical system wiring, bonding and
overcurrent protection; building infrastructure affected by charging station
equipment and associated conduits; areas of charging station equipment and
vehicle parking.
      2.   A permit application that satisfies the information requirements in
the City's/County's adopted checklist shall be deemed complete and be promptly
processed. Upon confirmation by the Building Official that the permit
application and supporting documents meets the requirements of the City/County
adopted checklist and is consistent with all applicable laws and health and
safety standards, the Building Official shall, consistent with Government Code
Section 65850.7, approve the application and issue all necessary permits. Such
approval does not authorize an applicant to energize or utilize the electric
vehicle charging station until approval is granted by the City/County. If the
Building Official determines that the permit application is incomplete, he or
she shall issue a written correction notice to the applicant, detailing all
deficiencies in the application and any additional information required to be
eligible for expedited permit issuance.
      3.   Consistent with Government Code Section 65850.7, the Building
Official shall allow for electronic submittal of permit applications covered by
this section and associated supporting documentation. In accepting such permit
applications, the Building Official shall also accept electronic signatures on
all forms, applications, and other documentation in lieu of a wet signature by
any applicant.
   B.   Technical Review:
      1.   It is the intent of this section to encourage the installation of
electric vehicle charging stations by removing obstacles to permitting for
charging stations so long as the action does not supersede the Building
Official's authority to address higher priority life-safety situations. If the
Building Official makes a finding based on substantial evidence that the
electric vehicle charging station could have a specific adverse impact upon the
public health or safety, as defined in this Chapter, the City/County may
require the applicant to apply for a use permit.
      2.   In the technical review of a charging station, consistent with
Government Code Section 65850.7, the Building Official shall not condition the
approval for any electric vehicle charging station permit on the approval of
such a system by an association, as that term is defined by Civil Code Section
4080.
   C.   Electric Vehicle Charging Station Installation Requirements:
      1.   Electric vehicle charging station equipment shall meet the
requirements of the California Electrical Code, the Society of Automotive
Engineers, the National Electrical Manufacturers Association, and accredited
testing laboratories such as Underwriters Laboratories, and rules of the Public
Utilities Commission or a Municipal Electric Utility Company regarding safety
and reliability.
      2.   Installation of electric vehicle charging stations and associated
wiring, bonding, disconnecting means and overcurrent protective devices shall
meet the requirements of Article 625 and all applicable provisions of the
California Electrical Code.
      3.   Installation of electric vehicle charging stations shall be
incorporated into the load calculations of all new or existing electrical
services and shall meet the requirements of the California Electrical Code.
Electric vehicle charging equipment shall be considered a continuous load.
      4.   Anchorage of either floor-mounted or wall-mounted electric vehicle
charging stations shall meet the requirements of the California Building or
Residential Code as applicable per occupancy, and the provisions of the
manufacturer's installation instructions. Mounting of charging stations shall
not adversely affect building elements. (Ord. 2023-01, 2-21-2023)
ARTICLE D. MECHANICAL CODE
SECTION:
8-1D-1: California Mechanical Code Adopted
8-1D-2: Amendments To Code
8-1D-3: Violation And Penalties
8-1D-1: CALIFORNIA MECHANICAL CODE ADOPTED:
This article shall be known as "an ordinance of the city of Lemoore adopting
the California mechanical code, 2022 edition, referencing the 2015 uniform
mechanical code, as published by the International Association Of Plumbing And
Mechanical Officials", a copy of which is on file in the office of the
development services department and which may hereinafter be referred to as
such or as "said code" or "code".
All the provisions and sections of said California mechanical code, 2022, title
24, part 4 as compiled by the International Association Of Plumbing And
Mechanical Officials, with the exception of those provisions in section
8-1D-2 of this article, are hereby adopted by reference as the mechanical code
and ordinance of the city. (Ord. 2016-14, 12-6-2016)
8-1D-2: AMENDMENTS TO CODE:
   A.   Schedule Of Fees: Fees for mechanical permits and inspections are in
the city of Lemoore master user fee schedule. (Ord. 2016-14, 12-6-2016)
8-1D-3: VIOLATION AND PENALTIES:
Any person who violates any of the provisions of this article shall be guilty
as set forth in section
8-1N-1 of this chapter. (Ord. 2008-02, 2-19-2008)
ARTICLE E. FIRE CODE
SECTION:
8-1E-1: California Fire Code Adopted
8-1E-2: Amendments To Code
8-1E-3: New Materials, Processes Or Occupancies Which May Require Permits
8-1E-4: Automatic Fire Extinguishing Or Sprinkler Systems
8-1E-4-1: Sale And Discharge Of Safe And Sane Fireworks 1 (Rep. by Ord. 2016-
11, 9-20-2016)
8-1E-5: Appeals
8-1E-6: Violation And Penalties
8-1E-7: Repeal Of Conflicting Ordinances
 
Notes
1 1. See title 4, chapter 9 of this code.
8-1E-1: CALIFORNIA FIRE CODE ADOPTED:
This article shall be known as "an ordinance of the city of Lemoore adopting
the 2022 California fire code including appendices B, BB, C, CC, D, E, F, G, H,
I, J, K, L, M, and referencing the 2015 international fire code", a copy of
which is on file at the office of the development services department, and
which may hereinafter be referred to as such or as "said code" or "code".
All the provisions and sections of said California fire code, 2022, title 24,
part 9, as compiled by the 2015 international fire code, with the exception of
those provisions in section
8-1E-2 of this article, are hereby adopted by reference as the California fire
code and ordinance of the city. (Ord. 2016-14, 12-6-2016)
8-1E-2: AMENDMENTS TO CODE:
The limits referred to in section 3-1.5 of the uniform fire code standard 80-
3 in which the storage of flammable cryogenic fluids in stationary containers
is prohibited shall be as designated and approved by the fire marshal. The
limits referred to in section 202 of the California fire code in which the
storage of hazardous materials is prohibited or limited shall be as designated
and approved by the fire marshal.
Section 103.1 of the California fire code is hereby amended to read as follows:
103.1 General: Establishment And Duties Of Bureau Of Fire Prevention. The
California fire code as adopted and amended herein shall be enforced by the
bureau of fire prevention (or other designated agency) in the fire department
of the city of Lemoore, which is hereby established and which shall be operated
under the supervision of the chief of the fire department. Under the chief's
direction, the fire department is authorized to enforce all ordinances of the
jurisdiction pertaining to:
      1.   The prevention of fires,
      2.   The suppression or extinguishment of dangerous or hazardous fires,
      3.   The storage, use, and handling of hazardous materials,
      4.   The installation and maintenance of automatic, manual, and other
private fire alarm systems and fire-extinguishing equipment,
      5.   The maintenance and regulation of fire escapes,
      6.   The maintenance of fire protection and the elimination of fire
hazards on land and in buildings, structures, and other property, including
those under construction,
      7.   The maintenance of means of egress, and
      8.   The investigation of the cause, origin and circumstances of fire and
unauthorized releases of hazardous materials.
For authority related to control and investigation of emergency scenes, see
section 103.3.1.
Section 103.3 of the California fire code is hereby amended to read as follows:
103.3 Deputies. The fire marshal shall recommend to the city council of the
city of Lemoore the employment of technical inspectors, who, when such
authorization is made, shall be selected through an examination to determine
their fitness for the position. The examination shall be open to members and
nonmembers of the fire department.
Section 103.3.1 of the California fire code is hereby amended to add the
following:
103.3.1 Fire Marshal. The chief (or fire marshal) in charge of the bureau of
fire prevention (or other designated agency) shall be appointed by the city
manager after an examination to determine his or her qualifications.
Section 202 Definitions of the California fire code is hereby amended to read
as follows:
There is hereby added to section 202 of the California fire code a definition
of "fire marshal," to read as follows:
Fire Marshal is the fire code official of the city of Lemoore.
There is hereby added to section 202 of the California fire code a definition
of "jurisdiction" to read as follows:
Jurisdiction is the city of Lemoore.
Section 5304.3 of the California fire code, 2016, is hereby added to read as
follows:
Section 5304.3 Maximum Capacity Within Established Limits. Within the limits
designated and approved by the fire marshal restricting the storage of CNG for
the protection of heavily populated or congested commercial areas, the
aggregate capacity of any one installation shall not exceed 183,000 cubic feet
(5,181,974 l).
Section 5604.5.2.2 of the California fire code, 2016, is hereby added to read
as follows:
5604.5.2.2 Limits Designated And Approved By Fire Marshal. Storage of explosive
materials and fireworks are prohibited within the limits designated and
approved by the fire marshal as the limits of districts in which such storage
is prohibited. Fireworks shall only be stored on site.
Section 5704.1.2 of the California fire code is hereby amended to add the
following:
5704.1.2 Establishment Of Limits Of Districts In Which Storage Of Flammable Or
Combustible Liquids In Aboveground Tanks Inside Or Outside Of Buildings Is
Prohibited. Storage of class I and II liquids in aboveground tanks inside or
outside of buildings is prohibited within the city limits, except on land zoned
light industrial or heavy industrial by the city of Lemoore zoning ordinance
and approved by the fire marshal.
Section 5704.2.9.6.1.2.1 of the California fire code is hereby amended to read
as follows:
Section 5704.2.9.6.1.2.1 Establishment Of Limits Of Districts In Which The
Location Of Aboveground Tanks With Pressures Exceeding 2.5 psig (17.2 kPa)
Inside Or Outside Of Buildings Is Prohibited. Aboveground tanks for the storage
of class I, II or III-A liquids operating at pressures exceeding 2.5 psig (17.2
kPa) or equipped with emergency venting allowing pressures to exceed 2.5 psig
(17.2 kPa) inside or outside of buildings is prohibited within city limits,
except on land zoned light industrial or heavy industrial by the city of
Lemoore zoning ordinance and approved by fire marshal.
Section 6104.2 of the California fire code, 2016, is hereby amended to read as
follows:
Section 6104.2 Maximum Capacity Within Established Limits. Within the limits
designated and approved by the fire marshal restricting the storage of LP-gas
for the protection of heavily populated or congested commercial areas, the
aggregate capacity of any one installation shall not exceed a 2,000-gallon
(7571 l) water capacity.
(Ord. 2016-14, 12-6-2016)
8-1E-3: NEW MATERIALS, PROCESSES OR OCCUPANCIES WHICH MAY REQUIRE PERMITS:
The Lemoore city council, the chief, and the chief of the bureau of fire
prevention shall act as a committee to determine and specify, after giving
affected persons an opportunity to be heard, any new materials, processes, or
occupancies for which permits are required in addition to those now enumerated
in the California fire code. The chief of the bureau of fire prevention shall
post in a conspicuous place in the bureau of fire prevention, a list of such
specified new materials, processes or occupancies and distribute copies thereof
to interested persons. (Ord. 2016-14, 12-6-2016)
8-1E-4: AUTOMATIC FIRE EXTINGUISHING OR SPRINKLER SYSTEMS:
   A.   Requirements For Automatic Fire Extinguishing Or Sprinkler Systems:
      1.   Group A, B, E, F, H, I, L, M, S, And U Occupancies: Regardless of
any provision as set forth in the uniform building code 1 , the installation of
automatic sprinklers or an automatic fire extinguishing system shall be
required in all group A, B, E, F, H, I, L, M, S, and U occupancies more than
two (2) stories in height or with a gross floor area greater than five thousand
(5,000) square feet, unless such occupancies are more restrictive from said
requirements through other codes.
   B.   Review And Approval Of Sprinkler System Plans: All sprinkler plans
shall be submitted to the development services department for plan review and
permit issuance of a sprinkler system or automatic fire extinguishing system
permit, and to the fire department for review and approval prior to
installation.
   C.   Installation Requirements:
      1.   Standards: All sprinkler installations shall meet the standards for
the installation of sprinkler systems as set forth in the NFPA no. 13
"Sprinkler Manual".
      2.   Notification Circuit For Systems: The installation of all sprinkler
systems or automatic fire extinguishing systems shall include a circuit to the
emergency dispatch, which would give immediate notifications of fire, water
flow, or trouble within the system.
   D.   Maintenance Of System: All sprinkler systems, fire hydrant systems,
standpipe systems, fire alarm systems, portable fire extinguishers, and other
fire protective or extinguishing systems or appliances shall be maintained in
an operative condition at all times and shall be replaced or repaired when
defective. All repairs and service shall be made in accordance with recognized
standards, and repairs shall be completed within two (2) weeks of notice.
   E.   Access Requirements: When fire protection facilities are required
during the construction phase, access to such facilities (sprinkler systems,
fire extinguishing systems, wet or dry standpipes) shall be provided with all
service roads. At the completion of construction, an adequate paved roadway
shall be provided at all sprinkler hookups, standpipes and fire hydrants.
   F.   Exceptions To Provisions: Automatic fire extinguishing systems or
smoke/heat detection systems not otherwise required in this code may be of a
type approved by the fire marshal. (Ord. 2016-14, 12-6-2016)
 
Notes
1 1. See article A of this chapter.
8-1E-4-1: SALE AND DISCHARGE OF SAFE AND SANE FIREWORKS 1 :
(Rep. by Ord. 2016-11, 9-20-2016)
 
Notes
1 1. See title 4, chapter 9 of this code.
8-1E-5: APPEALS:
Whenever the chief disapproves an application or refuses to grant a permit
applied for, or when it is claimed that the provisions of the code do not apply
or that the true intent and meaning of the code have been misconstrued or
wrongly interpreted, the applicant may appeal from the decision of the chief to
the Lemoore city council within thirty (30) days from the date of the decision
appealed. The appeal shall be in writing and shall be filed with the city
manager and shall be heard at the next regular meeting of the city council. The
determination of the city council upon such appeal shall be conclusive and
final. Other appeals shall be governed by uniform fire code section 103.1.4.
(Ord. 9912, 12-7-1999)
8-1E-6: VIOLATION AND PENALTIES:
Any person who violates any of the provisions of this article shall be guilty
as set forth in section
8-1N-1 of this chapter. (Ord. 2008-2, 2-19-2008)
8-1E-7: REPEAL OF CONFLICTING ORDINANCES:
All former ordinances or parts thereof conflicting or inconsistent with the
provisions of this article or the uniform fire code as adopted and amended
herein are hereby repealed. (Ord. 9912, 12-7-1999)
ARTICLE F. RESIDENTIAL CODE
SECTION:
8-1F-1: California Residential Code Adopted
8-1F-2: Amendments To Code
8-1F-1: CALIFORNIA RESIDENTIAL CODE ADOPTED:
This article shall be known as "an ordinance of the city of Lemoore adopting
the 2022 California building code part 2 (vol. 1 and 2) including appendices A,
B, C, D, E, F, G, H, I, J, K, M, O, P, R, S, T, U, V and W referencing the 2015
international residential code", a copy of which is on file in the office of
the development services department, and which may be hereinafter referred to
as such or as "said code" or "code".
All the provisions and sections of said California building code, 2022, title
24, part 2.5 as compiled by the International Conference Of Building Officials,
with the exception of those provisions in section
8-1F-2 of this article, are hereby adopted by reference as the building code
and ordinance of the city. (Ord. 2016-14, 12-6-2016)
8-1F-2: AMENDMENTS TO CODE:
Section 1511.3.2 of the California building code, part 2, vol. 1 is hereby
added to read as follows:
Section 1511.3.2 Roof Sheathing. When finish roof sheathing material is removed
to the existing spaced sheathing, a minimum 3/8 inch (9mm) thick plywood
sheathing shall be installed. The sheathing shall be installed such that the
edges align over rafters and individual spaced sheathing boards. The sheathing
shall be attached to the existing spaced sheathing and rafters with minimum 8d
sinker common nails at 6 inches on center at all supported edges and 8d sinker
nails at 12 inches on center at intermediate supports.
(Ord. 2016-14, 12-6-2016)
ARTICLE G. ADMINISTRATIVE CODE
SECTION:
8-1G-1: California Administrative Code Adopted
8-1G-1: CALIFORNIA ADMINISTRATIVE CODE ADOPTED:
This article shall be known as "an ordinance of the city of Lemoore adopting
the 2022 California administrative code, referencing the California code of
regulations, published by the International Code Council", a copy of which is
on file in the office of the development services department, and which may be
hereinafter referred to as such or as "said code" or "code".
All of the provisions and sections of said California administrative code,
2022, title 24, part 1 are hereby adopted by reference as the administrative
code and ordinance of the city. (Ord. 2016-14, 12-6-2016)
ARTICLE H. EXISTING BUILDING CODE
SECTION:
8-1H-1: California Existing Building Code Adopted
8-1H-1: CALIFORNIA EXISTING BUILDING CODE ADOPTED:
This article shall be known as "an ordinance of the city of Lemoore adopting
the 2022 California existing building code", a copy of which is on file in the
office of the development services department, and which may be hereinafter
referred to as such or as "said code" or "code".
All the provisions and sections of said California existing building code, 2022
edition, are hereby adopted by reference as the California existing building
code and ordinance of the city. (Ord. 2016-14, 12-6-2016)
ARTICLE I. HISTORICAL BUILDING CODE
SECTION:
8-1I-1: California Historical Building Code Adopted
8-1I-1: CALIFORNIA HISTORICAL BUILDING CODE ADOPTED:
This article shall be known as "an ordinance of the city of Lemoore adopting
the 2022 California historical building code", a copy of which is on file in
the office of the development services department and which may be hereinafter
referred to as such or as "said code" or "code".
All of the provisions and sections of said 2022 California historical building
code, title 24, part 8, as prepared by the International Code Council are
hereby adopted by reference as the historical building code and ordinance of
the city. (Ord. 2016-14, 12-6-2016)
ARTICLE J. GREEN CODE
SECTION:
8-1J-1: California Green Code Adopted
8-1J-1: CALIFORNIA GREEN CODE ADOPTED:
This article shall be known as "an ordinance of the city of Lemoore adopting
the California green code, 2022 edition, referencing the California code of
regulations", a copy of which is on file in the office of the building
inspection department, and which may be hereinafter referred to as such or as
"said code" or "code".
All the provisions and sections of said California green code, 2022, title 24,
part 11 are hereby adopted by reference as the building conservation code and
ordinance of the city. (Ord. 2016-14, 12-6-2016)
ARTICLE K. REFERENCED STANDARDS CODE
SECTION:
8-1K-1: California Referenced Standards Code Adopted
8-1K-1: CALIFORNIA REFERENCED STANDARDS CODE ADOPTED:
This article shall be known as "an ordinance of the city of Lemoore adopting
the California referenced standards code, 2022, referencing the California code
of regulations edition", a copy of which is on file in the office of the
development services department and which may be hereinafter referred to as
such or "said code" or "code".
All of the provisions and sections of said California referenced standards
code, 2022, title 24, part 12 are hereby adopted by reference as the referenced
standards code and ordinance of the city. (Ord. 2016-14, 12-6-2016)
ARTICLE L. HOUSING CODE
SECTION:
8-1L-1: Uniform Housing Code Adopted
8-1L-1: UNIFORM HOUSING CODE ADOPTED:
This article shall be known as "an ordinance of the city of Lemoore adopting
the uniform housing code, 1997 edition, as prepared and published by the
International Conference Of Building Officials, adopted as the housing code of
the city", a copy of which is on file in the office of the development services
department and which may hereinafter be referred to as such or as "said code"
or "code".
All of the provisions and sections of said uniform housing code, 1997 edition,
are hereby adopted by reference as the uniform housing code and ordinance of
the city. (Ord. 2016-14, 12-6-2016)
ARTICLE M. UNIFORM CODE FOR THE ABATEMENT OF DANGEROUS BUILDINGS
SECTION:
8-1M-1: Uniform Code For The Abatement Of Dangerous Buildings Adopted
8-1M-1: UNIFORM CODE FOR THE ABATEMENT OF DANGEROUS BUILDINGS ADOPTED:
This article shall be known as "an ordinance of the city of Lemoore adopting
the uniform housing code, 1997 edition, as prepared and published by the
International Conference Of Building Officials, adopted as the housing code of
the city", a copy of which is on file in the office of the development services
department and which may hereinafter be referred to as such or as "said code"
or "code".
All of the provisions and sections of said uniform housing code, 1997 edition,
are hereby adopted by reference as the uniform housing code and ordinance of
the city. (Ord. 2016-14, 12-6-2016)
ARTICLE N. PENALTIES
SECTION:
8-1N-1: Penalty
8-1N-1: PENALTY:
Any person who violates any of the provisions of the California building
standards code, 2022 edition, or 2022 California fire code is guilty as
described in title 1, chapter 4 of this code and shall be punishable as set
forth in subsection (b) of section 36900 of the Government Code of the state.
(Ord. 2016-14, 12-6-2016)
ARTICLE O. ENERGY CODE
SECTION:
8-1O-1: California Energy Code Adopted
8-1O-1: CALIFORNIA ENERGY CODE ADOPTED:
This article shall be known as "an ordinance of the city of Lemoore adopting
the California energy code, 2022 edition, referencing the California code of
regulations", a copy of which is on file in the office of the development
services department, and which may be hereinafter referred to as such or as
"said code" or "code".
All the provisions and sections of said California energy code, 2022, are
hereby adopted by reference as the building conservation code and ordinance of
the city. (Ord. 2016-14, 12-6-2016)
CHAPTER 2
DANGEROUS BUILDINGS
SECTION:
8-2-1: Nuisance Declared
8-2-2: Abatement of Nuisance Required
8-2-3: Notice of Hearing; Resolution
8-2-4: Court Proceedings
8-2-5: Abatement Costs
8-2-1: NUISANCE DECLARED:
   A.   Authority: All buildings or structures which are structurally unsafe,
or are partially destroyed by fire, or dilapidated from old age, neglect, decay
or other causes within the City which constitute a fire menace or are dangerous
to human life, or a likely resort for vagrant or dissolute persons may be
declared a nuisance by the City Council and thereafter abated as herein
provided. (1975 Code §12-2.01)
   B.   Resolution Declaring Nuisance: Whenever any such building or buildings,
structure or structures exist or are permitted upon any property within the
City, the City Council may by resolution declare the same to be a public
nuisance; said resolution shall declare the intention of the City Council to
commence abatement proceedings as herein provided and shall refer to the street
by the name under which it is officially or commonly known, and describe the
property upon which such nuisance exists by giving the lot and block number
thereof and no other description of such property shall be required.
The City Clerk shall forward a certified copy of said resolution to the County
Recorder of Kings County for recordation. (1975 Code §12-2.02)
8-2-2: ABATEMENT OF NUISANCE REQUIRED:
All buildings or structures declared to be public nuisances and ordered to be
abated hereby shall be abated by repair, rehabilitation, demolition or removal.
(1975 Code §12-2.03)
8-2-3: NOTICE OF HEARING; RESOLUTION:
   A.   Posting Notice and Resolution: After the passage of said resolution,
the Director of Public Works shall cause to be conspicuously posted on the
building or buildings, structure or structures declared to be a public nuisance
a certified copy of the resolution of intention of the City Council and at
least two (2) notices of the time and place of hearing before the City Council
which said notices shall be titled: "NOTICE OF HEARING" in letters of not less
than one inch (1") in height and shall be substantially in the following form:
   NOTICE OF HEARING
   TO ABATE BUILDING OR STRUCTURE
   BY REMOVAL OR REPAIR
Notice is hereby given that on the            day of                , 19     ,
the City Council of the City of Lemoore passed a Resolution declaring that the
certain unsafe or dilapidated building(s) or structure(s), consisting of
                     Street, in said City and more particularly described in
Lot No.       Block No.                           in said City of Lemoore, and
that the same constitutes a public nuisance and must be abated by the removal
or repair of said unsafe or dilapidated building(s) or structure(s), otherwise
the same will be abated by the municipal authorities of the City of Lemoore, in
which case the cost of such removal or repair shall be assessed upon the lots
and land on which said unsafe or dilapidated building(s) or structure(s) is or
are removed or repaired, and such cost will constitute a lien upon such lots or
land until paid. Reference is hereby made to said Resolution for further
particulars.
All persons having any objection to, or interest in the proposed removal or
repair of such unsafe or dilapidated building(s) or structure(s) are hereby
notified to attend a meeting of the City Council of the City of Lemoore to be
held in the Lemoore Justice Court, on the             day of                ,
19     , at the hour of           M., of said day, when their objections will
be heard and given due consideration.
Dated this            day of                , 19     .
   Director of Public Works
(1975 Code §12-2.04)
   B.   Serving Notice and Resolution: The Director of Public Works shall cause
to be served upon the owner of each building or structure sought to be removed
or repaired one copy of said notice and a certified copy of the resolution of
intention of the City Council in accordance with the following provisions:
(1975 Code §12-2.05)
Proper service of said notice and resolution shall be by personal service upon
the person owning the property as such person's name and address appears on the
last equalized assessment roll, if he is found within the City limits, or if he
is not to be found within the City limits, by depositing a copy of said notice
and resolution in the United States Post Office properly enclosed in a sealed
envelope and with the postage thereon fully prepaid. Said mail shall be
registered or certified and addressed to said owner at the last known address
of said owner, or if not known, at Lemoore, California. The service is complete
at the time of deposit. (1975 Code §12-2.06)
   C.   Time for Posting and Service of Notices and Resolutions: Said notices
and resolutions must be posted and served as aforesaid at least thirty (30)
days before the time fixed for the hearing before the City Council and proof of
posting and service of such notices and resolutions shall be made by affidavit
which shall be filed with the City Clerk. (1975 Code §12-2.05)
8-2-4: COURT PROCEEDINGS:
At the time stated in the notices, the City Council shall hear and consider all
objections or protests, if any, shall receive testimony from owners, witnesses
and parties interested relative to the proposed removal or repair of such
unsafe or dilapidated buildings or structures and may continue the hearing from
time to time. Upon the conclusion of said hearing, said City Council shall
allow or overrule any and all of said objections. The City Council may find and
determine that such unsafe or dilapidated building or structure may be made
safe by repair and shall, by resolution specifying in detail what repairs are
required to make said building or structure safe and the time within which the
repair work must be accomplished, instruct the Director of Public Works to
cause the abatement by repair of the unsafe or dilapidated structure or
building in the event of the failure of the owner or other person to make such
repairs within the time prescribed, or within any extension of time granted by
the City Council to complete the specified repairs; or the City Council may
find and determine that said unsafe or dilapidated building or structure is a
public nuisance and, by resolution, order the Director of Public Works to abate
said nuisance by removal after a period of thirty (30) days' notice to the
owner or his authorized representatives. (1975 Code §12-2.07)
A copy of said resolution adopted pursuant to this Section shall be served upon
the owner of said property in accordance with the provisions of Section
8-2-3 of this Chapter. (1975 Code §12-2.08)
8-2-5: ABATEMENT COSTS:
   A.   Record and Report of Abatement Costs: The Director of Public Works
shall keep an account of the cost (including incidental expenses) of abating
such nuisance on each separate lot or parcel of land where the work has been
done and shall render an itemized report in writing to the City Council showing
the cost of demolishing or removing said buildings or structures, including any
salvage value of such buildings or structures and incidental expenses, on each
separate lot or parcel of land; provided, that before said report is submitted
to the City Council, a copy of the same shall be posted for at least five (5)
days upon the property upon which such unsafe or dilapidated buildings or
structures were situated together with a notice of the time when said report
shall be submitted to the City Council for confirmation, and a copy of said
report and notice shall be served upon the owner of said property in accordance
with the provisions of Section
8-2-3 of this Chapter at least five (5) days prior to submitting the same to
the Council; proof of said posting and service shall be made by affidavit and
filed with the City Clerk.
The term "incidental expenses" shall include, but not be limited to, the
expenses and costs of the City in the preparation of notices, specifications
and contracts, and in inspecting the work, and the costs of printing and
mailing required hereunder. (1975 Code §12-2.09)
   B.   Hearing on Report: At the date and time fixed for receiving and
considering said report, the City Council shall hear and pass upon the report
of the Director of Public Works, together with any objections or protests which
may be raised by any of the property owners liable to be assessed for the work
of abating such nuisance and any other interested persons. Thereupon, the City
Council may make such revision, correction or modification in the report as it
may deem just, after which by resolution the report, as submitted, or as
revised, corrected or modified, shall be confirmed; provided, that said hearing
or consideration may be continued from time to time. The decision of the City
Council on all protests and objections which may be made shall be final and
conclusive. (1975 Code §12-2.10)
   C.   Costs a Lien: The amount of the cost for abating such nuisance upon the
various lots or parcels of land, as confirmed by the City Council, shall
constitute special assessments against the respective lots or parcels of land,
and as thus made and confirmed shall constitute a lien pursuant to section
38773.5 of the Government Code on said property for the amount of such
assessments, respectively. After the confirmation of said report, a copy shall
be turned over to the Assessor and Tax Collector for the County of Kings,
whereupon it shall be the duty of said Assessor and Tax Collector to add the
amounts of the respective assessments to the next regular bills of taxes levied
against the said respective lots and parcels of land for Municipal purposes,
and thereafter said amounts shall be collected at the time and the same manner
as ordinary Municipal taxes are collected, and shall be subject to the same
penalties and the same procedure under foreclosure and sale in case of
delinquency as provided for ordinary Municipal taxes. (1975 Code §12-2.11)
CHAPTER 3
MOVING BUILDINGS
SECTION:
8-3-1: Definitions
8-3-2: Permit Requirements
8-3-3: Duties of Permittee
8-3-4: Liability of Permittee
8-3-5: Enforcement
8-3-1: DEFINITIONS:
For the purposes of this Chapter, the following terms, phrases and words and
their derivatives shall have the meanings given herein:
BUILDING: A structure designed, built or occupied as a shelter or roofed
enclosure for persons, animals or property and used for residential, business,
storage, commercial, industrial, institutional, assembly, educational or
recreational purposes. A structure containing not more than one hundred fifty
(150) square feet shall not fall within this definition.
BUILDING INSPECTOR: The Building Inspector of the City of Lemoore.
CITY: The City of Lemoore.
PERSON: Any person, firm, partnership, association, corporation, company or any
organization of any kind. (1975 Code §12-3.01)
8-3-2: PERMIT REQUIREMENTS:
   A.   Permit Required: No person shall move any building over, along or
across any highway, street or alley in the City without first obtaining a
permit from the Building Inspector. (1975 Code §12-3.02)
   B.   Application for Permit: A person seeking issuance of a permit hereunder
shall file an application for such permit with the Building Inspector.
The application shall be made in writing, upon forms provided by the Building
Inspector, and shall include a plot plan of the proposed location to which the
building is to be moved and shall be filed in the office of the Building
Inspector.
The application shall set forth:
      1.   A description of the building proposed to be moved giving street,
number, construction materials, dimensions, number of rooms and condition of
exterior and interior;
      2.   A legal description of the lot from which the building is to be
moved giving the lot, block and tract number or such other description as will
adequately describe said lot together with the street address, if located in
the City;
      3.   A legal description of the lot to which it is proposed such building
be removed giving lot, block and tract number or such other legal description
as will adequately describe said lot together with the street address, if
located in the City;
      4.   The portion of the lot to be occupied by the building when moved;
      5.   The highways, streets and alleys over, along or across which the
building is proposed to be moved;
      6.   Proposed moving date and hours;
      7.   Any additional information which the Building Inspector shall find
necessary to a fair determination of whether a permit should be issued.
   C.   Certificate of Ownership or Entitlement: The applicant, if other than
the owner, shall file with the application a written statement or bill of sale
signed by the owner, or other sufficient evidence, that he is entitled to move
the building.
   D.   Permit Fee: The application shall be accompanied by a permit fee in the
amount of one hundred dollars ($100.00) plus such amount as is determined to be
due on the building permit. If the building to be moved is located outside the
City, such fee shall be augmented by a charge of twenty five cents (25¢) per
mile beyond the City limits for one way. (1975 Code §12-3.03)
   E.   Deposit for City Expenses: Upon receipt of an application, it shall be
the duty of the Building Inspector to make an estimate of the expense that will
be incurred in removing and replacing any electric wires, street lamps or pole
lines belonging to the City or any other property of the City, the removal and
replacement of which will be required by reason of the moving of the building
through the City, together with the cost of materials necessary to be used in
making such removals and replacements. Prior to issuance of the permit the
Building Inspector shall require of the applicant a deposit of a sum of money
equal to twice the amount of the estimated expense. (1975 Code §12-3.04)
   F.   Indemnity Deposit or Bond in Lieu Thereof:
      1.   An application hereunder shall be accompanied by a cash deposit in
the sum of five hundred dollars ($500.00) as an indemnity for any damage which
the City may sustain by reason of damage or injury to any highway, street,
alley, sidewalk, fire hydrant or other property of the City which may be caused
by or be incidental to the removal of any building over, along or across any
street in the City and to indemnify the City against any claim or damages to
persons or private individuals arising out of, caused by or incidental to the
moving of any building over, along or across any street.
      2.   Any person filing an application hereunder may, in lieu of the
general cash deposit required above, file with the Building Inspector a bond
approved as to form by the City Attorney, executed by a bonding company or
surety company authorized to do business in the State of California in the
penal sum of one thousand dollars ($1,000.00), conditioned upon the assurance
that this Chapter and other applicable ordinances will be complied with. Such
bond shall run to the City for the use and benefit of any persons or person,
including the City, intended to be protected thereby and shall be conditioned
on the payment of any damage to public or private property and the payment for
any damages or losses resulting from any malfeasance, misfeasance, nonfeasance
or negligence in connection with any of the activities or conditions upon which
the permit applied for is granted.
      3.   Either the cash deposit or the bond deposited as above provided
shall be retained to insure that the building to be moved is completed and that
the permittee has in all respects complied with the terms of the permit and the
provisions of Section
8-3-3 hereof. (1975 Code §12-3.05)
   G.   Insurance Requirements: Any person filing an application hereunder
shall file with the Building Inspector liability insurance policies, issued by
an insurance company authorized to do business in the State of California,
approved as to form by the City Attorney, in the amount of twenty five thousand
dollars ($25,000.00) for liability and fifty thousand dollars ($50,000.00) for
personal injury, and five thousand dollars ($5,000.00) property damage. (1975
Code §12-3.05; 1989 Code)
   H.   Standards for Issuance of Permit; Inspection: The Building Inspector
shall refuse to issue a permit if he finds:
      1.   That any application requirement or any fee or deposit requirement
has not been complied with.
      2.   That the building is too large to move without endangering persons
or property in the City.
      3.   That the building is in such a state of deterioration or disrepair
or is otherwise so structurally unsafe that it could not be moved without
endangering persons and property in the City.
      4.   That the building is structurally unsafe or unfit for the purpose
for which moved, if the removal location is in the City.
      5.   That the applicant's equipment is unsafe and that persons and
property would be endangered by its use.
      6.   That zoning or other ordinances would be violated by the building in
its new location 1 .
      7.   That for any other reason persons or property in the City would be
endangered by the moving of the building.
The Building Inspector shall inspect the building and the applicant's equipment
to determine whether the standards for issuance of a permit are met. (1975 Code
§12-3.06)
 
Notes
1 1. See Title 9 of this Code.
8-3-3: DUTIES OF PERMITTEE:
Every permittee under this Chapter shall:
   A.   Use Designated Streets: Move a building only over streets designated
for such use in the written permit.
   B.   Notify of Revised Moving Time: Notify the Building Inspector in writing
of a desired change in moving date and hours as proposed in the application.
   C.   Notify of Damage: Notify the Building Inspector in writing of any and
all damage done to property belonging to the City within twenty four (24) hours
after the damage or injury has occurred.
   D.   Comply with Governing Laws: Comply with the Building Code 2 , the Fire
Zone, the Zoning Ordinance 3 and all other applicable ordinances and laws upon
relocating the building in the City and any conditions imposed by the building
permit or the permit to be issued hereunder by the City officers.
   E.   Clear Old Premises: If the premises from which the building or
structure is removed is in the City, he shall remove all rubbish, materials and
foundations and fill all excavations to existing grade at the original building
site so that the premises are left in a safe and sanitary condition. (1975 Code
§12-3.07)
If the premises from which the building or structure is removed is situated in
the City and are left in an unsafe condition by the permittee, the City may
proceed to do the work necessary to bring the premises to a safe and sanitary
condition and the cost thereof shall be charged against the permittee and
collected from his deposit or as provided in Section
8-3-4 hereof. (1975 Code §12-3.08)
   F.   Remove Service Connections: If the premises from which the building or
structure is removed is in the City, he shall arrange with the City Sewer and
Water Department to have the sewer and water services turned off and notify the
gas and electric companies to remove their services. (1975 Code §12-3.07)
 
Notes
2 2. See Chapter 1, Article A of this Title.
3 3. See Title 9 of this Code.
8-3-4: LIABILITY OF PERMITTEE:
The permittee shall be liable for any expense, damage or costs in excess of
deposited amounts or securities, and the City Attorney shall prosecute an
action against the permittee in a court of competent jurisdiction for the
recovery of such excessive amounts.
8-3-5: ENFORCEMENT:
The Building Inspector and Police Department shall enforce and carry out the
requirements of this Chapter. (1975 Code §12-3.08)
CHAPTER 4
STORM AND SURFACE WATER DRAINAGE SYSTEMS
SECTION:
8-4-1: Purposes
8-4-2: Definitions
8-4-3: Drainage Fees Required; Exemptions
8-4-4: Schedule and Computation of Drainage Fees
8-4-5: Disposition of Funds
8-4-6: Unlawful Development or Improvement
8-4-7: Effect on Building and Development Permits
8-4-8: Appeals
8-4-1: PURPOSES:
The Council hereby declares and finds that the development of land for urban
uses substantially accelerates the concentration of surface and storm waters
and that it is necessary to establish and collect drainage fees to defray all
or a part of the actual or the estimated cost of constructing planned drainage
facilities for the removal of surface and storm waters from drainage areas in
order to promote and protect the public safety, peace, comfort, convenience and
general welfare and for the accomplishment of the purposes more particularly
set forth as follows:
   A.   To provide for planned drainage facilities within the City required for
the removal of surface and storm waters.
   B.   To provide for an additional method of financing the construction of
planned drainage facilities.
   C.   To provide a reliable source of information regarding the development
of planned drainage facilities for present and prospective residents,
developers and investors in property.
   D.   To obviate the menace to public safety arising from inadequate
provisions for the removal of storm waters which run off and accumulate as the
result of development of property.
   E.   To promote conditions that will prevent the deterioration of property
values in existing developments and encourage new development of desirable
residential, commercial and/or industrial properties through the construction
of planned drainage facilities.
   F.   To prevent the deterioration of public streets and other public
facilities which would result from failure to construct planned drainage
facilities.
   G.   To provide for the collection of drainage fees for the construction of
planned drainage facilities at the time of the division of land, as authorized
by sections 66483 and 66488 of the Subdivision Map Act of the State and the
provisions of this Code, or at the time of the development thereof, except as
otherwise provided in this Chapter.
8-4-2: DEFINITIONS:
The words and phrases listed below whenever used in this Chapter shall have the
following definitions:
COVERED AREA: Area of property covered by improvements including but not
limited to roofs, walkways, parking lots, parking area, etc.
DEVELOPMENT: Any building, structure or other improvement, or the construction,
erection or installation thereof, in, over or upon any parcel of land, or the
division of any parcel of land. "Development" shall not include any temporary
facility or the construction, erection or installation thereof, which is
accomplished in accordance with the terms of any permit issued therefor or
pursuant to such other assurance as the Director may require; provided, that
such temporary facility may be maintained for only a limited time, not to
exceed one year or, if erected or installed for use in the performance of the
work of a construction project, until the completion of such work.
DIRECTOR: The City Engineer.
DIVISION: The dividing of any parcel of land into two (2) or more lots or
parcels (but not including lot line adjustments), including but not limited to
a division as described in Title 9, Chapter 7 of this Code and Chapter 6,
Article A of this Title or as provided by State law.
DRAINAGE FEES: The fees established and levied as provided in this Chapter to
pay all or any part of the costs of the planned drainage facilities and their
appurtenances.
DRAINAGE MASTER PLAN: A plan adopted by the Council for the systematic control
and removal of excess surface and storm waters and also relating to flood
control and drainage, and delineating therein a plan and map of the drainage
area showing generally its boundaries and the location of the planned drainage
facilities.
GROSS ACREAGE: The area of a parcel of land, or of a lot or parcel in a
proposed division, including those portions of all abutting streets and alleys
measured to the center lines thereof or to a line parallel with and thirty feet
(30') outside the property line, whichever shall be the lesser; except, that if
a parcel abuts more than one street, the portion of the street abutting the
shortest side, or one side in the case of a square parcel, shall not be
included.
IMPROVEMENT: Without limitation, any addition to or alteration of an existing
building or structure, or paving or other improvement which restricts the
perviousness of the soil and which requires the issuance of a City building,
grading or related permit.
PARCEL OF LAND: Any real property, improved or unimproved, shown on the latest
adopted County tax roll as a unit or as contiguous units.
PAVING: The placing of concrete, asphalt, oil or any other means of soil
stabilization or consolidation which, as determined by the Director, may
materially decrease the permeability of the natural soil.
PLANNED DRAINAGE FACILITIES: The facilities which are required to provide
drainage, generally as set forth in the Master Plan. Such facilities may be
modified during final design with the approval of the Director; provided, that
such modification will not result in the reduction in the degree of protection
provided in the area under construction.
PLANNED LOCAL DRAINAGE FACILITIES FUND: A separate fund into which all drainage
fees collected shall be deposited and the moneys in which shall be expended
solely for the acquisition or construction of planned drainage facilities for
which such Fund was established as provided in this Chapter.
ZONING ORDINANCE: The Zoning Ordinance of the Lemoore Municipal Code 1 .
 
Notes
1 1. See Title 9 of this Code.
8-4-3: DRAINAGE FEES REQUIRED; EXEMPTIONS:
   A.   Drainage Fees Required: Except as otherwise provided in this Section, a
drainage fee shall be paid to the City on each parcel of land prior to the
commencement of the work of any development or improvement thereon or upon the
issuance of a building permit, whichever is earlier.
In the case of the division of any parcel of land, a local drainage fee shall
be paid:
      1.   Prior to the approval by the Council of the final parcel or
subdivision map thereof, such fee shall be paid on the gross acreage of each
lot or parcel in any such division, except any portion thereof for which fees
have previously been paid.
      2.   If approved by the Director, drainage facilities or other
consideration described in the Drainage Master Plan of equal value to the
drainage fees otherwise payable under the provision of this Chapter may be
accepted in lieu of the payment of fees.
   B.   Exemptions from Drainage Fees:
      1.   Except in conjunction with a division of land, drainage fees shall
not be payable on account of any improvement or development work which consists
solely of the construction, erection or installation of:
         a.   Fences, pole lines, underground conduits or pipelines or similar
developments which, as determined by the Director, do not materially impair the
permeability of the natural surface of the parcel of land; or
         b.   The replacement or repair of existing concrete curbs, gutters,
sidewalks, driveway approaches, paving or other street improvements within any
street or alley.
      2.   No drainage fee shall be payable on account of any development or
improvement consisting solely of additions to, alterations of or reconstruction
of any residential building or structure unless the covered area by the
cumulation of additions made after the effective date hereof equals or exceeds
an increase of twenty percent (20%) of the covered area as it existed on the
effective date hereof.
      3.   No drainage fee shall be payable on account of any development or
improvement consisting solely of additions to, alterations of or reconstruction
of any existing building or structure, other than residential covered by
paragraph 2 hereinabove, unless the additions or alterations are such that,
under the applicable provisions of the Building Code 1 , the entire building or
structure must be made to conform to the requirements for new buildings or
structures or unless the area covered by the cumulation of additions made
subsequent to the effective date hereof equals or exceeds an increase of twenty
five percent (25%) of the covered area as it existed on the effective date
hereof.
   C.   Deferrals:
      1.   Payment of the drainage fee on a parcel zoned for industrial
development otherwise due under this Chapter may be deferred at the request of
the owner; provided the Director determines that planned drainage facilities
designed to serve the parcel of land are not immediately available and cannot
be made available within a reasonable period of time.
      2.   Any deferment authorized by the provisions of paragraph 1 of this
subsection shall be allowed only if all the owners of the parcel enter into a
written agreement which shall provide that:
         a.   The fee shall be paid to the City at the time an owner is issued
a building permit for any construction or improvement on the property.
         b.   At the time of payment of the deferred fee, the fee shall be
reduced by a credit which shall be an amount equal to the actual cash
expenditures incurred by the owner for the construction of any temporary
drainage facilities required by the Director as part of the initial development
to serve the property until such time as planned drainage facilities become
available; provided, that the temporary drainage facilities are useful in or
will become a part of the permanent Master Plan drainage facilities.
         c.   The agreement creates a valid lien upon such parcel to the extent
of the fee (such lien may be subordinated at the discretion of the Director,
and the form and substance of the agreement, procedures, documents, covenants,
etc., necessary to place the agreement and lien into effect shall all be
determined by the Director, subject to the approval of the City Attorney).
         d.   The owner of such parcel agrees to pay all court costs and
attorney's fees and waives any and all defenses, legal or equitable, if an
action at law or foreclosure suit is brought to enforce payment of the fee or
recovery of the fee through the lien.
   D.   Full Payment of Fee: When the drainage fee applicable to any parcel of
land shall have been fully paid pursuant to the provisions of this Chapter, or
shall have been assessed against it by the levying of an assessment therefor in
a special assessment proceeding, no further drainage fees shall be payable with
respect to such parcel; provided, however, if after such full payment, the use
of such parcel of land shall be changed to a use which, under the then current
fee schedule, requires a higher local drainage fee than the use upon the basis
of which such payment was previously made, then such parcel of land shall be
subject to the payment of an additional fee, which shall be the fee applicable
to such parcel of land in its changed use under the fee schedule in effect at
the time the additional fee is payable, less the total of any fees previously
paid.
 
Notes
1 1. See Chapter 1, Article A of this Title.
8-4-4: SCHEDULE AND COMPUTATION OF DRAINAGE FEES:
   A.   Schedule of Drainage Fees: Concurrently with the adoption of the
Drainage Master Plan, an interim plan or any amendment thereto, the Council
shall fix, by resolution, a schedule of per gross acre fees calculated to raise
the sum of money necessary to pay the estimated costs of the planned drainage
facilities as set forth in the Drainage Master Plan. Such schedule shall be
conditioned and based on the following findings by the Council:
      1.   The planned drainage facilities are in conformity with the City
General Plan, and Drainage Master Plan;
      2.   The development or improvement of property within the Master Plan
area will require the construction or acquisition of the planned drainage
facilities described in the Drainage Master Plan;
      3.   The fees are fairly apportioned within the drainage area either on
the basis of benefits conferred on property proposed for subdivision or on the
need for such facilities created by the proposed subdivision and development of
other property within such area;
      4.   Planned drainage facilities, which facilities are in addition to any
existing drainage facilities serving such local drainage area at the time of
the adoption of the Drainage Master Plan, are necessary to complete the
Drainage Master Plan for the City;
      5.   The fee apportioned to any property proposed for subdivision within
such drainage area does not exceed the pro rata share of the amount of the
total actual or estimated costs of all facilities within such area which would
be assessable on such property if such costs were apportioned uniformly on a
per-acre basis; and
      6.   The drainage facilities planned are in addition to existing
facilities serving the drainage area at the time of the adoption of the
Drainage Master Plan for the area.
   B.   Computation of Drainage Fee; Credits:
      1.   In the computation of the drainage fee payable because of the
division, development or improvement of any parcel of land, a credit for
drainage fees or other charges for drainage previously paid, or drainage
facilities installed with respect to such parcel shall be allowed, but only as
set forth in this Chapter. Credits for actual cash expenditures for the
construction of drainage facilities constructed and still in existence and use
in any street, alley or public easement and not constructed by special
assessment proceedings shall be allowed, subject to the following conditions
and limitations:
         a.   The facilities considered for such credits shall have been
constructed in conformance with the standards of the City in effect when such
facilities were constructed;
         b.   The Director shall certify that such facilities are in conformity
with, or compatible for use in connection with, the planned drainage facilities
installed or to be installed in the drainage area pursuant to the Drainage
Master Plan;
         c.   The credit allowed shall not exceed the depreciated value of such
facilities as determined by the Director by applying estimates of construction
costs prevailing at the time the credit is allowed (i.e., replacement cost new
less depreciation);
         d.   The facilities shall have been constructed and paid for with
respect to the parcel of land for which credit is claimed. If the facilities
were constructed for the benefit of other parcels of land in addition to the
parcel for which credit is claimed, the Council may, in the absence of
agreement of the owners of the respective parcels as to the apportionment of
the cost, estimate the total cost of such facilities at the time of
construction and apportion the total credit allowable for such facilities among
the several parcels by such method as it shall, in its sole discretion, deem
equitable. Proof to the satisfaction of the Council shall be made by the person
claiming credit hereunder of the amount of any actual cash expenditure on the
facilities for which credit is claimed.
      2.   Credits for assessments previously levied for planned drainage
facilities by any statutory special assessment proceedings shall be allowed
subject to the following conditions and limitations:
         a.   Such facilities shall have been constructed in conformance with
the standards of the City in effect when such facilities were constructed.
         b.   The credit allowed shall not exceed the depreciated value of such
facilities as determined by the Director by applying estimates of construction
costs prevailing at the time the credit is allowed (i.e., replacement cost new
less depreciation). If one assessment was levied for drainage facilities and
other improvements in the same proceeding, the Director shall determine from
the engineer's report in the assessment proceedings, if available, otherwise on
cost estimates applied by the Director, the proportion of the assessment
attributable to such facilities and the amount so determined by him shall be
the credit allowed.
         c.   The Director shall certify that such facilities are in conformity
with, or compatible for use in connection with, the planned drainage facilities
installed or to be installed in the drainage area pursuant to the Drainage
Master Plan.
         d.   The facilities shall have been constructed and paid for with
respect to the parcel of land for which credit is claimed. If the facilities
were constructed for the benefit of other parcels of land in addition to the
parcel for which credit is claimed, the Council may, in the absence of
agreement of the owners of the respective parcels as to the apportionment of
the cost, estimate the total cost of such facilities at the time of
construction and apportion the total credit allowable for such facilities among
the several parcels by such method as it shall, in its sole discretion, deem
equitable. Proof to the satisfaction of the Council shall be made by the person
claiming credit hereunder of the amount of any actual cash expenditure on the
facilities for which credit is claimed.
      3.   If a drainage fee was paid on all or a portion of the parcel of land
under the provisions of subsection
8-4-3B2 of this Chapter which is a part of a division of land, and an
additional drainage fee is payable under any provision of this Chapter, a
credit shall be allowed equal to the amount included in the fee paid under the
provisions of this Section for the gross acreage of such parcel or portion.
8-4-5: DISPOSITION OF FUNDS:
Fees collected pursuant to this Chapter shall be deposited in the Planned Local
Drainage Facilities Fund. The Council may appropriate monies from the Fund for
the construction or reimbursement of construction of the planned drainage
facilities or to reimburse the General Fund or other City funds or to pay debt
incurred for the costs of engineering and administrative services incident to
the creation of the Master Plan and the design and construction of planned
drainage facilities.
8-4-6: UNLAWFUL DEVELOPMENT OR IMPROVEMENT:
No person shall construct, erect or install, or cause or permit to be
constructed, erected or installed, any development or make any improvement on
any parcel of land on which the drainage fee required by the provisions of this
Chapter has not been fully paid. Violation of this Section is hereby declared
to be a misdemeanor and shall be punishable as provided in Section
1-4-1 of this Code.
8-4-7: EFFECT ON BUILDING AND DEVELOPMENT PERMITS:
No building permit or other permit for any development shall be issued pursuant
to the provisions of this Title unless the drainage fee required by this
Chapter has been fully paid.
8-4-8: APPEALS:
Any decision or determination of the Director under this Chapter may be
appealed to the Planning Commission. The decision of the Planning Commission
shall be final. (Ord. 8609, 8-19-86)
CHAPTER 5
INTERIM SCHOOL FACILITIES
SECTION:
8-5-1: Legislative Intent; Purpose
8-5-2: Application of Provisions
8-5-3: Definitions
8-5-4: Findings Regarding School Facilities
8-5-5: School Facilities Fee and Alternatives
8-5-6: Adoption of Fees by School District
8-5-7: Building Permits; Compliance with Provisions
8-5-8: Liability and Responsibility of School District
8-5-9: Exemptions from Provisions
8-5-1: LEGISLATIVE INTENT; PURPOSE:
This Chapter is adopted to supplement and implement sections 65970 through
65981 of the Government Code of the State of California in order to establish a
method of providing interim classrooms and related facilities for school
districts having conditions of overcrowding within one or more attendance
areas. All of the requirements of said sections 65970 through 65981 of the
Government Code are incorporated by reference and shall apply to school
districts and the City as though expressly set forth herein.
8-5-2: APPLICATION OF PROVISIONS:
This Chapter applies to all land proposed for residential development which is
owned by any individual, firm, partnership, joint venture, association,
corporation, estate or trust. In addition, it applies to any land proposed for
residential development which is owned by the United States, the State of
California and any agency of the State, a city and any public district or
political subdivision of the State of California insofar as it is legally
possible to enforce this Chapter, or any portion thereof, against such
entities.
8-5-3: DEFINITIONS:
The definitions set forth in sections 65973 and 65980 of the Government Code of
the State of California shall apply throughout this Chapter. In addition, the
following words and phrases, as used in this Chapter, shall have the following
meanings:
ATTENDANCE AREA: That portion of a school district, with identifiable
boundaries determined by the governing board of a school district, from which
children residing therein would normally be assigned to attend a specified
school in the district.
CITY: The City of Lemoore.
CITY COUNCIL and COUNCIL: The governing body of the City of Lemoore.
DEVELOPER: Any person, or any of the other entities mentioned in Section
8-5-2 of this Chapter, who applies to have property rezoned to a residential
use, applies for a discretionary permit for residential use, files a tentative
subdivision or parcel map 1 for residential purposes or makes application for a
building permit for residential purposes.
DWELLING UNIT: One or more rooms in a building, mobilehome or portion thereof,
designed, intended to be used or used for occupancy by one family for living
and sleeping quarters.
MOBILEHOME SPACE: Any space, including each space within a mobilehome park,
designed for parking a mobilehome on a temporary, semi-permanent or permanent
basis.
REASONABLE METHODS FOR MITIGATING CONDITIONS OF OVERCROWDING: Include but are
not limited to the following:
   A.   Agreements between a developer and the affected school district whereby
temporary-use buildings owned by the school district will be used.
   B.   The availability of funds, the use of which would not impair the normal
functioning of educational programs.
   C.   The use of funds which could be made available from the sale of surplus
school district real property and/or personal property.
   D.   The use of school district property for temporary-use buildings.
   E.   The use of other schools in the district not having overcrowded
conditions.
 
Notes
1 1. See Chapters 6 and 7 of this Title.
8-5-4: FINDINGS REGARDING SCHOOL FACILITIES:
   A.   Findings by School District; Notice: Before a developer may be required
to dedicate land or pay a fee in lieu thereof pursuant to sections 65970
through 65981 of the Government Code of the State of California and this
Chapter, the governing board of a school district which operates an elementary
or high school shall make the written findings, supported by clear and
convincing evidence, required by section 65971 of the Government Code of the
State of California and notify the City Council of its findings. The notice to
the City Council shall contain all of the following:
      1.   The findings required by section 65791 of the Government Code of the
State of California.
      2.   A summary of the evidence upon which the findings are based.
      3.   The reasonable methods of mitigating conditions of overcrowding
which have been considered by the school district and any determination made
concerning them by the district.
      4.   The precise geographic boundaries of the overcrowded attendance area
or areas.
      5.   Sufficient evidence on the interim classroom and related facilities
needed by the school district and the costs of providing the same so that the
City Council can set the fees to be charged to the developer or the applicant
for the building permit.
      6.   A statement that in consideration of the City concurring in the
finding of overcrowding the governing board of the school district covenants
and agrees at its sole cost and expense to defend and hold harmless the City
from all liability, claims, charges, expenses, costs and litigation of
whatsoever kind arising out of this Chapter, its sufficiency, legality, related
findings, fees schedule, implementation, operation, enforcement, collection or
otherwise.
   B.   Action by City Council: Upon receipt of such notice from a school
district, the City Council shall, by resolution, concur in the findings of the
school district or state why it does not concur in such findings.
8-5-5: SCHOOL FACILITIES FEE AND ALTERNATIVES:
   A.   Fee Imposed; Alternative Options:
      1.   When the City Council has concurred in such findings under
subsection
8-5-4B of this Chapter, from time to time the Council shall determine the fees
payable by a developer by resolution. Thereafter, the Council shall not approve
an ordinance rezoning property to a residential use, nor shall the City Council
or Planning Commission grant a discretionary permit for residential purposes,
nor shall the Planning Commission or City Council approve a tentative
subdivision or parcel map for residential purposes, nor shall the City Building
Inspector issue a building permit for residential purposes within such area
without said decision-making body imposing the fee determined by the Council,
as a condition of approval.
      2.   Notwithstanding the provisions of paragraph 1 above, the City
Council may find that there are specific overriding fiscal, economic, social or
environmental factors which in the judgment of the Council would benefit the
City and justify issuing such an approval without requiring the payment of fees
or, may require the dedication of land in subdivisions containing more than
fifty (50) parcels.
      3.   Notwithstanding the provisions of paragraph 1 above, a builder of a
residential development may exercise the option of providing interim facilities
at his or her expense at a place designated by the school district in lieu of
paying fees or may enter into any other legally binding agreement with the
school district which the school district deems satisfies its needs including,
but not limited to, an agreement where temporary-use buildings will be leased
to the school district or temporary-use buildings owned by the school district
will be used.
   B.   Amount of Fee or Land Dedication: The fees payable, or dedication of
land in lieu thereof, by a developer to a school district shall be determined
by resolution of the City Council at or after the time that the Council concurs
in the findings of the school district pursuant to subsection
8-5-4B of this Chapter. No dedication of land may be required in subdivisions
containing fifty (50) parcels or less. (Ord. 8411, eff. 1-3-85)
Any school facilities fees imposed by resolution and adopted by the Council
pursuant to subsection A of this Section shall not exceed the limits set forth
in Government Code section 65995. (Ord. 8615, 12-2-86)
   C.   Appeals: A right to appeal the imposition of fees to the City Council
shall be available to developers and/or builders of residential development for
those projects which come within the provisions of subsections A2 and A3 of
this Section, who shall be apprised of such right at the time that fees are
imposed in the manner provided by this Section.
   D.   Fee Payment and Land Dedication to Comply with Provisions: Any
dedication of land, or payment of fees in lieu thereof, shall comply fully with
all of the requirements of this Chapter and section 65974 of the Government
Code of the State of California. (Ord. 8411, eff. 1-3-85)
8-5-6: ADOPTION OF FEES BY SCHOOL DISTRICT:
   A.   Notwithstanding any provision of this Chapter to the contrary, if the
governing board of any school district within the City exercises its powers
pursuant to Government Code section 53080 and levies a fee, charge, dedication
or other form of requirement against any development project, as defined in
Government Code section 65928, then the provisions of this Chapter, including
any fees imposed pursuant hereto, shall not apply and only the fee, charge,
dedication or other requirement imposed by the governing board of the school
district shall apply.
   B.   If the governing board of any school district within the City levies a
fee, charge, dedication or other form of requirement against any development
project within the City, pursuant to the authority conferred by Government Code
section 53080, no building permit for said development project shall be
authorized or issued by the City except after receipt of written certification
by the appropriate school district of compliance or payment by the said
development project of the fees, charges or dedications levied by the governing
board of the school district.
   C.   Any development project, as herein defined, for which a final map was
approved and construction had commenced on or before September 1, 1986, is
subject only to the fees, charges or dedications imposed pursuant to this
Chapter. (Ord. 8615, 12-2-86)
8-5-7: BUILDING PERMITS; COMPLIANCE WITH PROVISIONS:
When the City Council has determined pursuant to subsection
8-5-5A of this Chapter that the developer shall dedicate real property, pay
fees in lieu thereof, or a combination of both, a copy of the determination of
the Council shall be sent to the City Building Inspector. The City Building
Inspector shall not issue any building permit for construction of a mobile park
or residence, nor any permit to relocate a residence, nor any permit to move in
a mobilehome pursuant to provisions of this Code, which is subject to said
determination by the Council unless he receives proper verification that the
required dedication of land and/or payment of fees to the school district has
been made. The developer may pay said fees directly to the school district or,
at his option, may pay said fees to the City Building Inspector who shall cause
the fee to be forwarded to the school district as soon as is practicable but in
no event more than forty five (45) days after receipt. It shall be the school
district's responsibility to promptly report in writing to the City Building
Inspector the receipt of fees collected that are imposed pursuant to this
Chapter and receipt of the required dedication of land, if any.
8-5-8: LIABILITY AND RESPONSIBILITY OF SCHOOL DISTRICT:
   A.   Liability: Notwithstanding anything in this Chapter to the contrary, no
fee or dedication of land may be imposed hereunder unless and until the City
receives a valid and enforceable commitment in writing from the school district
that it shall at its sole cost and expense defend, represent, pay and indemnify
the City from and for any claim, demand and/or litigation in any way arising
out of or relating to this Chapter, its enforcement and operation, the
establishment, the amount of and/or collection of fees established hereunder or
herefor.
   B.   Responsibility: It shall be the responsibility of the school district,
at its sole cost and expense, to appear and testify at any hearing, including
any appeal, relating to the imposition of fees or dedication of land.
8-5-9: EXEMPTIONS FROM PROVISIONS:
This Chapter shall not apply to the following types of projects:
   A.   Senior citizen housing approved, financed and/or subsidized by the
United States Department of Housing and Urban Development, and residential
development restricted to adults only; provided, the developer enters into a
recordable written agreement with the affected school district that the
developer will dedicate land or pay fees in lieu thereof, or a combination of
both, when and if such restrictions cease during a period the school district
has overcrowded conditions within the attendance area in which the development
is located.
   B.   Conversion of existing apartment buildings to condominiums or a
community apartment project, except where such apartment buildings were
restricted to "adults only" and said restrictions are removed when conversion
takes place.
   C.   Alterations, remodeling or renovations of existing residences which do
not result in additional dwelling units. (Ord. 8411, eff. 1-3-1985)
CHAPTER 6
DEVELOPMENT MAPS
(Rep. by Ord. 9805, 12-1-1998)
CHAPTER 7
LAND DIVISION
ARTICLE A. ESTABLISHMENT AND PURPOSE
SECTION:
8-7A-1: Title
8-7A-2: General Purpose
8-7A-3: Applicability
8-7A-1: TITLE:
This chapter shall be known as the LAND DIVISION CODE OF THE CITY OF LEMOORE.
(Ord. 2012-01, 4-17-2012)
8-7A-2: GENERAL PURPOSE:
This chapter is adopted pursuant to article XI, section 7 of the California
constitution and to supplement and implement the subdivision map act 1 .
It is the purpose of this chapter to regulate and control the division of land
within the city and to supplement the provisions of the subdivision map act
concerning the design, improvement, and survey data of subdivisions, the form
and content of all required maps provided by the subdivision map act, and the
procedure to be followed in securing the official approval of the city
regarding the maps. To accomplish this purpose, the regulations contained in
this chapter are determined to be necessary to:
   A.   Preserve the public health, safety, and general welfare;
   B.   Promote orderly growth and development through implementation of the
city's general plan; and
   C.   Ensure that properly designed infrastructure necessary to support
public service needs, including, but not limited to, transportation and utility
infrastructure, is provided in conjunction with subdivisions. (Ord. 2012-01, 4-
17-2012)
 
Notes
1 1. Gov.C. § 66410 et seq.
8-7A-3: APPLICABILITY:
   A.   Relationship To Prior Ordinance: The provisions of this chapter, as it
existed prior to the effective date of the ordinance enacting this chapter,
ordinance 2012-01, are repealed and superseded as provided in ordinance 2012-
01, with major additions and edits provided by ordinance 2023-11.
   B.   Prior Rights And Violations: The enactment of this chapter shall not
terminate or otherwise affect vested land division approvals or agreements
authorized under the provisions of any ordinance, nor shall violation of prior
ordinance be excused by the adoption of this chapter.
   C.   Effect Of Land Division Code Changes On Pending Applications: Following
the effective date of this chapter, or any amendment of this chapter,
regulations of this chapter are applicable to all pending entitlement
applications that have not been deemed complete, unless prohibited by state
law.
   D.   Conflicting Requirements:
      1.   Land Division Code And Municipal Code Provisions: If conflicts occur
between this land division code, the municipal code, or other plans and
policies adopted by the city, the land division code shall govern.
      2.   Development Agreements: If conflicts occur between the requirements
of this land division code and standards adopted as part of any development
agreement, the requirements of the development agreement shall govern.
   E.   Other Requirements/Permits: Nothing in this land division code
eliminates the need for obtaining any other permits required by the city, or
any permit, approval, or entitlement required by the regulations of any
regional, state, or federal agency.
   F.   Public Nuisance: Neither the provisions of this title nor the approval
of any permit authorized by this title shall authorize the maintenance of any
public nuisance as defined in the municipal code.
   G.   Severability, Partial Invalidation Of Land Division Code: If any
portion of this title is held to be invalid, unconstitutional, or unenforceable
by a court of competent jurisdiction, such determinations shall not affect the
validity of the remaining portions of this chapter. The city council hereby
declares that this chapter and each article, section, subsection, paragraph,
subparagraph, sentence, clause, phrase, and portion thereof is adopted without
regard to the fact that one or more portions of this chapter may be declared
invalid, unconstitutional, or unenforceable. (Ord. 2012-01, 4-17-2012; amd.
Ord. 2023-11, 9-19-2023)
ARTICLE B. ADMINISTRATION
SECTION:
8-7B-1: Purpose
8-7B-2: Responsibilities
8-7B-3: Procedures
8-7B-4: Application Processing
8-7B-5: Interpretation
8-7B-6: Enforcement
8-7B-7: Certificate Of Compliance
8-7B-8: Definitions Of Specific Terms
8-7B-1: PURPOSE:
The purpose of this article is to establish the administration of this chapter
and to set forth the basic responsibilities of the officials and bodies charged
with its administration. Further, this article specifies the authority and
procedures for clarifying any ambiguity in the regulations of this chapter in
order to ensure consistent interpretation and application of this chapter.
(Ord. 2012-01, 4-17-2012)
8-7B-2: RESPONSIBILITIES:
Except as expressly provided otherwise in this chapter, the responsibility for
actions taken under this chapter shall be as stated below and summarized in
table 8-7B-2-1, "Approving Authority", of this section.
   A.   City Council: The city council shall be responsible for:
      1.   The approval or denial of final maps and parcel maps;
      2.   The acceptance, acceptance subject to improvement, or rejection of
offers of dedications shown on final and parcel maps;
      3.   The approval, conditional approval, or denial of reversions to
acreage; and
      4.   Acting as the appeal board for hearing appeals of planning
commission actions as provided in this chapter.
   B.   Planning Commission: The planning commission shall be responsible for:
      1.   The approval, conditional approval, or denial of tentative maps and
subdivision modifications for all subdivisions resulting in divisions of land
into five (5) or more parcels (tentative subdivision maps);
      2.   The approval, conditional approval or denial of tentative maps and
subdivision modifications for all subdivisions resulting in divisions of land
into four (4) or fewer parcels (tentative parcel maps) where a tentative map is
required by this chapter;
      3.   The approval or denial of requests for extensions of time for
tentative maps subject to the provisions of the subdivision map act (section
66452.6);
      4.   Acting as the appeal board for hearing appeals of planning director
actions as provided in this chapter.
   C.   Planning Director: The planning director shall be responsible for:
      1.   The approval, conditional approval, or denial of lot line
adjustments and certificates of compliance;
      2.   The approval or denial of mergers of contiguous parcels under common
ownership without reversion under article E, “Voluntary Parcel Merger”, of this
chapter;
      3.   The waiver of the requirement to file a parcel map;
      4.   In conjunction with the public works director and city engineer,
recommending approval, conditional approval, or disapproval of the design of
proposed subdivisions, and the kinds, nature, and extent of on site and off
site improvements required in connection therewith to the planning commission
and/or the city council;
      5.   Reporting on land use matters related to proposed subdivisions to
the planning commission and/or city council, including, but not limited to,
consistency with the city general plan and the zoning code (title 9 of the
municipal code);
      6.   Recommending approval, conditional approval, or denial of tentative
maps of all proposed subdivisions of land to the planning commission and/or the
city council; and
      7.   Reviewing and making recommendations concerning proposed
subdivisions in the unincorporated territory of the county of Kings in
accordance with Subdivision Map Act section 66453 when the planning director
has elected to do so.
   D.   Public Works Director: The public works director shall be responsible
for:
      1.   Conducting investigations and reporting on the design and
improvement of all proposed subdivisions and making recommendations thereon to
the planning director, the planning commission, and the city council;
      2.   Recommending approval, conditional approval, or denial of tentative
maps of all proposed subdivisions of land, and requests for extensions of time
for tentative maps based upon the requirements of this chapter, the subdivision
map act, title 9 of the municipal code, the general plan, or the standards,
rules, or regulations adopted by the city pursuant to this chapter;
      3.   Such additional powers and duties as prescribed by law and by this
chapter.
   E.   City Engineer: The city engineer (or, as required by law, the city
surveyor) shall be responsible for:
      1.   Reviewing tentative, final, and parcel maps for compliance with the
standards of this chapter, the subdivision map act, and other local or state
law and providing a recommendation on such matters to the public works director
and planning director;
      2.   Investigating requests for and recommending action on certificates
of compliance as provided in section 66499.35 of the subdivision map act;
      3.   Completing those certificates on final and parcel maps as required
by this chapter and the subdivision map act;
      4.   Ministerially approving or denying urban lot split parcel maps under
article O, “Urban Lot Split Parcel Map”, of this chapter; and
      5.   All other duties as prescribed by the subdivision map act,
including, but not limited to, section 66416.5.
TABLE 8-7B-2-1
APPROVING AUTHORITY
 
R symbolizes the "recommending body"
F symbolizes the "final decision making body"
 
Type Of     Designated Approval Authority
Subdivision               Public Works Planning Planning
Permit Or   City Engineer Director     Director Commission City Council
Decision
Type Of            Designated Approval Authority
Subdivision Permit City Engineer Public Works Planning Planning   City Council
Or Decision                      Director     Director Commission
Administrative
decisions:
 Urban lot split  R                          F
  parcel map
 Certificates of  R             -            F        -          -
  compliance
Subdivision
permits:
 Voluntary parcel R             R            F        -          -
  merger
 Lot line         R             R            F        -          -
  adjustment
 Waiver of parcel R             R            F        -          -
  map
 Tentative        R             R            R        F          -
  subdivision map
  Tentative parcel
 map (when        R             R            R        F          -
  required by this
  chapter)
  Vesting
 tentative        R             R            R        F          -
  subdivision map
  Requests for
 extension of     R             R            R        F          -
  tentative maps1
  Requests for
 amendment to     R             R            R        F          -
  conditions of
  approval1
 Reversion to     R             R            R        -          F
  acreage
Offers and
recordation:
 Offers of        R             R            -        -          F
  dedication
 Parcel map       R             R            R        -          F
 Final map        R             R            R        -          F
 
Note:
   1.   Requests for extension of tentative maps and amendments to conditions
of approval shall be decided by the same authority that originally approved the
permit.
(Ord. 2012-01, 4-17-2012; amd. Ord. 2023-11, 9-19-2023)
8-7B-3: PROCEDURES:
   A.   Application: Application for subdivision permits and map approvals
under this chapter shall be submitted to the city as follows:
      1.   Applications for subdivision permits shall be made to the planning
director. The application shall be made on a form provided by the planning
department and accompanied by those materials specified by this chapter or as
otherwise required by the city. The application shall also be accompanied by a
fee as established by the city council.
      2.   Applications for final map, parcel map, and certificate of
compliance shall be made to the planning director. The application shall be
made on a form provided by the planning department and accompanied by those
materials specified by this chapter or as otherwise required by the city. The
application shall also be accompanied by a fee as established by the city
council.
   B.   Concurrent Application With Planning Permits: Application for
subdivision permits (lot line adjustment(s), tentative subdivision map(s),
tentative parcel map(s), and vesting tentative map(s)) may be submitted
concurrently with applications for planning permits as provided in title 9,
“Zoning”, of the municipal code. When a proposed project requires more than one
permit with more than one approving authority as identified in this chapter or
in title 9, “Zoning”, of the municipal code, all project permits shall be
processed concurrently, and final action shall be taken by the highest level
designated approving authority for all such requested permits. (Ord. 2012-01,
4-17-2012; amd. Ord. 2023-11, 9-19-2023)
8-7B-4: APPLICATION PROCESSING:
Unless otherwise provided for in this chapter, applications for subdivision
permits and decisions shall be processed as follows:
   A.   Application And Fee: Applications for subdivision permits and decisions
shall be made to the city on a form provided by the city, accompanied by those
materials specified in this chapter or as otherwise required by the city, along
with a filing fee as established by resolution of the city council.
   B.   Determination Of Completeness: Applications for subdivision permits and
decisions shall be reviewed for completeness as follows. These provisions are
consistent with the process provided under section
9-2A-5, "Application Requirements And Process", of the municipal code.
      1.   Application Completeness With Notification: Within 30 days of
application submittal to the planning department, the planning director shall
determine whether or not the application is complete. The planning director
shall notify the applicant of the determination either that:
         a.   All the submittal requirements have been satisfied and the
application has been accepted as complete; or
         b.   Specific information is still necessary to complete the
application. The letter may also identify preliminary information regarding the
areas in which the submitted plans are not in compliance with city standards
and requirements.
      2.   Application Completeness Without Notification: If the written
determination is not made within 30 days after receipt of the application and
the application includes a statement that it is an application for a
development permit, the application shall be deemed complete for purposes of
this chapter.
      3.   Resubmittal: Upon receipt and resubmittal of any incomplete
application, a new 30 day period shall begin during which the planning director
shall determine the completeness of the application. Application completeness
shall be determined and noticed as specified in subsection B1 of this section.
      4.   Incomplete Application: If additional information or submittals are
required and the application is not made complete within six (6) months of the
completeness determination letter, the application shall be deemed by the city
to have been withdrawn, and no action will be taken on the application.
Unexpended fees, as determined by the city, will be returned to the applicant.
If the applicant subsequently wishes to pursue the project, a new application,
including fees, plans, exhibits, and other materials, must then be filed in
compliance with this chapter.
      5.   Right To Appeal: The applicant may appeal the determination in
accordance with subsection E, “Appeals”, of this section.
   C.   Application Review And Report: Unless otherwise provided for in this
chapter, applications for subdivision permits and decisions shall be reviewed,
and a report prepared, as follows. These provisions are consistent with the
process provided for under subsection
9-2A-5D, “Application Review, Report, Determination, And Conditions”, of the
municipal code.
      1.   Project Routing: Upon acceptance of the application and either prior
to or after it is deemed complete, the planning director shall forward copies
of the application to affected agencies within five (5) days asking them to
provide their input or comments within 15 working days.
      2.   Environmental Review: After determination of a complete application,
the project shall be reviewed as required by the California environmental
quality act (CEQA) to determine whether the project is exempt from the
requirements of CEQA or is not a project as defined by CEQA, whether a negative
declaration or mitigated negative declaration may be issued, or whether an
environmental impact report (EIR) shall be required.
      3.   Application Review: The planning director, in conjunction with the
public works director, city engineer, and other agencies, shall review all
applications to determine compliance with provisions of this chapter and other
applicable city regulations (e.g., zoning code, general plan). The project
review will include any required environmental review as required by CEQA.
Pursuant to section 66452.1 of the subdivision map act, and unless extended by
mutual consent of the subdivider and the city, the designated approving
authority shall make a decision on the tentative map within 50 days of adopting
or certifying the environmental determination for the project.
      4.   Staff Report: When this chapter requires planning commission or city
council action, the planning director shall provide a written recommendation to
the designated approving authority to either approve, conditionally approve, or
deny the application. The staff report may be amended as necessary at any time
prior to the hearing to address issues or information not reasonably known at
the time the report is due.
      5.   Report Distribution: Each staff report shall be furnished to the
applicant and property owner at the same time as it is provided to the
designated approving authority prior to consideration of the requested
approval. In the case of a proposed conversion of residential real property to
a condominium project, community apartment project, or stock cooperative
project, pursuant to section 66452.3 of the subdivision map act, the report
shall also be provided to the tenants of the subject property at least three
(3) days prior to any hearing or action on such map.
   D.   Public Hearing And Public Notice: Where this chapter or the subdivision
map act requires a public hearing by the designated approving authority prior
to making a decision on an application for a subdivision permit or decision, a
public hearing shall be held, and public notice provided, as described below.
These requirements are consistent with those provided in section
9-2A-6, “Public Notice, Hearings, And Decisions”, of the municipal code.
      1.   Notice Of Hearing: Pursuant to California Government Code section
65091, not less than 10 days before the scheduled date of a hearing, public
notice shall be given of such hearing in the manner listed below. The notice
shall state the date, time, and place of hearing, identify the hearing body,
and include a general explanation of the matter to be considered and a general
description of the real property (text or diagram), if any, which is the
subject of the hearing.
         a.   Notice of the public hearing shall be published in at least one
newspaper of general circulation in the city.
         b.   Except as otherwise provided herein, notice of the public hearing
shall be mailed, postage prepaid, to the owners of property within a radius of
300 feet of the exterior boundaries of the property involved in the
application, using for this purpose that last known name and address of such
owners as shown upon the current tax assessor’s records. If the number of
owners exceeds 1,000, the city may, in lieu of mailed notice, provide notice by
placing notice of at least one-eighth (1/8) page in one newspaper of general
circulation within the city.
         c.   Notice of the public hearing shall be mailed, postage prepaid, to
the owner of the subject real property or the owner’s authorized agent, and to
the project applicant.
         d.   Notice of the public hearing shall be provided to each local
agency expected to provide water, sewerage, streets, roads, schools, or other
essential functions or services to the project whose ability to provide those
facilities and services may be significantly affected.
         e.   Notice of the public hearing shall be posted at city hall.
      2.   Requests For Notification: Any person who requests to be on a
mailing list for notice of hearing for a development project or projects shall
submit such request in writing to the city clerk. The city may impose a
reasonable fee for the purpose of recovering the cost of such notification.
      3.   Failure To Receive Notice: Failure of any person or entity to
receive any properly issued notice required by law for any hearing required by
this chapter shall not constitute grounds for any court to invalidate the
actions of a designated approving authority for which the notice was given.
      4.   Hearing Procedure: Hearings as provided for in this chapter shall be
held at the date, time, and place for which notice has been given as required
in this chapter. The designated approving authority shall conduct the public
hearing and hear testimony. The summary minutes shall be prepared and made part
of the permanent file of the case. Any hearing may be continued. If the hearing
is not continued to a specific date/time, then the hearing shall be noticed
again.
   E.   Appeals: Decisions of the designated approving authority may be
appealed as provided below. These provisions are consistent with the procedures
provided in section
9-2A-8, “Appeals”, of the municipal code.
      1.   Appeal Applicability And Authority: Any person dissatisfied with a
determination or action of the planning director or planning commission made
pursuant to this chapter may appeal such action to the designated appeal
authority listed in table
8-7B-4-1 , “Appeal Authority”, of this section, within 10 days from the date of
the action, or as otherwise provided by this chapter or the subdivision map
act. Actions by the city council are final, and no further administrative
appeals are available.
TABLE 8-7B-4-1
APPEAL AUTHORITY
 
Approving Authority For Action Being Appealed Appeal Authority
                                              Planning Commission City Council
City Engineer, Public Works Director, or      X                    
Planning director
Planning commission                                              X
 
      2.   Filing An Appeal: All appeals shall be submitted in writing,
identifying the determination or action being appealed and specifically stating
the basis or grounds of the appeal. Appeals shall be filed within 10 days
following the date of determination or action for which an appeal is made, or
as otherwise provided by this chapter or the subdivision map act. The appeal
shall be accompanied by a filing fee established by resolution of the city
council. The appeal shall be submitted to the city clerk. The filing of an
appeal shall stay the issuance of any necessary subsequent permit(s) associated
with any right or entitlement that will be subject of the appeal (e.g.,
building permits).
      3.   Notice And Schedule Of Appeal Hearings: Unless otherwise agreed upon
by the person filing the appeal and the applicant, appeal hearings should be
conducted within 45 days from the date of appeal submittal. Notice of hearing
for the appeal shall be provided pursuant to noticing requirements of
subsection D, “Public Hearing And Public Notice”, of this section.
      4.   Appeal Hearing And Action: Each appeal shall be considered a de novo
(new) hearing, and the appeal authority may reverse, modify, or affirm the
decision of the approving authority in whole or in part. In taking its action
on an appeal, the appeal authority shall state the basis for its action. The
appeal authority may modify, delete, or add such conditions as it deems
necessary. The appeal authority may also refer the matter back to the approving
authority for further action. The action of the appeal authority is final on
the date of decision and, unless expressly provided by the chapter, may not be
further appealed. A person may seek judicial review of a final decision of the
city in accordance with applicable sections of the California Government Code
or Code Of Civil Procedures.
   F.   Effective Date: Decisions on subdivision permits shall become effective
on the eleventh day after the date of action, immediately following expiration
of the 10 day appeal period. This is consistent with the procedures provided in
subsection E, “Action/Determination Procedures”, of the municipal code. All
other decisions shall become effective upon approval. (Ord. 2012-01, 4-17-2012;
amd. Ord. 2023-11, 9-19-2023)
8-7B-5: INTERPRETATION:
If ambiguity arises concerning the meaning or applicability of the provisions
of this chapter, it shall be the responsibility of the planning director to
review pertinent facts, determine the intent of the provision, and issue an
administrative interpretation of said provision(s) as specified in this
section.
   A.   Rules Of Interpretation:
      1.   Terminology: When used in this chapter, the following rules apply to
all provisions of this title:
         a.   Language: The words "shall", "must", "will", "is to", and "are
to" are always mandatory. "Should" is not mandatory but is strongly
recommended, and "may" is permissive.
         b.   Tense And Number: The present tense includes the past and future
tense, and the future tense includes the present. The singular number includes
the plural number, and the plural the singular, unless the natural construction
of the words indicates otherwise.
         c.   Conjunctions: "And" indicates that all connected items or
provisions shall apply. "Or" indicates that the connected items or provisions
may apply singly or in any combination. "Either...or" indicates that the
connected items and provisions shall apply singly but not in combination.
"Includes" and "including" shall mean "including, but not limited to".
      2.   Number Of Days: Whenever the number of days is specified in this
chapter, or in any permit, condition of approval, or notice issued or given as
provided in this chapter, the number of days shall be construed as calendar
days. When the last of the specified number of days falls on a weekend or city
holiday, time limits shall extend to the end of the next working day.
      3.   Minimum Requirements: When interpreting and applying the regulations
of this chapter, all provisions shall be considered to be minimum requirements,
unless specifically stated otherwise.
   B.   Record Of Interpretation: Whenever the planning director determines
that an ambiguity in a subdivision regulation exists or when an applicant
requests an interpretation based on his or her judgment or understanding of
this chapter, the planning director shall issue an official interpretation. The
procedure for preparation, content, procedure, and keeping of official
interpretations shall be as provided for official zoning interpretations in
section
9-2B-8, "Official Zoning Interpretation", of the municipal code.
   C.   Appeals: Interpretations may be appealed as specified in subsection
8-7B-4E, "Appeals", of this article. (Ord. 2012-01, 4-17-2012)
8-7B-6: ENFORCEMENT:
   A.   Generally: Except as otherwise provided herein, the planning director,
public works director, and city engineer are authorized and directed to enforce
the provisions of this chapter and the subdivision map act for subdivisions
within the city. The city attorney is authorized on behalf of the City of
Lemoore to file a suit in a superior court of competent jurisdiction to
restrain or enjoin any attempted or proposed subdivision or sale, lease, or
financing in violation of the subdivision map act, this chapter, or the
conditions and term of approvals granted thereunder.
   B.   Certificates Of Compliance: Applications for certificates of compliance
shall be filed with the planning department. The city engineer shall be
responsible for their issuance and recordation. The form of the application and
requirements for a certificate of compliance shall be prescribed by the city. A
nonrefundable fee in the amount established by resolution of the city council
for each lot or parcel for which a certificate is sought shall accompany the
application.
   C.   Illegal Subdivisions: No board, commission, officer, or employee of the
city shall issue any certificate or permit, or grant any approval necessary to
develop any real property within the city that has been divided, or which
resulted from a division, in violation of the provisions of the subdivision map
act or of this chapter.
   Whenever the city has knowledge that real property has been divided in
violation of the subdivision map act or this chapter, the city engineer shall,
upon receipt of information of such violation, file the notices required by
section 66499.36 of the subdivision map act and thereafter follow the
procedures set forth in that section. (Ord. 2012-01, 4-17-2012; amd. Ord. 2023-
11, 9-19-2023)
8-7B-7: CERTIFICATE OF COMPLIANCE:
   A.   Purpose: This section describes the procedures and processing for
certificates of compliance, consistent with the requirements of section
66499.35 of the subdivision map act.
   B.   Applicability: A certificate of compliance is a document, recorded by
the county recorder, which acknowledges that a parcel or lot of real property
(hereinafter parcel) is considered by the city to be a legal parcel or lot of
record. Any person owning real property, or a purchaser of the property in a
contract of sale of the property, may request a certificate of compliance from
the city.
   C.   Application: A certificate of compliance application shall be made on a
form provided by the planning department and submitted to the department. The
form shall be accompanied by an application deposit or fee as established by
resolution of the city council. The application shall also include a chain of
title, consisting of copies of deeds beginning before the division of the
property and running through to the time of application for the certificate of
compliance, unless the parcel(s) in question was created through a recorded
subdivision map.
   D.   City Review And Action: The application for certificate of compliance
shall be reviewed and acted upon as provided below.
      1.   Planning Director Review: The planning director, in consultation
with the city engineer, shall review the request and make a determination on
the application as follows:
         a.   If the planning director makes a determination that the parcel(s)
complies with the subdivision map act and this chapter, the planning director
shall cause a certificate of compliance to the filed for record with the county
recorder. The form of the certificate shall be as described below.
         b.   If the planning director determines that the parcel(s) does not
comply with the provisions of the subdivision map act or this chapter, the
planning director shall issue a conditional certificate of compliance. The city
may, as a condition to granting a conditional certificate of compliance, impose
any conditions that would have been applicable to the division of the property
at the time the applicant acquired their interest in the property and that had
been established at that time by the subdivision map act and this chapter. Upon
making a determination and establishing conditions, the planning director shall
file a conditional certificate of compliance for record with the county
recorder. The certificate shall serve as notice to the property owner who has
applied for the certificate, a grantee of the property owner, or any subsequent
transferee to assignee of the property, that the fulfillment and implementation
of the conditions shall be required prior to subsequent issuance of a permit or
other grant of approval for development of the property. Compliance with the
conditions shall not be required until the time that a permit or other grant of
approval for development of the property is issued by the City.
      2.   Form Of Certificate: The certificate of compliance shall identify
the property, shall state that the division complies with the provisions of the
subdivision map act and this chapter, and shall include all information
required under section 66499.35 of the subdivision map act.
      3.   Effective Date: A certificate of compliance shall not become final
until the document has been recorded by the county recorder.
      4.   Recorded Final Map Or Parcel Map: A recorded final map or parcel map
shall constitute a certificate of compliance with respect to the parcels of
real property described in the final or parcel map. (Ord. 2012-01, 4-17-2012;
amd. Ord. 2023-11, 9-19-2023)
8-7B-8: DEFINITIONS OF SPECIFIC TERMS:
For the purposes of this chapter, the following terms, phrases, and words shall
have the following definitions:
   A.   “A” Definitions:
      ALLEY: A public or private way providing a secondary means of vehicular
access to abutting property.
   B.   “B” Definitions:
      BUILDING SITE: See “lot”, as defined in title 9, “Zoning”, of the
municipal code.
   C.   “C” Definitions:
      CEQA: Refers to the California Environmental Quality Act, Public
Resources Code section 21000 et seq., and the state CEQA guidelines.
      CITY ENGINEER: The engineer of the city of Lemoore, or his or her
designee.
      COUNTY: The County of Kings.
   D.   “D” Definitions:
      DESIGNATED REMAINDER: Any unit or units of improved or unimproved land
not divided for the purpose of sale, lease, or finance and designated as
remainder by a subdivider for purposes of section 66424.6 of the subdivision
map act.
      DRIP LINE: A line which may be drawn on the ground around a tree directly
under its outermost branch tips and which identifies that location where
rainwater tends to drip from the tree.
      DWELLING UNIT: A group of rooms or a single room with kitchen facilities
occupied or intended for occupancy as separate living quarters by a family or
other group of persons living together, or by a person living alone,
irrespective of the age of the occupant or occupants. See title 9, “Zoning”, of
the municipal code.
   E.   “E” Definitions:
      EASEMENT: A right of way offered or dedicated to the city or other public
entity or a public utility for purposes of providing access to a division of
land, for placing utilities, or for any other specific purpose.
   F.   “F” Definitions:
      FINAL MAP: A map showing a subdivision of five (5) or more parcels for
which a tentative and final map are required by the subdivision map act and
this chapter, prepared in accordance with the provisions of the subdivision map
act and this title, and designed to be filed for recordation in the office of
the county recorder.
      FIRE PROTECTION: Such fire hydrants and other protective measures as may
be reasonably required by the city fire marshal for protection of property to
be located within a subdivision.
      FLOOD HAZARD: A hazard to land or improvements due to seasonal inundation
or to overflow water having sufficient velocity to transport or deposit debris,
scour the surface soil, dislodge or damage buildings, or erode the banks of
watercourses.
      FRONTAGE ROAD: A street lying adjacent and approximately parallel to and
separated from a freeway or other public street, and which affords access to
abutting property.
   G.   “G” Definitions:
      GENERAL PLAN: The general plan of the city of Lemoore.
      GEOLOGICAL HAZARD: A hazard inherent in the crust of the earth, or
artificially created, which is dangerous or potentially dangerous to life,
property, or improvements due to the movement, failure, or shifting of earth.
   H.   “H” Definitions:
      HIGHWAY: A roadway defined as a freeway in section 23.5 of the Streets
And Highways Code of the state of California.
   I.   “I” Definitions:
      IMPROVEMENT PLANS: The plans, profiles, cross sections, and
specifications for all proposed improvements. Improvement plans are often
referred to as civil plans.
      IMPROVEMENT STANDARDS: The requirements for design and construction of
improvements established by the city council as set forth in the city’s
“Standard Specifications For Public Works Improvements”.
      INUNDATION: Ponded water or water in motion of sufficient depth to damage
property due to the presence of the water or to deposits of alluvium.
   J.   “J” Definitions: Reserved for future use.
   K.   “K” Definitions: Reserved for future use.
   L.   “L” Definitions:
      LOOP OUT STREET: A street formed by the intersection of two (2) streets
where one street curves into another to form a two-way intersection. The
outside curb flares out, or loops out, to provide sufficient turning space for
larger vehicles, such as fire and solid waste.
      LOT: A parcel of land which is identified on a final map or parcel map
recorded in the office of the county recorder of Kings County with a separate
and distinct number or letter. See “lot” as defined in title 9, “Zoning”, of
the municipal code.
      LOT, FLAG: A parcel of land shaped like a “flag” as defined in title 9,
“Zoning”, of the municipal code.
      LOT LINE ADJUSTMENT: The relocation of an interior lot line between four
(4) or fewer existing adjoining parcels, where the land taken from one parcel
is added to an adjoining parcel, and where a greater number of parcels than
originally existed is not thereby created.
      LOT, THROUGH: A “lot” having frontage on two (2) parallel or
approximately parallel streets, as defined in title 9, “Zoning”, of the
municipal code.
   M.   “M” Definitions:
      MOBILEHOME SPACE: Any space designated, designed, or usable for the
occupancy of one mobilehome on a temporary, semipermanent, or permanent basis.
      MULTIPLE-FAMILY DWELLING: A building or portion thereof designed for
occupancy by three (3) or more families living independently of each other, but
under one roof. See “dwelling, multi-family” as defined in title 9, “Zoning”,
of the municipal code.
   N.   “N” Definitions: Reserved for future use.
   O.   “O” Definitions: Reserved for future use.
   P.   “P” Definitions:
      PARCEL MAP: A map showing a subdivision of four (4) or fewer parcels, as
required by the subdivision map act and this chapter, prepared in accordance
with the provisions of the subdivision map act and this chapter, and designed
to be filed for recordation in the office of the county recorder. This excludes
a remainder parcel and may be greater than four (4) parcels if certain
exceptions apply.
      PLANNED DEVELOPMENT: A real property development other than a condominium
project, or a stock cooperative, having either or both of the following
features: (a) Common area that is owned either by an association or in common
be the owners of the separate interest who possess appurtenant rights to the
beneficial use and enjoyment of the common area. (b) Common area and an
association that maintains the common area with the power to levy assessments
that may become a lien upon the separate interests in accordance with Article 2
(commencing with Section 6808) of Chapter 7 of Civil Code.association that
maintains the common area with the power to levy assessments that may become a
lien upon the separate interests in accordance with Article 2 (commencing with
Section 6808) of Chapter 7 of Civil Code.
      PLANNING DIRECTOR: The planning director of the City of Lemoore, or his
or her designee.
      PRIVATE ROAD EASEMENT: A parcel of land not dedicated as a public street,
over which a private easement for road purposes is proposed to be or has been
granted to the owners of property contiguous or adjacent thereto which
intersects or connects with a public street, or a private street; in each
instance the instrument creating such easement shall be or shall have been duly
recorded or filed in the office of the county recorder.
      PUBLIC FACILITIES MAINTENANCE DISTRICT: Any assessment district formed
for the purposes of financing the maintenance of public facilities, as provided
in title 7, chapter 10, “City Maintenance Districts”, of the municipal code.
      PUBLIC WAY: Any street, highway, alley, pedestrian way, equestrian or
hiking trail, biking path, channel, viaduct, subway, tunnel, bridge, easement,
right of way, or other way in which the public use has a right of use.
      PUBLIC WORKS DIRECTOR: The public works director of the City of Lemoore,
or his or her designee.
   Q.   “Q” Definitions: Reserved for future use.
   R.   “R” Definitions:
      ROADWAY: That portion of a right of way for a street, highway, or alley
designed or used predominately to accommodate the movement of motor vehicles.
   S.   “S” Definitions:
      SINGLE-FAMILY DWELLING UNIT: A detached building designed exclusively for
occupancy by one family. See “dwelling, single- family” as defined in title 9,
“Zoning”, of the municipal code.
      SPECIFIC PLAN: A plan for a specific plan as described in title 9,
“Zoning”, of the municipal code.
      STREET, ARTERIAL: A street that is used or is intended to be used as the
principal route of traffic flow, connecting areas of major traffic generation
to highways and county roads.
      STREET, COLLECTOR: A street that is used or is intended to be used for
the principal purpose of collecting traffic from local streets and transferring
it to arterial streets or highways.
      STREET, CUL-DE-SAC: A street that terminates in a permanent turnaround
and which by design is not intended to continue beyond its terminal point.
      STREET, DEDICATED: A right of way dedicated to the city and legally
accepted by the city council for public use as a street.
      STREET, LOCAL: Any street other than a collector street, arterial, or
freeway that provides direct access to abutting properties and serves local
versus through traffic. Also used to mean a street that is used or is intended
to be used for the principal purpose of serving as access to abutting
properties.
      STREET, PRIVATE: A street privately owned and maintained (e.g., by a
homeowners’ association) and approved by the city council for street purposes,
which has not been dedicated or accepted as a public street and which connects
parcels or lots with a public street.
      STREET, PUBLIC: Any street which is dedicated or proposed to be dedicated
for public use and is maintained or proposed to be maintained by the city, the
county, or the state.
      STREET, STUB: A street that terminates at the boundary line of a
subdivision but is intended and designed to be extended at a later date to
provide access to abutting parcels or lots.
      SUBDIVIDER: A person, firm, corporation, partnership, or association, as
defined in section 66423 of the subdivision map act, who proposes to divide,
divides, or causes to be divided real property into a subdivision for
themselves or for others except that employees and consultants of such persons
or entities, acting in such capacity, are not “subdividers”.
      SUBDIVISION: The division, by any subdivider, of any unit or units of
improved or unimproved land, or any portion thereof, shown on the latest
equalized county assessment roll as a unit or as contiguous units, for the
purpose of sale, lease, or financing, whether immediate or future as defined in
section 66424 of the subdivision map act.
      SUBDIVISION MAP ACT: The subdivision map act of the state of California,
Government Code section 66410 et seq., inclusive, as that act currently
provides or is subsequently amended.
   T.   “T” Definitions:
      TEMPORARY TURNAROUND: A paved area for turning vehicles at the end of a
dead end street, which is constructed either within the dedicated right of way
or upon a temporary easement and which is intended to be replaced or removed
after a period of time.
      TENTATIVE MAP: A map made for the purpose of showing the design
improvements of the proposed subdivision and the existing conditions in or
around it. See article F, “Tentative Maps”, of this chapter.
      TWO-FAMILY DWELLING UNIT: A detached building designed exclusively for
occupancy by two (2) families living independently of each other, but under one
roof. See “dwelling, two-family” as defined in title 9, “Zoning”, of the
municipal code.
   U.   “U” Definitions:
      URBAN LOT SPLIT: A subdivision of an existing lot within a single-family
residential zoning district into no more than two new parcels that meet all of
the requirements set forth in Government Code section 66411.7 and article O,
“Urban Lot Split Parcel Map” of this chapter.
   V.   “V” Definitions:
      VEHICULAR ACCESS RIGHTS: The right of vehicular access of owners or
occupants of abutting lands to a public way.
      VESTING TENTATIVE MAP: A tentative map which shall have printed
conspicuously on its face the words “vesting tentative map” at the time it is
filed, in accordance with article H, “Vesting Tentative Maps”, of this chapter.
Consistent with sections 66498.1(b) and 66474.2(a) of the subdivision map act,
approval of a vesting tentative map confers a vested right to proceed with
development in substantial compliance with the ordinances, policies, and
standards in effect at the time the vesting tentative map application is
complete.
      VOLUNTARY PARCEL MERGER: The joining of two (2) or more contiguous
parcels of land under one ownership into one parcel.
   W.   “W” Definitions:
      WATER SUPPLY: Such water supply and distribution facilities as are
necessary to provide a reliable and adequate water supply for appropriate
residential, commercial, and industrial use and for public and private fire
protection purposes.
   X.   “X” Definitions: Reserved for future use.
   Y.   “Y” Definitions: Reserved for future use.
   Z.   “Z” Definitions:
      ZONING CODE: The zoning code of the City of Lemoore, Title 9 of the
municipal code, and revisions thereto.
(Ord. 2012-01, 4-17-2012; amd. Ord. 2023-11, 9-19-2023)
ARTICLE C. DIVISION OF LAND; REQUIRED MAPS
SECTION:
8-7C-1: Purpose
8-7C-2: Required Maps
8-7C-1: PURPOSE:
The purpose of this article is to establish the types of maps that are required
for the division of land in the city. (Ord. 2012-01, 4-17-2012)
8-7C-2: REQUIRED MAPS:
   A.   General Requirements: Generally, the division of land creating five (5)
or more parcels requires the preparation and approval of a tentative map
(referred to as a tentative subdivision map) and the subsequent preparation,
approval, and recordation of a final map as described in this chapter. Those
specific types of land division requiring a tentative subdivision map and final
map are described in subsection B of this section.
When the division of land does not require the preparation of a tentative
subdivision map and a subsequent final map pursuant to section 66426 of the
subdivision map act, a parcel map shall instead be required (e.g., the creation
of 4 or fewer parcels). The process for preparation, approval, and recordation
of parcel map shall be as described in this chapter. In certain circumstances,
as provided in subsection C of this section, a tentative parcel map shall be
prepared and approved prior to the parcel map. Additionally, and separate from
the tentative parcel map process and as provided under section 66428(b) of the
subdivision map act, the requirement for a parcel map may be waived by the city
pursuant to the provisions of section
8-7G-12, "Waiver Of Parcel Map", of this chapter.
Lastly, there are, as provided in the subdivision map act, a class of
subdivisions that are exempt entirely from the requirements of a tentative map,
final map, or parcel map. Those classes of subdivisions are described in
subsection D of this section.
   B.   Divisions Of Land Requiring A Tentative Subdivision Map And Final Map
And Exemptions Thereto: As provided in section 66426 of the subdivision map
act, a tentative subdivision map and a final map shall be required for all
divisions of land where the land will be divided into five (5) or more parcels,
five (5) or more condominiums, a community apartment project containing five
(5) or more parcels, or for the conversion of a dwelling to a stock cooperative
containing five (5) or more dwelling units except where:
      1.   The land before division contains less than five (5) acres, each
parcel created by the division abuts upon a maintained public street or highway
and no dedications or improvements are required by the legislative body; or
      2.   Each parcel created by the division has a gross area of twenty (20)
acres or more and has an approved access to a maintained public street or
highway; or
      3.   The land consists of a parcel or parcels of land having approved
access to a public street or highway which comprises part of a tract of land
zoned for industrial or commercial development, and which has the approval of
the governing body as to street alignments and widths; or
      4.   Each parcel created by the division has a gross area of not less
than forty (40) acres or is not less than one-quarter of a one-quarter section;
or
      5.   The land being subdivided is solely for the creation of an
environmental subdivision pursuant to section 66418.2 of the subdivision map
act.
   C.   Divisions Of Land Requiring A Parcel Map And Those Specific Divisions
Also Requiring A Tentative Parcel Map: The division of land in a manner that
does not require a tentative subdivision map and final map as provided in
subsection B of this section shall require the preparation of a parcel map.
This specifically includes the division of land into four (4) or fewer parcels
and those divisions of land described in subsections B1 through B5 of this
section. Generally, only a parcel map shall be required and the preparation of
a tentative parcel map shall be prepared at the option of the subdivider
(section 66428(c) of the subdivision map act); however, if the proposed
division of land meets any of the following qualifications, a tentative parcel
map shall also be prepared and approved prior to the preparation, approval, and
recordation of the final parcel map. This section shall not limit the
subdivider, upon their own decision, to elect to submit for a tentative parcel
map prior to a parcel map where a tentative parcel map is not required by this
chapter.
      1.   The proposed subdivision is greater than twenty (20) acres.
      2.   The proposed subdivision involves the relocation or abandonment of
existing easements or rights of way held by the city or another public agency.
      3.   The parcel map, as presented, cannot be approved by the city for
recording without the imposition of conditions of approval to ensure
consistency with the general plan, this code, the city's improvement standards,
or address other issues of public safety.
   D.   Projects Exempt From Map Requirements: As provided by state law, the
following divisions of land are specifically exempt from the requirements of a
tentative map, final map, or parcel map:
      1.   Lot line adjustments between four (4) or fewer existing adjoining
parcels and where a greater number of parcels than originally existed is not
being created. The lot line adjustment shall be reflected in a recorded deed.
No record of survey shall be required unless otherwise required by section 8762
of the Business And Professions Code. The procedure for a lot line adjustment
shall be as provided in article D, "Lot Line Adjustments", of this chapter.
      2.   Subdivisions of a portion of the operating right of way of a
railroad corporation, defined by section 230 of the state Public Utilities
Code, which are created by short term leases terminable by either party on not
more than thirty (30) days' notice in writing.
      3.   Land conveyed to or from a governmental agency, public entity, or
public utility, or for land conveyed to a subsidiary of a public utility for
conveyance to such public utility for rights of way, unless a showing is made
by the department in individual cases, upon substantial evidence, that public
policy necessitates a parcel map.
      4.   Any other actions specifically excluded from section 66412 et seq.,
of the subdivision map act. (Ord. 2012-01, 4-17-2012)
ARTICLE D. LOT LINE ADJUSTMENTS
SECTION:
8-7D-1: Purpose
8-7D-2: General Provisions
8-7D-3: Process For Reviewing Lot Line Adjustments
8-7D-4: Appeals
8-7D-5: Recording
8-7D-6: Record Of Survey
8-7D-1: PURPOSE:
The purpose of this article is to establish the procedures for application,
processing, and deciding applications for lot line adjustments between four (4)
or fewer existing adjoining parcels and where a greater number of parcels than
originally existed is not being created. (Ord. 2012-01, 4-17-2012)
8-7D-2: GENERAL PROVISIONS:
The designated approving authority for lot line adjustments shall be the
planning director. The procedure provided by this article is an alternative to
the procedures provided by articles F, "Tentative Maps", and G, "Final Maps And
Parcel Maps", of this chapter. Nothing stated herein shall be construed to
prevent an applicant from filing a tentative map, a final map, or a parcel map
for any lot line adjustment. (Ord. 2012-01, 4-17-2012)
8-7D-3: PROCESS FOR REVIEWING LOT LINE ADJUSTMENTS:
      1.   A completed application form, of which the blank form shall be
provided by the planning department.
      2.   A preliminary title report that is current and dated not more than
90 days prior to submittal of application. All items referenced within the
title report shall be submitted for review (i.e., deeds, easements, and record
maps) when submitting application.
      3.   A filing fee as established by resolution of the city council.
      4.   Upon filing the application, the planning department will assign the
application a Lot Line Adjustment number.
      5.   The legal descriptions of the original parcels, with a title as
Exhibit A, Lot Line Adjustment No. 20xx-xx, Existing Legal Descriptions. The
licensed land surveyor or registered civil engineer authorized to practice land
surveying shall sign the exhibit along with his/her seal or stamp and
expiration date of license/registration per the Professional Land Surveyor’s
Act, Section 8761.
      6.   The legal descriptions of the proposed parcels, with a title as
Exhibit B, Lot Line Adjustment No. 20xx-xx, Adjusted Legal Descriptions. The
licensed land surveyor or registered civil engineer authorized to practice land
surveying shall sign the exhibit along with his/her seal or stamp and
expiration date of license/registration per the Professional Land Surveyor’s
Act, Section 8761.
      7.   One (1) copy of a map exhibit, legibly drawn on a sheet(s) eight and
a half inches by eleven inches (8-1/2" x 11"), and titled Exhibit C, Lot Line
Adjustment No. 202x-xx. that includes an Owner’s Statement in a format
determined by the City Engineer or City Surveyor and the Planning Director, as
well as the following:.
         a.   The entire existing boundary line of all affected parcels
conforming with existing record data, with essential information as to bearings
and dimensions.
         b.   The proposed boundary lines with dimensions and curve radii of
the proposed parcels.
         c.   Each parcel identified with a letter, assessor parcel number,
deed document number and area of each existing parcel (Existing Parcel A,
Existing Parcel B etc.).
         d.   Each parcel identified with a letter and area of each proposed
parcel (Adjusted Parcel A, Adjusted Parcel B etc.).
         e.   Identification, location, and dimensions of all existing and
proposed improvements.
         f.   The names, widths, and locations of the existing and proposed
public and private streets.
         g.   The location, width, purpose, and owners of existing easements or
rights of way and all easements located to boundary, if applicable.
         h.   The date of application, the north arrow, scale of drawing, and
assessor’s parcel number(s) of the area to be adjusted and a legend, if
applicable.
         i.   The owner’s name, assessor parcel number, and deed document
number of all adjoining parcels.
         j.   The location and width of watercourses and areas potentially
subject to flooding, and methods of floodwater drainage control.
         k.   The location of existing wells and septic systems.
         l.   The location of structures, irrigation ditches, and railroad
rights of way, if any.
         m.   The location and width of proposed building setbacks.
         n.   A small scale vicinity map portraying and orienting the
boundaries of the proposed lot line adjustment with respect to surrounding
areas and roads.
         o.   The existing use and existing zoning district of the property.
         p.   The proposed use and proposed zoning district of the property.
         q.   The method of sewage disposal, storm drainage, and source of
water.
         r.   The location, trunk diameter, drip line location, and species
name of any trees, with notations as to their retention or destruction; and any
vernal pools or wetlands located on the property to be adjusted. The general
description of trees and shrubs should include an indication as to their size
(diameter) and type, if known.
         s.   The licensed land surveyor or registered civil engineer
authorized to practice land surveying shall sign the exhibit along with his/her
seal or stamp and expiration date of license/registration per the Professional
Land Surveyor’s Act, Section 8761.
   B.   Application Review: Applications for lot line adjustments shall be
reviewed as provided in subsections
8-7B-4B, “Determination Of Completeness”, and
8-7B-4C, “Application Review And Report”, of this chapter.
   C.   Timely Processing: Applications for lot line adjustments shall be
processed by the applicant in a timely manner. If the applicant fails to
process the application to completion within one year from the date the
application was first submitted, due to the applicant’s failure to respond to
requests for additional information, to pay processing fees, or for any other
reason, and upon written notice of the city, the application shall be deemed
withdrawn. Thereafter, a new application, including the filing fee, will be
needed to process the lot line adjustment.
   D.   Decision By The Approving Authority: A decision on the application for
lot line adjustment shall be made by the designated approving authority after
review and recommendation by the public works director and city engineer. The
application shall be decided within the time limits described in this chapter
and the subdivision map act.
   E.   Conditions Of Approval: In deciding applications for lot line
adjustments, the designated approving authority may impose conditions on the
approval of the application. In accordance with section 66412(d) of the
subdivision map act, the conditions imposed shall be limited to:
      1.   Ensuring conformity to the city’s general plan, any applicable
specific plan, the zoning code, and the city’s adopted building code.
      2.   Requiring the prepayment of real property taxes.
      3.   The relocation of existing utilities, infrastructure, or easements.
   F.   Findings: The designated approving authority shall approve a lot line
adjustment sought pursuant to this article if the designated approving
authority finds:
      1.   That the lot line adjustment will not result in the abandonment of
any street or utility easement of record, and that, if the lot line adjustment
will result in the transfer of property from one owner to another owner, the
deed to the subsequent owner expressly reserves any street or utility easement
of record.
      2.   That the lot line adjustment will not result in the elimination or
reduction in size of the accessway to any resulting parcel, or that the
application is accompanied by new easements to provide access which meet all
the city requirements regarding access to parcels in the location and of the
size as those proposed to be created.
      3.   That the resulting parcels conform to the requirements of the city’s
general plan, any applicable specific plan, the city’s adopted building code,
and the city’s zoning code. (Ord. 2012-01, 4-17-2012; amd. Ord. 2023-11, 9-19-
2023)
8-7D-4: APPEALS:
The applicant or any interested person adversely affected by any action of the
designated approving authority on a lot line adjustment may, within 10 days
after the decision, appeal the decision consistent with subsection
8-7B-4E, “Appeals”, of this chapter. (Ord. 2012-01, 4-17-2012; amd. Ord. 2023-
11, 9-19-2023)
8-7D-5: RECORDING:
Pursuant to section 66412(d) of the subdivision map act, the lot line
adjustment shall be reflected in perfecting deeds. The perfecting deeds shall
be in a form satisfactory to the county recorder. It shall be submitted to the
planning department for a determination that the perfecting deeds complies with
the approved lot line adjustment. The approved perfecting deeds shall
thereafter be forwarded by the planning department to the county recorder’s
office for recording. The applicant shall pay all recording fees. (Ord. 2012-
01, 4-17-2012; amd. Ord. 2023-11, 9-19-2023)
8-7D-6: RECORD OF SURVEY:
If a field survey was conducted or if monuments are set at the new parcel
lines, a record of survey shall be required pursuant per the Professional Land
Surveyor’s Act, Section 8762 of the Business and Professions Code, unless the
boundary is monumented as part of a land division with a recorded map. (Ord.
2023-11, 9-19-2023)
ARTICLE E. VOLUNTARY PARCEL MERGER
SECTION:
8-7E-1: Purpose
8-7E-2: Voluntary Parcel Merger Authorized
8-7E-3: Process For Reviewing A Voluntary Parcel Merger
8-7E-4: Appeals
8-7E-5: Recording
8-7E-1: PURPOSE:
The purpose of this article is to provide a simplified procedure to allow for
the removal of previously approved parcel lines and the merger of contiguous
parcels under common ownership at the request of the property owner, pursuant
to section 66499.203/4 of the subdivision map act. The procedure provided by
this article is an alternative to the procedures provided by articles F,
"Tentative Maps" and G, "Final Maps And Parcel Maps", of this chapter. Nothing
stated herein shall be construed to prevent an applicant from filing a
tentative map and a final map or parcel map for any merger. (Ord. 2012-02, 6-5-
2012)
8-7E-2: VOLUNTARY PARCEL MERGER AUTHORIZED:
Pursuant to section 66499.203/4 of the subdivision map act, the planning
commission is authorized to approve the merger requested by the property owner
of contiguous parcels under common ownership without reversion to acreage, upon
making the findings and utilizing the procedures set forth in this chapter. The
city clerk shall cause an instrument to be recorded as evidence of a merger
approved under this article. (Ord. 2012-02, 6-5-2012; amd. Ord. 2023-11, 9-19-
2023)
8-7E-3: PROCESS FOR REVIEWING A VOLUNTARY PARCEL MERGER:
   A.   Application: An application for a merger pursuant to this article may
be made by owners of all affected parcels or individuals authorized by the
owner(s) to make an application. Such application shall be filed with the
planning department and shall include the following information, materials, and
documents to the satisfaction of the city:
      1.   A completed application form, of which the blank form shall be
provided by the planning department.
      2.   A filing fee as established by resolution of the city council.
      3.   A preliminary title report that is current and dated not more than
90 days prior to submittal of application. All items referenced within the
title report shall be submitted for review (i.e., deeds, easements, and record
maps) when submitting application.
      4.   The legal descriptions of the existing parcels, with a title as
Exhibit A, Voluntary Parcel Merger No. 20xx-xx, Existing Legal Descriptions.
The licensed land surveyor or registered civil engineer authorized to practice
land surveying shall sign the exhibit along with his/her seal or stamp and
expiration date of license/registration per the Professional Land Surveyor’s
Act, Section 8761. Upon filing the application, the planning department will
assign the application a Voluntary Parcel Merger number.
      5.   One (1) copy of a map, legibly drawn on a sheet(s)eight and one half
(8½) inches by 11 inches, that includes all of the following information:
         a.   The entire existing boundary line of all affected parcels
conforming with existing record data, with essential information as to bearings
and dimensions.
         b.   The proposed merged boundary lines with dimensions and curve
radii and area of the merged parcel.
         c.   Each existing parcel identified with a letter, assessor parcel
number, deed document number and area of each parcel.
         d.   The names, widths, and locations of the existing public and
private streets.
         e.   The location, width, purpose, and owners of existing easements or
rights of way with all easements located to boundary, if applicable.
         f.   The north arrow, scale of drawing and a legend, if applicable.
         g.   The owner’s name, assessor parcel number and deed document number
of all adjoining parcels.
         h.   The location of building structures with building setbacks
measured from the merged parcel boundaries.
         i.   A small scale vicinity map portraying and orienting the
boundaries of the voluntary parcel merger boundary with respect to surrounding
areas and roads.
         j.   The licensed land surveyor or registered civil engineer
authorized to practice land surveying shall sign the exhibit along with his/her
seal or stamp and expiration date of license/registration per the Professional
Land Surveyor’s Act, Section 8761.
      6.   A perfecting deed, which will record when the Notice of Voluntary
Parcel Merger is approved.
   B.   Application Review: Applications for voluntary parcel mergers shall be
reviewed as provided in subsections
8-7B-4B, “Determination Of Completeness”, and
8-7B-4C, “Application Review And Report”, of this chapter.
   C.   Timely Processing: Applications for voluntary parcel mergers shall be
processed by the applicant in a timely manner. If the applicant fails to
process the application to completion within one year from the date the
application was first submitted, due to the applicant’s failure to respond to
requests for additional information, to pay processing fees, or for any other
reason, and upon written notice of the city, the application shall be deemed
withdrawn. Thereafter, a new application, including the filing fee, will be
needed to process voluntary parcel merger.
   D.   Decision By The Approving Authority: A decision on the application for
voluntary parcel merger shall be made by the designated approving authority
after review and recommendation by the public works director and city engineer.
The application shall be decided within the time limits described in this
chapter and the subdivision map act.
   E.   Findings: The designated approving authority shall not approve a
Voluntary Parcel Merger pursuant to this article unless it makes all of the
following findings:
      1.   That all required street, access, and utility easements are in
place.
      2.   That the resulting parcel conforms to the requirements of this
chapter, the city’s general plan, any applicable specific plan, the city’s
zoning code, and the city’s building code. (Ord. 2012-02, 6-5-2012; amd. Ord.
2023-11, 9-19-2023)
8-7E-4: APPEALS:
The applicant or any interested person adversely affected by any action of the
designated approving authority on a merger may, within ten (10) days after the
decision, appeal the decision consistent with subsection
8-7B-4E, "Appeals", of this chapter. (Ord. 2012-02, 6-5-2012)
8-7E-5: RECORDING:
The merger of contiguous parcels under common ownership shall be recorded in a
Notice of Voluntary Merger form satisfactory to the county recorder. It shall
be submitted to the planning department for a determination that the final
documentation complies with the approved merger. The perfecting deed shall be
submitted to the planning department for a determination that the final
documentation complies with the approved merger. The approved final
documentation shall thereafter be forwarded by the planning department to the
county recorder’s office for recording. The applicant shall pay all recording
fees. (Ord. 2012-02, 6-5-2012; amd. Ord. 2023-11, 9-19-2023)
ARTICLE F. TENTATIVE MAPS
SECTION:
8-7F-1: Purpose
8-7F-2: Tentative Map Required
8-7F-3: Preliminary Design Evaluation
8-7F-4: Tentative Map Application
8-7F-5: Tentative Map Process And Procedures
8-7F-6: Withdrawal Of Tentative Map
8-7F-7: Resubmittal Of Application
8-7F-8: Tentative Map Revision Or Amendment
8-7F-9: Expiration Of Tentative Map Approval
8-7F-10: Time Extension
8-7F-1: PURPOSE:
The purpose of this article is to establish the city's regulations, standards,
and procedures for consideration of tentative subdivision map and tentative
parcel map application. (Ord. 2012-01, 4-17-2012)
8-7F-2: TENTATIVE MAP REQUIRED:
For every subdivision for which a tentative map is required pursuant to article
C, "Division Of Land; Required Maps", of this chapter (e.g., tentative
subdivision map, tentative parcel map), the subdivider shall file with the city
a tentative map prepared in accordance with the provisions of this article.
(Ord. 2012-01, 4-17-2012)
8-7F-3: PRELIMINARY DESIGN EVALUATION:
Prior to submitting a tentative map application, the subdivider may schedule a
preapplication meeting with the planning director, or his or her designated
representative, with any applicable fees, to discuss the proposed subdivision.
At the preapplication meeting, the subdivider shall have an opportunity to
discuss physical conditions, facts, and policies affecting the proposed
subdivision. The subdivider may also present for review a preliminary map
showing approximate lot lines, proposed street alignments, or other features of
the proposed subdivision. The planning director or representative shall inform
the subdivider of the city's policies, general plan, zoning, fees, and
infrastructure and development standards that may pertain to the proposed
subdivision and may make recommendations concerning modifying improvements and/
or design of the proposed division of land. (Ord. 2012-01, 4-17-2012)
8-7F-4: TENTATIVE MAP APPLICATION:
   A.   Application Components: A subdivider seeking approval of a tentative
subdivision map or tentative parcel map (as required by this chapter) shall
file an application for tentative map approval consistent with the requirements
of this chapter. The application shall consist of the following components:
      1.   A completed application form, of which the blank form shall be
provided by the planning department.
      2.   One (1) copy of the tentative map, consistent with the requirements
of this section.
      3.   A filing fee as established by resolution of the city council.
      4.   A preliminary title report, showing the legal owners at the time of
the filing of the tentative map and prepared not more than 90 days prior to the
submittal of the application.
      5.   All items referenced within the preliminary title report shall be
submitted for review (i.e., deeds, easements, and record maps) when submitting
application.
      6.   The following drawings, statements, and other data, and as many
additional copies thereof as may be required, shall be filed on or with the
tentative map:
         a.   A vicinity or key map of appropriate scale and covering
sufficient adjoining territory so as to clearly indicate nearby street
patterns, major access streets, property lines, other adjacent properties in
the subdivider’s ownership, and other significant features which will have a
bearing upon the proposed subdivision and its location and relationship to
surrounding areas.
         b.   A statement of existing and proposed zoning and existing and
proposed uses of the property with the approximate areas of the proposed uses
by type and the total area of the subdivision.
         c.   A soils report and map, when specifically requested by the city
due to questionable site specific soil conditions. A preliminary soils report,
prepared by a civil or geotechnical engineer registered in the state and based
on adequate test borings or excavations. At least three (3) test borings shall
be done for subdivisions of up to three (3) acres, and thereafter at least one
test boring shall be done for each additional three (3) acres or fraction
thereof. If the preliminary soils report indicates the presence of critically
expansive soils, or other soil problems which, if not corrected, could lead to
structural defects, the soils report accompanying the final subdivision map
shall contain an investigation of each lot within the subdivision. If the
preliminary soils report indicates the presence of rocks or liquids containing
deleterious chemicals which, if not corrected, could cause construction
materials to corrode or deteriorate, a soils investigation of each potentially
affected lot in the subdivision may be required. The city engineer may require
additional information or reject the report if he determines it to be
incomplete, inaccurate, or unsatisfactory. Percolation test(s) shall be
conducted for each lot on which a private sewer system is proposed. A soils map
showing lots and location of test bores and percolation tests shall be
submitted with the soils report. The soils report shall include recommendation
by the civil engineer on any corrective action(s) likely to prevent structural
damage to each structure proposed to be constructed in the area where soil
problem exists.
         d.   A preliminary grading plan. Submission of the preliminary grading
plan may be waived by the city engineer when he or she determines that the
submission of said plan is not required for proper grading, flood hazard
mitigation, and erosion control of the proposed subdivision.
         e.   All other data required as a prerequisite to approval of the
tentative map, including plans, reports, fees, or other requirement.
   B.   Preparation And Form Of Tentative Map:
      1.   The tentative map shall be clearly and legibly drawn and shall be
drawn to scale by or under the direction of a licensed land surveyor and/or
registered civil engineer authorized to practice land surveying. The scale of
the map shall be at least one inch equals one hundred feet (1" = 100'). If
necessary to provide the proper scale, more than one sheet may be used, but the
relation of the several sheets shall be clearly shown on each. No single sheet,
when printed at scale, shall exceed 24 inches in length and 36 inches in width.
The licensed land surveyor or registered civil engineer authorized to practice
land surveying shall sign the tentative map along with his/her seal or stamp
and expiration date of license/registration per the Professional Land
Surveyor’s Act, Section 8761.
      2.   The city engineer may, in his or her sole discretion, waive the
requirements that the tentative map be prepared by a licensed land surveyor
and/or registered civil engineer authorized to practice land surveying if the
city engineer finds that the tentative map submitted is clearly and legibly
drawn, drawn to scale, and satisfies the requirements of subsections C and D of
this section. The decision to waive or not waive the foregoing requirement
shall be final and not subject to appeal.
   C.   Information On Tentative Map: The tentative map shall contain the
following information in addition to such information as is required by the
subdivision map act:
      1.   Proposed subdivision name and county tract number, if any.
      2.   Names, addresses, and telephone numbers of the record owner(s) and
subdivider(s) of the land.
      3.   Name, address, and telephone number of the person, firm, or
organization that prepared the map, and the applicable registration or license
number.
      4.   Date of preparation, north point, and scale of the map. If based on
a survey, the date of the survey.
      5.   Boundaries of the subdivision with sufficient information to locate
the property.
      6.   Name of adjacent subdivisions, if any, and property lines sufficient
to show their relationship to the proposed subdivision. Identify adjoining
properties with owner name, assessor parcel number and deed document reference.
      7.   Contour lines at intervals of not more than one foot (1') unless
waived prior to submission by the city engineer. Topographic information shall
be sufficient to fully show the configuration of the land and any and all
depressions that present drainage problems, and shall extend beyond the tract
boundaries where necessary to show drainage conditions on surrounding property
which may affect the subdivision. Topographic survey shall not be waived in
areas within the 100-year flood hazard boundary as shown on the most current
flood insurance rate map prepared by the federal emergency management agency,
along with any approved revisions thereto.
      8.   The approximate location and general description of any trees and
shrubs, and their drip lines if known, with notations as to their retention or
destruction; and any vernal pools or wetlands located on the property to be
subdivided. The general description of trees and shrubs should include an
indication as to their size (diameter) and type, if known.
      9.   The location of all railroad rights of way and grade crossings;
approximate locations of all existing wells, abandoned wells, and sumps; and an
indication of any physical restrictions or conditions in the subdivision which
affects the use of the property.
      10.   The location of all structures on the site or on adjacent
properties; the distances between structures to be retained and existing or
proposed street and lot lines; and notations concerning all structures which
are to be removed.
      11.   The location and width of existing and proposed building setbacks.
      12.   The locations shown by hatched lines of existing utilities in and
adjacent to the subdivision; the size and location of sanitary and storm
sewers; the size of water mains; and, if sewers and water mains are not in or
adjacent to the subdivision, the direction and distance to the nearest sewer
and water main with size and invert elevation of sewer and size of main, and
the proposed method of providing sewage disposal.
      13.   The location of all potentially dangerous areas, including
geologically hazardous areas and areas subject to inundation or flood hazard;
the location, width, and directions of flow of all watercourses and flood
control channels within and adjacent to the property involved; and the proposed
method of providing stormwater, drainage, and erosion control. In areas subject
to 100-year flood hazard, base flood elevation and floodway boundary shall be
indicated. The location and statement of FEMA flood zone information.
      14.   The locations, widths, and names or designations of all existing or
proposed streets, alleys, pedestrian ways, and other rights of way, whether
public or private, within and adjacent to the subdivision; the radius of each
centerline curve; and any planned line for street widening or for any other
public project in and adjacent to the subdivision.
      15.   The lines and approximate dimensions of all lots, and the number
assigned to each lot; the total number of lots; and the approximate area of the
average lot.
      16.   The total area in square footage or acreage to the nearest one-
tenth (1/10) acre of each lot proposed to be utilized for other than single-
family or two- family housing.
      17.   The boundaries of existing and proposed public areas in and
adjacent to the subdivision, with the nature of each indicated thereon with the
acreage thereof. If land is to be offered for dedication for park or recreation
or landscape perimeter purposes it shall be so designated and labeled as
outlots (e.g., outlot A, outlot B, outlot C).
      18.   All street rights of way and public easements proposed for
abandonment with the final map pursuant to section 66477.2(c) of the
subdivision map act shall be clearly shown, or clearly listed on the map in
cases where the specific location of the easement cannot be determined. Such
abandonments shall be listed in the public notice required under subsection
8-7B-4D, “Public Hearing And Public Notice”, of this chapter and following
proper abandonment proceedings under chapter 3 of division 9 of the Streets And
Highways Code commencing with section 8320.
      19.   If separate final or parcel maps are to be filed on portions of the
property shown on the tentative map, the subdivider shall provide notice to the
city at either: a) the time the tentative map application is filed, or b) after
the filing of the tentative map. The right of the subdivider to file multiple
final maps shall not limit the ability of the city to impose reasonable
conditions relating to the filing of multiple final maps.
   D.   Additional Information To Be Provided For Condominium Conversions: When
a tentative map includes a condominium conversion, the application for
tentative map shall also include all of the following information:
      1.   The following information shall be shown on the tentative map, or in
a separate document, or one or more separate map sheets:
         a.   The entire site with dimensions.
         b.   Footprints of all units with dimensions, and a block number and
letter identifying each unit.
         c.   The right of way and roadway width of all public and private
streets within or adjacent to the site.
         d.   The dimensions of commercial driveways within the site.
         e.   All existing and proposed parking spaces, together with
dimensions.
         f.   Existing and proposed landscaping with common names of the trees.
         g.   Location and type of existing and proposed outdoor lighting.
         h.   Sidewalks within and adjacent to the site together with
dimensions.
         i.   Location, height, and material of any existing and proposed
walls, fences, and hedges.
      2.   The following documents and information shall be submitted with the
tentative map application for a condominium conversion:
         a.   A statement of repairs and improvements to be made by the
subdivider to refurbish and restore the building and other structures to
achieve compliance with applicable codes.
         b.   A copy of the declaration of covenants, conditions, and
restrictions required by state law, which will apply to all owners of the
proposed condominium units.
         c.   Square footage and number of rooms in each unit.
         d.   Evidence that all written notifications required by section
66427.1 of the subdivision map act have been delivered to the existing tenants
of the property. (Ord. 2012-01, 4-17-2012; amd. Ord. 2023-11, 9-19-2023)
8-7F-5: TENTATIVE MAP PROCESS AND PROCEDURES:
   A.   General Application Review And Processing: The designated approving
authority shall approve, conditionally approve, or deny the tentative map
within fifty (50) days of the date of certification of the EIR, adoption of a
negative declaration, or a determination that the project is exempt from the
requirements of CEQA. The planning director shall thereafter report the
decision of the approving authority to the subdivider. Pursuant to section
66412.3 of the subdivision map act, in reaching a decision upon the tentative
map, the approving authority shall consider the effect of that decision on the
housing needs of the region and balance these needs against the public service
needs of its residents and available fiscal and environmental resources. Except
as provided otherwise by the subdivision map act, failure to act within the
above specified time limits shall be deemed or considered approval of the
tentative map.
   B.   Approval And Application Of Conditions: The tentative map may be
approved or conditionally approved by the approving authority if it finds that
the proposed subdivision, together with the provisions for its design and
improvement, is consistent with the general plan, any applicable specific plan,
and all applicable provisions of this chapter. The approving authority may
require that, as a condition of approval, the subdivider pay all required
development impact fees at the rate for such fees in effect at the time such
fees would normally be levied (e.g., building permit issuance). The approving
authority may modify or delete any of the conditions of approval recommended in
the planning director’s report. The approving authority may add additional
requirements as a condition of its approval.
   C.   Findings For Denial: Except as otherwise required by state or federal
law, the approving authority shall deny approval of the tentative map if it
makes any of the following findings:
      1.   That the proposed map, together with the provisions for its design
and improvement, is inconsistent with the general plan or any applicable
specific plan, or other applicable provisions of this code.
      2.   That the site is not physically suitable for the type of
development.
      3.   That the site is not physically suitable for the proposed density of
development.
      4.   That the design of the subdivision or the proposed improvements are
likely to cause substantial environmental damage or substantially and avoidably
injure fish or wildlife or their habitat. Notwithstanding the foregoing, the
designated approving authority may approve such a tentative map if any
environmental impact report was prepared with respect to the project and a
finding was made pursuant to section 21081(c) of CEQA that specific economic,
social, or other considerations make infeasible the mitigation measures or
project alternatives identified in the environmental impact report.
      5.   That the design of the subdivision or the type of improvements are
likely to cause serious public health problems.
      6.   That the design of the subdivision or the type of improvements will
conflict with easements, acquired by the public at large, for access through or
use of, property within the proposed subdivision. In this connection, the
designated approving authority may approve a map if it finds that alternate
easements, for access or for use, will be provided, and that these will be
substantially equivalent to ones previously acquired by the public. This
subsection shall apply only to easements of record or to easements established
by judgment of a court of competent jurisdiction, and no authority is granted
to the planning commission to determine that the public at large has acquired
easements for access through or use of property within the proposed
subdivision.
      7.   Subject to section 66474.4 of the subdivision map act, that the land
is subject to a contract entered into pursuant to the California land
conservation act of 1965 (commencing with section 51200 of the Government Code)
and that the resulting parcels following a subdivision of the land would be too
small to sustain their agricultural use.
   D.   Appeal: The decision of the designated approving authority may be
appealed as provided in subsection
8-7B-4E, “Appeals”, of this chapter. (Ord. 2012-01, 4-17-2012)
8-7F-6: WITHDRAWAL OF TENTATIVE MAP:
Requests for withdrawal of any application for tentative map shall be submitted
to the planning director in writing unless made at a public hearing on the
tentative map. (Ord. 2012-01, 4-17-2012)
8-7F-7: RESUBMITTAL OF APPLICATION:
No application for a tentative map approval shall be accepted, nor any hearings
held thereon, for an application for the same or substantially same tentative
map that has been previously denied until a period of one year has elapsed from
the date of the final denial of the application by the body having final
jurisdiction of the matter. (Ord. 2012-01, 4-17-2012)
8-7F-8: TENTATIVE MAP REVISION OR AMENDMENT:
   A.   Revisions Or Amendments Generally: Unless deemed by the city engineer
to be in substantial compliance with the approved tentative map, any request to
revise or amend an approved or conditionally approved tentative map shall be
deemed an application for a new tentative map. Such new tentative map shall be
processed in conformance with the requirements of this chapter in effect at the
time such revised map is filed, including any changes in street standards which
have become effective since the original tentative map was filed. The approval
or conditional approval of any revised tentative map shall void all prior
approved tentative maps.
   B.   Amendment Of Conditions Of Approval: A subdivider may apply for a
revision or amendment to the conditions of approval for a conditionally
approved tentative map, provided there is no proposed change to the layout or
design of the subdivision or modifications in the proposed lot sizes.
Modification of the conditions on a conditionally approved tentative map shall
not extend the time limits imposed by this chapter or the subdivision map act.
(Ord. 2012-01, 4-17-2012)
8-7F-9: EXPIRATION OF TENTATIVE MAP APPROVAL:
   A.   Initial Life: Except as provided in section
8-7F-10, "Time Extension", of this article, the approval or conditional
approval of a tentative map shall expire twenty four (24) months after the date
of approval by the designated approving authority. This twenty four (24) month
period shall be referred to as the "initial life".
   B.   Effect Of Expiration: Expiration of an approved or conditionally
approved tentative map (including any extensions) shall terminate all
proceedings, and no final map of all or any portion of real property included
within the tentative map shall be filed without first processing a new
tentative map application. (Ord. 2012-01, 4-17-2012)
8-7F-10: TIME EXTENSION:
The initial life of an approved or conditionally approved tentative map may be
extended in any of the following ways, or as otherwise provided by the
subdivision map act:
   A.   Discretionary Extension: Prior to the expiration of an approved or
conditionally approved tentative map, the subdivider may file a written
application for an extension of the expiration date. The process for
submission, review, and consideration of the request for extension shall be as
follows:
      1.   The application shall be filed with the planning director. The
application shall include the following information:
         a.   A completed application form, of which the blank form shall be
provided by the planning department;
         b.   Tentative map number and county tract number of the subject
subdivision and/or other unique information used to reference the approved
tentative map;
         c.   Requested period of extension;
         d.   Reasons for seeking extension including facts showing why the
requirements for recording a final map cannot be completed within the period
provided;
         e.   A description of all efforts made to date to record the final map
and the current status of the project; and
         f.   A description of what remains to be done to record the final map
and what steps the subdivider proposes to complete the required subdivision
improvements.
      2.   Upon receipt of this application, the approval of the tentative map
shall automatically be extended for sixty (60) days or until the application
for the extension is approved or denied, whichever occurs first.
      3.   The designated approving authority for requests for extension of a
tentative map shall be the planning commission. In accordance with the
subdivision map act and case law, the designated approving authority may not
impose additional conditions on the tentative map as part of the approval of a
discretionary extension. However, the designated approving authority may add or
amend conditions based on any changed circumstances or new city policies with
the consent of the applicant.
      4.   The process for review and processing the request for extension
shall be the same as provided in section
8-7F-5, "Tentative Map Process And Procedures", of this article.
      5.   The tentative map may be extended for a period or periods not
exceeding a total of six (6) years as provided in section 66452.6 of the
subdivision map act.
      6.   The designated approving authority shall deny the request for
extension if the approving authority makes a finding that the granting of the
extension will create a negative impact to the public health, safety, or
welfare.
      7.   If the designated approving authority denies a subdivider's
application for an extension, the subdivider may appeal the decision within 15
days in accordance with the provisions of subsection
8-7B-4E, "Appeals", of this chapter.
   B.   Filing Of Multiple (Phased) Final Maps: If multiple final maps are to
be filed for the subdivision pursuant to the subdivision map act, and if the
subdivider is required to spend more than $236,790.00 or any greater amount
pursuant to section 66452.6 of the subdivision map act, to construct, improve,
or finance (e.g., payment of impact fees) the construction of public
improvements that are located outside the property boundaries of the tentative
map, excluding improvements of public rights of way which abut the property to
be subdivided and which are reasonably related to the development of the
property, each filing of a final map shall extend the expiration of the
approved or conditionally approved tentative map by 48 months from the date of
its expiration, or the date of the previously filed (recorded) final map,
whichever is later but in no event more than 10 years from such approval or
conditional approval.
      As provided in section 66452.6(a)(3), “public improvement” shall include
traffic controls, streets, roads, highways, freeways, bridges, overcrossings,
street interchanges, flood control or storm drain facilities, sewer facilities,
water facilities, and lighting facilities. Examples include, but are not
limited to, roadway improvement projects that are conditioned as part of
project approval but do not occur within the boundaries or along the perimeter
of the project.
   C.   Development Agreement: In accordance with section 66452.6(a)(1) of the
subdivision map act, a tentative map on a property subject to a statutory
development agreement between the city and the subdivider (or any successor in
interest) may extend the life of the tentative map for a period of time as
specified in the development agreement, which period shall not exceed the term
of the development agreement itself.
   D.   Development Moratorium: In accordance with section 66452.6(b)(1) of the
subdivision map act, the initial life of an approved or conditionally approved
tentative map shall not include any time during which a development moratorium,
imposed after approval or conditional approval of the tentative map, is in
effect. However, the length of the moratorium will not exceed five (5) years.
   E.   Litigation: In accordance with section 66452.6(c) of the subdivision
map act, upon approval by the city, a pending lawsuit involving the approval or
conditional approval of a tentative map shall stay the life of a tentative map
for up to five (5) years. The subdivider may submit an application to the city
requesting the stay. The procedures for considering and taking action upon the
request for the stay shall be as provided in subsection A, “Discretionary
Extension”, of this section. The city shall take action on the request to deny
the stay within forty (40) days of receipt of the subdivider’s application. The
city shall not impose conditions upon the approval of a request for stay.
   F.   Special Legislative Extensions: On occasion, the California legislature
has adopted statutory extensions to tentative maps. Examples include, but are
not limited to, the following specific references. Any additional extensions
that are adopted by the legislature in the future are hereby incorporated into
this code by reference. The city shall honor any applicable extension provided
by the legislature.
      1.   Section 66452.21 of the subdivision map act, providing a 12-month
extension to all tentative maps that have not expired as of July 15, 2008, and
would expire before January 1, 2011.
      2.   Section 66452.22 of the subdivision map act, providing a 24-month
extension to all tentative maps that have not expired as of July 15, 2009, and
would expire before January 1, 2012.
      3.   Section 66452.23 of the subdivision map act, providing a 24-month
extension to all tentative maps that have not expired as of July 15, 2011, and
would expire before January 1, 2014.
      4.   Section 66452.24 of the subdivision map act, providing a 24-month
extension to all tentative maps that were approved on or after January 1, 2000,
and would expire before July 11, 2013.
      5.   Section 66452.25 of the subdivision map act, providing a 24-month
extension to all tentative maps that were approved on or after January 1, 2002,
and not later than July 11, 2013, and would expire October 10, 2015.
      6.   Section 66452.26 of the subdivision map act, providing a 24-month
extension to all tentative maps that were approved on or after January 1, 2006,
and not later than July 11, 2013, and would expire January 1, 2021.
   7.   Section 65914.5 of the government code , providing an 18-month
extension to certain housing entitlements, including tentative maps, that were
approved prior to March 4, 2020, and would otherwise expire prior to December
31, 2021. (Ord. 2012-01, 4-17-2012; amd. Ord. 2023-11, 9-19-2023)
ARTICLE G. FINAL MAPS AND PARCEL MAPS
SECTION:
8-7G-1: Purpose
8-7G-2: Timing
8-7G-3: Preparation And Form Of Final Map Or Parcel Map
8-7G-4: Certificates And Statements On Final Map Or Parcel Map
8-7G-5: Survey Of Final Map Or Parcel Map
8-7G-6: Filing Of Final Map Or Parcel Map
8-7G-7: City Engineer's Review
8-7G-8: Planning Director's Review
8-7G-9: Approval Of Final Map Or Parcel Map, Execution Of Subdivision
Agreement, And Acceptance Of Dedication
8-7G-10: Multiple Final Maps Or Parcel Maps
8-7G-11: Separate Dedications
8-7G-12: Waiver Of Parcel Map
8-7G-1: PURPOSE:
The purpose of this article is to establish the process for preparing,
reviewing, and approving final maps and parcel maps. (Ord. 2012-01, 4-17-2012)
8-7G-2: TIMING:
Within 24 months of the date of approval or conditional approval of the
tentative map, or within any further time period for which an extension has
been granted or made as a matter of law, the subdivider may cause the proposed
subdivision or any part thereof to be surveyed and a final map or parcel map to
be prepared and recorded in accordance with the provisions of this article and
the subdivision map act. (Ord. 2012-01, 4-17-2012; amd. Ord. 2023-11, 9-19-
2023)
8-7G-3: PREPARATION AND FORM OF FINAL MAP OR PARCEL MAP:
   A.   Preparation Of Final Map Or Parcel Map: The final map or parcel map
shall be prepared by or under the direction of a licensed land surveyor or
registered civil engineer authorized to practice land surveying, shall be based
upon a survey, in the manner required by this article and the subdivision map
act.
      Three (3) draft copies shall be submitted to the city for review by the
planning director, public works director, and city engineer for their accuracy
prior to calling for final mylar versions for recording.
   B.   Final Map Or Parcel Map Description And Contents:
      1.   Description:
         a.   The final map or parcel map shall be legibly drawn, printed, or
reproduced by a process guaranteeing a permanent record in black on mylar.
Certificates, affidavits, and acknowledgments may be legibly stamped or printed
upon the map with opaque ink. If ink is used on polyester base film, the ink
surface shall be coated with a suitable substance to assure permanent
legibility.
         b.   The size of each sheet shall be 18 inches by 26 inches or 460
millimeters by 660 millimeters, leaving an entirely blank margin of one (1)
inch or 25 millimeters. The scale of the map shall be large enough to show all
details clearly and enough sheets shall be used to accomplish this end. The
particular number of the sheet and the total number of sheets comprising the
map shall be stated on each of the sheets, and its relation to each adjoining
sheet shall be clearly shown. Affidavits, certificates, acknowledgments,
endorsements, acceptances of dedication, and seals required by law and by this
chapter shall appear on the first sheet and may be combined where appropriate.
      2.   Information Required:
         a.   Index And Location Map:
         (1)   If more than two (2) sheets are used to show the actual layout
of the streets and lots, an index map shall be used showing the relationship of
the sheets.
         (2)   A location map shall appear on the map, showing the relative
position of the land to be subdivided with the surrounding existing
subdivisions with their recorded map reference, including their names and tract
numbers. The location map shall show city boundaries crossing or adjoining the
subdivision.
         b.   Subdivision Name; Exterior Boundaries: The subdivision name, if
one is used, and the tract number shall conspicuously appear on each sheet of
the final map or parcel map. On the first sheet, there shall be a full legal
description of the exterior boundaries of the area subdivided and an
abbreviated legal description shall be shown below the name of the final map or
parcel map. The exterior boundary of the land to be divided shall be indicated
by a border one-eighth (1/8) of an inch in width.
         c.   Lots And Blocks: Each lot shall be numbered or lettered
consecutively beginning with lot number 1; except that when the final map or
parcel map is an additional phase of an existing subdivision, the lot numbers
shall commence with the next number higher than in the preceding phase. The
area of each lot shall be shown on the final map or parcel map.
      Blocks, if used, shall be consecutively lettered or numbered. Each block
and each parcel shall be shown completely on one sheet.
         d.   Public Dedications: The final map or parcel map shall show the
width, location, proper reference to record information shall be stated and
names without abbreviation or other sufficient designation of the following:
         (1)   New streets.
         (2)   Public areas and easements.
         (3)   Adjoining streets.
         (4)   All other existing streets, easements, rights of way, and other
real property interests to be dedicated for public purposes.
         e.   Technical Information:
         (1)   Dimensions of all lot lines, subdivision perimeter, and
centerline of streets shall be in feet and decimals thereof to the nearest one-
hundredth (1/100) of a foot and bearings to the nearest second. If a course is
a curve, the radius, length of curve or bearing and length of chord, and
central angle shall be shown. If the ends of a curve are not tangent to the
preceding or following courses and the chord along with its bearing and length
are not shown, the radial of the end of the curve, with its bearing, shall be
shown.
         (2)   All required information shall be shown in full for all portions
of the map. No ditto marks shall be used with respect to any required
information.
         (3)   The width of each street right of way shall be shown indicating
the widths on each side of the centerline. If additional right of way for an
existing street is offered for dedication, the original right of way and the
additional right of way width offered for dedication shall be shown along with
the total width of the new right of way.
         f.   Record Of Easements: The final map or parcel map shall show the
location, width, and sidelines of all easements to which the lots are subject.
Easements for storm drains, sewers, and other purposes shall be denoted by
broken lines. Each easement shall be clearly labeled and identified, and if
already of record, proper reference to the record information shall be stated.
Easements being offered for dedication shall be so indicated in the statement
of dedication.
         g.   Abandonment Of Public Streets And Easements: The final map or
parcel map shall adequately delineate any public streets or public easements to
be left in effect after the subdivision. The filing of the final map or parcel
map shall constitute abandonment of all public streets and public easements not
shown on the final map or parcel map, provided that a written notation of each
abandonment is listed by reference to the recording data or other official
record creating these public streets or public easements and certified to on
the map by the city clerk. Before a public easement vested in another public
entity may be abandoned pursuant to this subsection, the city shall notify that
public entity of the proposed abandonment. The city shall submit with the final
map or parcel map written verification that the public entity has received the
notice. No public easement vested in another public entity shall be abandoned
pursuant to this subsection if that public entity objects to the proposed
abandonment. Off-site abandonments shall follow the procedures for abandonment
established in chapter 3 of division 9 of the Streets And Highways Code,
commencing with section 8320. (Ord. 2012-01, 4-17-2012; amd. Ord. 2023-11, 9-
19-2023)
8-7G-4: CERTIFICATES AND STATEMENTS ON FINAL MAP OR PARCEL MAP:
The title sheet of the final map or parcel map shall contain those certificates
required by the subdivision map act. It shall also contain any other
certificates and statements as outlined below.
   A.   Owner’s Statement: Subject to Section 66436 of the Subdivision Map Act,
a statement signed by all parties having record title interest in the land
subdivided, consenting to the preparation and recordation of the map and
dedication to the public, subject to Section 66439(d), of specific parcels or
easements in a format determined by the City Engineer or City Surveyor and the
Planning Director.
   B.   Engineer’s or Surveyor’s Statement: A statement signed by the engineer
or surveyor responsible for preparation of the final map or parcel map, as
provided in Section 66441 of the Subdivision Map Act in a format determined by
the City Engineer or City Surveyor and the Planning Director.
   C.   City Engineer’s and City Surveyor’s Statements: A statement, signed and
sealed by the city engineer and city surveyor (as required by Section 66442 of
the Subdivision Map Act), that the map was examined by him and the subdivision
as shown is substantially the same as it appeared on the approved tentative map
and, if required, any approved alterations thereof, and that all the provisions
of the Subdivision Map Act and any local ordinance applicable at the time of
approval of the tentative map have been complied with, and that he is satisfied
that the map is technically correct, in a format determined by the City
Engineer or City Surveyor and the Planning Director.
   D.   Tax Collector’s Statement: A statement signed by the county tax
collector, stating that all due taxes and special assessments collected as
taxes have been paid or that a bond or other security assuring the payment of
all taxes or special assessments collected as taxes which are liens but are not
yet payable, has been filed with the county, in a format determined by the City
Engineer or City Surveyor and the Planning Director.
   E.   Approving Authority’s Statement: A statement signed by the secretary or
clerk of the designated approving authority, indicating the date of the meeting
on which the tentative map was approved and a reference to the resolution
approving the tentative map, in a format determined by the City Engineer or
City Surveyor and the Planning Director.
   F.   City Clerk’s Statement: If any real property is offered for dedication
for public use on the final map or parcel map or by a separate instrument, a
statement signed by the city clerk shall be provided on the final map or parcel
map stating that the city council approved the map and accepted, accepted
subject to improvement, or rejected on behalf of the public the real property
offered for dedication, in a format determined by the City Engineer or City
Surveyor and the Planning Director.
   G.   Recorder’s Certificate: The following certificate shall be located in
the lower right corner of the first certificate sheet and shall be completed by
the county recorder upon recordation of the final map or parcel map in a format
determined by the City Engineer or City Surveyor and the Planning Director.
   H.   Restrictions Statement: Any previously existing nonstandard easements
or documents that restrict the use of the land recorded previously or
concurrently with the map must be listed in the restrictions section of the
cover page with recording date, document number, and county of record. Pursuant
to Section 66411.1 of the Subdivision Map Act, any requirements for the
construction of off-site and on-site improvements shall be noticed on the face
of the map.
   I.   Owners of Interest Statement: If necessary, the following statement
shall be included on final maps and parcel maps if the owners will not have an
interest that may ripen into a fee title in a format determined by the City
Engineer or City Surveyor and the Planning Director.
   J.   Notary Public Certificate: Where certificates or statements required by
this Section or the Subdivision Map Act require a notary public certificate per
Civil Code 1189, the following certificate shall be used in a format determined
by the City Engineer or City Surveyor and the Planning Director. (Ord. 2012-01,
4-17-2012; amd. Ord. 2023-11, 9-19-2023)
8-7G-5: SURVEY OF FINAL MAP OR PARCEL MAP:
A complete and accurate survey of the land to be subdivided shall be made by a
licensed land surveyor or registered civil engineer authorized to practice land
surveying in accordance with the provisions of article K, “Survey And
Monuments”, of this chapter. (Ord. 2012-01, 4-17-2012; amd. Ord. 2023-11, 9-19-
2023)
8-7G-6: FILING OF FINAL MAP OR PARCEL MAP:
The subdivider shall cause all certificates and statements to be executed
except those to be executed by the city engineer, city surveyor, city clerk,
planning commission, tax collector, and the county recorder, and shall file the
following with the planning director:
   A.   Four (4) copies of the final map or parcel map, each conforming to the
requirements of section
8-7G-3, “Preparation And Form Of Final Map Or Parcel Map”, of this article.
   B.   Copy of approved tentative map and conditions of approval.
   C.   Closure calculations and other survey information.
   D.   A current preliminary title report pertaining to the real property
proposed to be subdivided. The title report shall be dated not more than ninety
(90) days prior to the submittal of the final map or parcel map application.
   E.   A title guarantee by a qualified title company, for the benefit of the
city, certifying that the signatures of all persons whose consent is necessary
to pass clear title to the land and all acknowledgments appear on the proper
certificates and are correctly shown on the map and affidavits to dedication.
   F.   Copies of record maps and record documents used as reference map
submitted.
   G.   Draft copies of any off site easements or rights of way required.
   H.   Improvement plans, and engineer’s cost estimate for such, when
applicable as outlined in section
8-7M-2, “Improvement Requirements And Plans”, of this chapter.
   I.   The application review fee as established by resolution of the city
council. (Ord. 2012-01, 4-17-2012; amd. Ord. 2023-11, 9-19-2023)
8-7G-7: CITY ENGINEER'S REVIEW:
Upon submittal of the final map or parcel map and accompanying documents,
offers of dedication, offers of deed, offers of easement, fees, and materials
for filing, the city engineer shall cause the same to be examined, and if found
to be in substantial conformity with the approved tentative map and all
amendments, conditions, modifications, and provisions made or required by the
designated approving authority, and if found to be complete, technically
correct, in conformity with improvement plans and specifications, and in
compliance with the requirements of these regulations, planned street lines,
and other applicable specific plans and ordinance, shall forward the same to
the planning director for review and further action.
Should the map or other accompanying documents, fees, or materials be found to
be incomplete or incorrect in any respect, the subdivider shall be advised in
writing, by mail, of the changes or additions that must be made before the map
may be certified. If the defect is the result of a technical and inadvertent
error which, in the opinion of the city engineer, does not materially affect
the validity of the map, the city engineer may waive the defect and forward to
the city council.
The city engineer may recommend against approval of the recording a portion of
a final map or parcel map when, in the process of checking the final map or
parcel map, he determines that said portion does not by itself provide adequate
or satisfactory access, design, or improvements and therefore does not conform
to the design and improvement of the subdivision as indicated by the approved
tentative map, if applicable. (Ord. 2012-01, 4-17-2012)
8-7G-8: PLANNING DIRECTOR'S REVIEW:
The planning director shall review the final map or parcel map to determine its
compliance with the approved tentative map and the conditions of approval
imposed by the designated approving authority. If the director determines that
the final map or parcel map is in compliance with the approved tentative map,
that all conditions of approval have been met or performed, and that the final
map or parcel map has been recommended for approval by the city engineer, the
director shall present it to the council with his or her recommendation. If a
subdivision improvement agreement is proposed, it shall be presented to the
council in the same meeting as the final map or parcel map. (Ord. 2012-01, 4-
17-2012)
8-7G-9: APPROVAL OF FINAL MAP OR PARCEL MAP, EXECUTION OF SUBDIVISION
AGREEMENT, AND ACCEPTANCE OF DEDICATION:
   A.   Generally: The city engineer shall execute the city engineer’s
certificate on the final map or parcel map before forwarding to the city
council for their acceptance.
      The city council shall consider the final map or parcel map and any
associated offers of dedication, deed, and easement at the meeting at which it
receives the final map or parcel map or at its next regular meeting after the
meeting at which it receives the final map or parcel map. The city council
shall review the final map or parcel map and approve it if it conforms to the
approved or conditionally approved tentative map and if all requirements and
conditions imposed on the subdivision pursuant to this chapter or the
subdivision map act have been met or performed. If the final map or parcel map
does not conform, the city council shall disapprove the map. The city council
shall also accept, accept subject to improvement, or reject any or all offers
of dedication in conformance with the approvals for the tentative map and the
provisions of this chapter and the subdivision map act.
      If improvements required under the terms of this chapter or as a
condition of approval have not been completed, the city council shall provide
for such improvements by approving a subdivision improvement agreement. No
final map or parcel map shall be certified until the required improvements have
been installed or agreed to be installed in accordance with article M,
“Improvements”, of this chapter and appropriate surety has been provided to the
satisfaction of the city. The city manager is authorized to execute subdivision
improvement agreements, as permitted by section 66462(d) of the subdivision map
act, in accordance with the city’s standard subdivision agreement.
      No public hearing shall be required, and no public notice shall be
required for review, consideration, and action by the city council on a final
map or parcel map, offers of dedication, deed, and easement, or improvement
agreement.
      As permitted by section 66458(d) of the subdivision map act, the city may
accept, accept subject to improvement, or reject dedications and offers of
dedications that are made by a statement on the map.
   B.   Determinations For Condominium Conversions: No final map or final
parcel map for a condominium conversion shall be approved unless all the
following determinations are made:
      1.   Each existing tenant has received notification of intent to convert,
pursuant to subsection
8-7F-4D of this chapter and section 66452.9 of the subdivision map act, at
least sixty (60) days prior to the filing of the tentative map or tentative
parcel map.
      2.   Each existing tenant and each person applying for rental of a unit
in the project has, or will have, received all applicable notices and rights
required by chapter 2 or 3 of the subdivision map act.
      3.   Each tenant has, or will have, received ten (10) days’ written
notice that an application for a public report will be, or has been, submitted
to the California department of real estate and that such report will be
available on request.
      4.   Each tenant of the proposed condominium conversion has been, or will
be, given written notification within ten (10) days of approval of a final map.
      5.   Each tenant has been, or will be, given at least one hundred eighty
(180) days written notice of intention to convert before tenancy is terminated
due to the conversion or proposed conversion.
      6.   Each tenant has been, or will be, given notice of an exclusive
right, pursuant to section 66427.1(d) of the subdivision map act, to contract
for the purchase of such tenant’s unit on the same terms and conditions that
the unit will be initially offered to the general public or terms more
favorable to the tenant. (Ord. 2012-01, 4-17-2012; amd. Ord. 2023-11, 9-19-
2023)
8-7G-10: MULTIPLE FINAL MAPS OR PARCEL MAPS:
Multiple final maps or parcel maps relating to an approved or conditionally
approved tentative map may be filed prior to the expiration of the tentative
map if: a) the subdivider, at the time the tentative map is filed, informs the
planning director of the subdivider's intention to file multiple final maps or
parcel maps on such tentative map, or b) after filing of the tentative map, the
city and the subdivider concur in the filing of multiple final maps or parcel
maps. In providing such notice, the subdivider shall not be required to define
the number or configuration of the proposed multiple final maps or parcel maps.
The filing of a final map or parcel map on a portion of an approved or
conditionally approved tentative map shall not invalidate any part of such
tentative map. Each final map or parcel map which constitutes a part, or unit,
of the approved or conditionally approved tentative map shall have a separate
subdivision phase number. Unless specific timing thresholds are set forth in
the conditions of approval, the city engineer and planning director shall
determine the improvements required and conditions that must be satisfied in
conjunction with a given final map or parcel map phase to ensure a logical and
orderly development of the whole subdivision. The subdivision improvement
agreement executed by the subdivider for that map phase shall provide for the
design and construction of all such required improvements. (Ord. 2012-01, 4-17-
2012)
8-7G-11: SEPARATE DEDICATIONS:
When completed outside of a dedication on a map, dedications may be required to
be made by separate instrument with fees paid to cover the cost of processing.
After receiving the instrument of dedication and accompanying title report, the
city engineer shall approve or disapprove the instrument of dedication as to
its suitability for recordation, specifically including a cover sheet, legal
description, and map in eight and one-half inch by eleven inch (81/2" x 11")
format. After approving an offer to dedicate, the city engineer shall notify
the planning director to request original signed and notarized document(s) with
the applicant’s land surveyor’s or registered civil engineer’s original seal.
Offer of dedication shall be brought to the city council for consideration of
acceptance or acknowledgment for later acceptance. (Ord. 2012-01, 4-17-2012;
amd. Ord. 2023-11, 9-19-2023)
8-7G-12: WAIVER OF PARCEL MAP:
Where a parcel map is required by the subdivision map act or this chapter, but
the subdivider seeks to waive this requirement, the following procedures shall
apply:
   A.   Waiver Of Parcel Maps Generally: The planning director shall be the
designated approving authority for the waiver of the requirements for the
recordation of a parcel map. Such a waiver may be provided in any case when the
land being divided consists of a lot or parcels shown on a recorded parcel map
or final subdivision map and the full street improvements have been constructed
or monumentation is evident, or where each of the lots has a gross acreage of
forty (40) acres or more or each of which is a quarter-quarter section or
larger. The designated approving authority may grant the waiver and will issue
a certificate of compliance if:
      1.   The subdivider files an application with the planning director,
including any fees required, verifying the existence of monumentation in the
installation of street improvements;
      2.   The application contains a legal description for each of the lots to
be created; and
      3.   The designated approving authority finds that the proposed division
of land complies with requirements as to area, improvement and design,
floodwater drainage control, appropriate improved public roads, sanitary
disposal facilities, water supply availability, environmental protection, and
other requirements of this title.
   B.   Waiver Of Parcel Maps For Condominiums:
      1.   The planning director may waive the requirements for a final parcel
map imposed by the subdivision map act for the construction of a condominium
project on a single lawful parcel.
      2.   The procedure for determining whether such a waiver for a
condominium is appropriate shall be initiated by an application for waiver
filed with the planning director.
      3.   The application shall contain a legal description for the single
lawful parcel and a description of the proposed condominium project.
      4.   The designated approving authority shall make a determination on the
waiver request after review and recommendation by the public works director and
city engineer.
      5.   If an application for waiver on a residential condominium project is
filed contemporaneously with an application to adopt or amend a specific plan,
then the application for waiver shall be first considered by the planning
commission at a public hearing. After this hearing, the planning commission
shall provide a written recommendation to the city council, which shall make
the final determination on the application.
      6.   No applications for a waiver of the requirement for a tentative or
parcel map for the construction of a condominium project on a single lawful
parcel shall be granted unless it is found that the proposed division of land
complies with the requirements of the subdivision map act and this code as to
area, improvement and design, floodwater drainage control, appropriate improved
public roads, sanitary disposal facilities, water supply availability,
environmental protection, and other requirements of the subdivision map act and
this code. (Ord. 2012-01, 4-17-2012)
ARTICLE H. VESTING TENTATIVE MAPS
SECTION:
8-7H-1: Purpose
8-7H-2: Right To File A Vesting Tentative Map
8-7H-3: Application For Vesting Tentative Map
8-7H-4: Processing And Approving Authority
8-7H-5: Development Rights Upon Approval
8-7H-6: Filing And Processing Of Final Vesting Map
8-7H-7: Administration Of Vested Rights
8-7H-1: PURPOSE:
The purpose of this article is to establish the procedures for the submission,
review, and action by the city of vesting tentative maps. These provisions
supplement the standard of the subdivision map act. The intent of vesting
tentative maps is to provide greater protection earlier in the development
process by “locking in place” the ordinances, policies, and standards of the
city at the time the application is deemed complete. (Ord. 2012-01, 4-17-2012;
amd. Ord. 2023-11, 9-19-2023)
8-7H-2: RIGHT TO FILE A VESTING TENTATIVE MAP:
Whenever a provision of the subdivision map act or this chapter requires the
filing of a tentative map (e.g., a tentative subdivision map, tentative parcel
map), a vesting tentative map may instead be filed. Such vesting tentative map
shall be in accordance with the provisions of this article. If a subdivider
does not seek the rights conferred by the vesting tentative map statute, the
filing of a vesting tentative map shall not be a prerequisite to any approval
for any proposed subdivision, permit for construction, or work preparatory to
construction. (Ord. 2012-01, 4-17-2012)
8-7H-3: APPLICATION FOR VESTING TENTATIVE MAP:
This section describes the required content and process for filing a vesting
tentative map.
   A.   Form And Content Consistent With Tentative Map Requirement: A vesting
tentative map shall be filed in the same form and have the same content as
required by this chapter for tentative maps. The application shall be filed in
the same manner as tentative maps.
   B.   Titled Vesting Tentative Map: At the time a vesting tentative map is
filed, it shall have printed conspicuously on its face the words "Vesting
Tentative Map".
   C.   Additional Submittal Requirements: At the time a vesting tentative
subdivision map is filed, the subdivider shall also supply the following
information to the city:
      1.   Plans and studies for all public works improvements to be
constructed as a condition of the subdivision, prepared by a registered civil
engineer in accordance with city standards and approved by the city engineer,
including, but not limited to, sewer, water, storm drainage, dry utilities
(e.g., electrical, gas, and roads);
      2.   Plans for all site development, including, but not limited to,
grading, drainage facilities, and miscellaneous structures, prepared by a
registered civil engineer in accordance with city standards and approved by the
city engineer;
      3.   Geological studies in such form as acceptable to the city engineer
and the building official, which shall include detailed soils reports, seismic
analysis, bank stabilization, and other factors pertinent to the particular
site location;
      4.   Specific information on the uses to which the proposed buildings
will be put;
      5.   The height, size, and location of all buildings, building setbacks,
number of stories, and driveway locations;
      6.   Architectural plans satisfactory for review by the city, including
site plans, floor plans, exterior elevations, and other information necessary
for building permit plan checks;
      7.   Landscape plans, including planting and irrigation details, and
drawings and specifications as prepared by a licensed landscape architect or
contractor satisfactory for review by the city;
      8.   Traffic reports and analysis, in a form approved by the city
engineer, if required;
      9.   Acoustical report, prepared by a licensed engineer in a form
acceptable to the city, if in an area anticipated to be greater than sixty five
decibels (65 dB) CNEL;
      10.   Flood control information and statements showing compliance with
flood hazard regulations; and
      11.   Such other exhibits, studies, and information that fully depict
features of the development which the developer desires review for the purpose
of approval concurrently with the vesting tentative map.
The city may request, and the applicant shall promptly furnish, information as
may reasonably be necessary to enable the city to evaluate the vesting effect
that would follow from approval of the map.
   D.   Other Land Use Permits: If other discretionary land use approvals are
required in connection with development under the vesting tentative map, the
subdivider shall obtain such approval prior to, or process them concurrently
with, the filing of the vesting tentative map. For purposes of this section,
"discretionary land use approvals" shall include, but not be limited to,
general plan amendments, zone district amendments, conditional use permits, and
variances. (Ord. 2012-01, 4-17-2012)
8-7H-4: PROCESSING AND APPROVING AUTHORITY:
The processing of a vesting tentative map shall be the same as provided in this
chapter for tentative maps. The designated approving authority for vesting
tentative maps shall be the planning commission. Review and action on a vesting
tentative map shall be limited to those ordinances, policies, and standards in
effect at the date the city has determined the application to be complete.
(Ord. 2012-01, 4-17-2012)
8-7H-5: DEVELOPMENT RIGHTS UPON APPROVAL:
   A.   Generally: The approval of a vesting tentative map by the city shall
confer a vested right to apply for permits needed to proceed with development
and have the city exercise its discretion to approve, disapprove, or approve
such permits with conditions, on the basis of ordinances, policies, and
standards in effect at the time the application was determined to be complete
pursuant to section 65943 of the Government Code.
   B.   Disclaimers:
      1.   This article does not enlarge, diminish, or alter the power of the
city to deny approval of the requested project or any part thereof, or to
impose conditions on the approval of a project.
      2.   Nothing in this article removes, diminishes, or affects the
obligation of any subdivider or local agency to comply with the conditions and
requirements of any state or federal laws, regulations, or policies.
      3.   In the event that section 66474.2 of the subdivision map act is
repealed, any subsequent approvals of vested maps shall confer a vested right
to proceed with development in substantial compliance with ordinances,
policies, and standards in effect at the time the vesting map is approved or
conditionally approved, rather than at the time the application was determined
to be complete.
      4.   Notwithstanding this article, the city may condition or deny a
permit, extension, or entitlement, including, but not limited to, final maps
and building permits, if it determines any of the following:
         a.   A failure to do so would place the residents of the subdivision
or the immediate community, or both, in a condition dangerous to their health
or safety, or both;
         b.   The condition or denial is required in order to comply with state
or federal law. (Ord. 2012-01, 4-17-2012; amd. Ord. 2023-11, 9-19-2023)
8-7H-6: FILING AND PROCESSING OF FINAL VESTING MAP:
A final vesting map shall be filed and processed in the same manner, form, and
content, and shall be subject to the same fees prescribed for final maps and
parcel maps as required by this chapter. The "initial life" for vesting
tentative maps shall be the same as for tentative maps as provided in this
chapter, and the life of a vesting tentative map may be extended as provided by
this chapter. (Ord. 2012-01, 4-17-2012)
8-7H-7: ADMINISTRATION OF VESTED RIGHTS:
   A.   Concurrent Approvals: Approval of a vesting tentative map applies only
to actions considered and approved by the designated approving authority. If
the vesting tentative map was approved with conditions, the approval is subject
to those conditions. If related applications for discretionary permits were
approved in conjunction with the vesting tentative map, the approvals are
subject to applicable ordinances, policies, and standards granting those
entitlements, including any conditions thereof.
   B.   Initial Life Of Vested Rights: The rights conferred by a vesting
tentative map as provided by this article shall last for an initial period of
one year after recording of the final map. This period may be extended as
provided below.
   C.   Extension Of Vested Rights Through Recording Of A Final Map: Where
several final maps or final parcel maps are recorded on various phases of a
project covered by a single vesting tentative map, this initial time period
shall begin for each phase when the final map or final parcel map for that
phase is recorded. Where several final maps are recorded on various phases of a
project covered by a single vesting tentative map, the initial vesting period
shall begin for each phase on the date the final map for that phase is
recorded.
   D.   Extension Of Vested Rights Through Period For Subsequent Approvals: The
initial time period shall be automatically extended by any time used by the
local agency for processing a complete application for a grading permit or for
design or architectural review, if the time used by the local agency to process
the application exceeds thirty (30) days from the date that a complete
application is filed.
   E.   Extension Of Vested Rights By Moratorium Or Stay: Vesting rights shall
automatically be extended any time during which a development moratorium or
stay on the project is in effect.
   F.   Automatic Extension Of Vested Rights: Vesting rights shall
automatically be extended by any time used by a city department for processing
a complete application for a grading permit or for design or architectural
review, if the time used by the city exceeds thirty (30) days from the date a
complete application is filed.
   G.   Extension Of Vested Rights Through Building Permit: If the subdivider
submits a complete application for a building permit during the periods of time
specified above, the rights conferred by this article shall continue until the
expiration of that permit, or any extension of that permit granted by the city.
   H.   Termination Of Vested Rights: Vested rights that have been conferred
shall end on the occurrence of the following, whichever comes first:
      1.   A final map is not recorded within the initial life of the vesting
tentative map unless a longer period is provided by state law, or an extension
is granted as provided by this chapter.
      2.   If a final map is recorded, the vesting rights shall end one year
after the date of final map recordation as provided in subsection B of this
section.
      3.   The expiration of a building permit, including extension, issued
pursuant to a vesting tentative map, and issued during the time vesting rights
are valid. (Ord. 2012-01, 4-17-2012; amd. Ord. 2023-11, 9-19-2023)
ARTICLE I.  REVERSIONS
SECTION:
8-7I-1: Purpose
8-7I-2: Initiation Of Reversion Proceedings
8-7I-3: Review Of Petition
8-7I-4: Findings Of Reversion
8-7I-5: Conditions For Reversion
8-7I-6: Filing With County Recorder
8-7I-7: Merging And Resubdividing Without Reversion
8-7I-8: Requirements For Parcel Mergers And Unmergers
8-7I-1: PURPOSE:
The purpose of this article is to describe how subdivided property may be
reverted to acreage, and merged and unmerged, pursuant to the provisions of the
subdivision map act. (Ord. 2012-01, 4-17-2012)
8-7I-2: INITIATION OF REVERSION PROCEEDINGS:
Proceedings to revert subdivided property to acreage may be initiated by
petition of all owners of record of the real property or by the city council on
its own motion.
   A.   By Owners: In the case of initiation by the owners, the petition shall
be submitted to the planning division and shall contain the following
information:
      1.   Evidence of title to the real property within the subdivision.
      2.   A final map or parcel map consistent with the requirements of
article G, “Final Maps And Parcel Maps”, of this chapter, and which delineates
dedications which will not be vacated and dedications required as a condition
to reversion. Final or parcel maps shall be conspicuously designated with the
title, “The purpose of this map is a reversion to acreage”.
      3.   Such other additional data as required by the city.
      4.   Each petition for reversion to acreage shall be accompanied by a
nonrefundable filing fee as established by resolution of the city council.
   B.   By City Council: The city council may, by resolution, initiate
proceedings to revert property to acreage. The city council shall direct the
planning director to obtain the necessary information to initiate and conduct
the proceedings. (Ord. 2012-01, 4-17-2012; amd. Ord. 2023-11, 9-19-2023)
8-7I-3: REVIEW OF PETITION:
The notice, hearing, and procedural requirements for review of a tentative map
requiring city council approval shall be followed in connection with the review
of a proposed reversion to acreage, provided that, upon the conclusion of the
hearing before the city council, the city council may approve the reversion to
acreage and take final action on the final map or parcel map. (Ord. 2012-01, 4-
17-2012)
8-7I-4: FINDINGS OF REVERSION:
Subdivided property may be reverted to acreage only if the city council finds
that:
   A.   Dedications or offers of dedication to be vacated or abandoned by the
reversions to acreage are unnecessary for present or prospective public
purposes; and
   B.   Either:
      1.   All owners of an interest in the real property within the
subdivision have consented to reversion, or
      2.   None of the improvements required to be made have been made within
two (2) years from the date the final map or parcel map was filed for record,
or within the time allowed by agreement for completion of the improvements,
whichever is the later, or
      3.   No lots shown on the final map or parcel map have been sold within
five (5) years from the date such map was filed for record. (Ord. 2012-01, 4-
17-2012)
8-7I-5: CONDITIONS FOR REVERSION:
The city council may require the following as conditions of the reversion:
   A.   The owners dedicate or offer to dedicate streets, public rights of way,
or easements;
   B.   The retention of all or a portion of previously paid subdivision fees,
deposits, or improvement securities if the same are necessary to accomplish any
of the purposes or provisions of the subdivision map act or this chapter;
   C.   Such other conditions of reversion as are necessary to accomplish the
purposes or provisions of the subdivision map act or this chapter or necessary
to protect the public health, safety, or welfare. (Ord. 2012-01, 4-17-2012)
8-7I-6: FILING WITH COUNTY RECORDER:
Upon approval of the reversion to acreage, the city clerk shall transmit the
final map or parcel map, together with the city council resolution approving
the reversion, to the county recorder for recordation. Reversion shall be
effective upon the final map or parcel map being filed for record by the county
recorder. (Ord. 2012-01, 4-17-2012)
8-7I-7: MERGING AND RESUBDIVIDING WITHOUT REVERSION:
Except as provided in article E, “Voluntary Parcel Merger”, of this chapter for
merger of contiguous parcels under common ownership, subdivided lands may be
merged and resubdivided without reverting to acreage by complying with the
applicable requirements for the subdivision of land as provided by this chapter
and the subdivision map act. (Ord. 2012-01, 4-17-2012; amd. Ord. 2023-11, 9-19-
2023)
8-7I-8: REQUIREMENTS FOR PARCEL MERGERS AND UNMERGERS:
Except as provided otherwise in this article, the requirements for the merger
and unmerger of parcels shall be as set forth in the subdivision map act. (Ord.
2012-01, 4-17-2012)
ARTICLE J. SUBDIVISION DESIGN STANDARDS
SECTION:
8-7J-1: Purpose
8-7J-2: Applicability Of Standards And Review
8-7J-3: General Lot And Block Design
8-7J-4: Roadways And Access
8-7J-5: Utilities And Services
8-7J-6: Grading And Drainage
8-7J-1: PURPOSE:
The purpose of this article is to establish specific design standards and
requirements for the subdivision of land in the city, consistent with the goals
and policies set forth in the general plan. (Ord. 2012-01, 4-17-2012)
8-7J-2: APPLICABILITY OF STANDARDS AND REVIEW:
The provisions of this article shall apply to all subdivisions, in addition to
other standards of this code, including title 9, "Zoning", of the municipal
code. The design of proposed subdivisions shall be reviewed for consistency
with these standards as part of the review and consideration of the tentative
map. (Ord. 2012-01, 4-17-2012)
8-7J-3: GENERAL LOT AND BLOCK DESIGN:
   A.   Lot Area: Proposed lots shall comply with the minimum lot area
requirements, where applicable, for the underlying property as described in the
general plan and zoning code.
   B.   Lot Orientation: Subdivision design shall provide, to the extent
feasible, for future passive or natural heating or cooling opportunities in the
subdivision as provided in section 66473.1 of the subdivision map act as
follows:
      1.   Passive or natural heating opportunities, such as lot size and
configuration to permit orientation of a structure in an east-west alignment
for southern exposure; and
      2.   Passive or natural cooling opportunities, such as lot size and
configuration to permit orientation of a structure to take advantage of shade
or prevailing breezes.
   C.   Frontage, Width, And Depth:
      1.   All lots shall have frontage on a public or private street.
      2.   Proposed lots shall comply with the minimum frontage requirements,
lot widths, and lot depths, as applicable, described in title 9, “Zoning”, of
the municipal code, for the property.
      3.   Double frontage lots shall be avoided.
   D.   Block Configuration: Blocks shall be designed to allow for adequate
building sites for the type of use proposed; to allow for convenient pedestrian
and vehicular circulation, access, traffic control and safety; and with regard
to limitations created by topography.
      1.   Generally, maximum block length shall be 500 feet; except
      2.   Blocks with single-family residential uses may be up to 600 feet
long, or up to 750 feet long when mid-block pedestrian connections are
provided.
   E.   Development Density: The density of proposed development shall be
consistent with the allowable density as described in the city’s general plan
and consistent zoning. (Ord. 2012-01, 4-17-2012; amd. Ord. 2023-11, 9-19-2023)
8-7J-4: ROADWAYS AND ACCESS:
   A.   Lot Access:
      1.   Each local street providing access to lots within a subdivision
shall connect directly to or by way of one or more local streets to a collector
street or arterial street.
      2.   Each route of access to collector streets or arterial streets and
its point of connection therewith shall be adequate to safely accommodate the
composition and volume of vehicular traffic generated by the land uses that it
serves. However, residential subdivisions shall be designed to encourage
vehicle speeds less than 25 miles per hour and traffic volumes less than 500
average daily traffic (500 ADT).
      3.   In determining the adequacy of a route of access, the deployment of
fire equipment or other services under emergency conditions shall be
considered.
      4.   A tentative map that makes use of a local street that passes through
a predominantly residential neighborhood as a route of access to industrial,
commercial, or other subdivisions generating traffic that would conflict with
the residential character of the neighborhood may be denied.
      5.   A frontage road, or through or side-on lots, or other types of
limited access layout may be required where a subdivision adjoins or contains
an existing or proposed freeway or arterial street. To accomplish the purpose
of this section, waivers of vehicular and pedestrian access rights to the
freeway or arterial street will be required.
   B.   Roadway Network Design: The alignment of streets shown on a tentative
map shall be consistent with the general plan and any applicable specific plan,
and as follows:
      1.   Streets shall be laid out to conform to the alignment of existing
streets in adjoining subdivisions and to the logical continuation of existing
streets where the adjoining land is not subdivided.
      2.   The realignment of streets in contemplation of the development, or
use of adjoining property, and the provision of streets or dead end street
extensions to facilitate the subdivision of adjoining property may be required.
      3.   Permanently dead ended streets (except cul-de-sacs as defined in
these regulations) are prohibited. When a street is temporarily dead ended, a
barricade or temporary turning area or temporary connection to another street
may be required. Permanent turnarounds may be required at the end of dead end
streets where the future extension of the street is remote.
      4.   The use of cul-de-sacs shall be limited to no more than ten percent
(10%) of the length of all streets in a subdivision.
      5.   The use of loop out streets is encouraged over cul-de-sacs.
      6.   All streets shall intersect or intercept each other so that for a
distance of at least 100 feet back from the intersection all streets are
approximately at right angles to each other.
      7.   Street alignment shall provide for streets entering opposite each
other to have their centerlines directly opposite. Where this is not possible,
street jogs shall have a minimum centerline offset of 180 feet. No jogs shall
interrupt the continuity of a major or collector street.
      8.   A subdivision of 40 or more lots shall have at least two (2) points
of ingress/egress, unless otherwise allowed by the designated approving
authority. Additional points of ingress/egress may be required through the site
plan review process for a subdivision of 100 or more lots.
      9.   All street cross sections shall be consistent with those specified
in the general plan.
   C.   Roadway Design To Conform To City Improvement Standards: The design of
public roads within subdivisions (e.g., roadway cross sections) shall conform
to the City’s adopted improvement standards and to the satisfaction of the
City, unless expressly deviated at the time of approval of the tentative map,
or where a special cross section is required to conform to an adopted planned
street line, an applicable specific plan, an existing street, or cross sections
in the general plan depending on surrounding conditions.
   D.   Sidewalks: All new residential subdivisions shall conform to the City’s
adopted improvement standards. The new subdivisions may utilize either parkway
style sidewalks (e.g., sidewalks separated from the curb by a landscaped area),
or “monolithic” or attached sidewalks. Either type of sidewalk must remain in
compliance with the City’s design standards.
   E.   Street Landscaping: Streets shall be provided within landscaping
consistent with the City’s adopted improvement standards and to the
satisfaction of the City. Street trees (trees within the public right-of-way)
shall be planted as required by title 9, chapter 5, article D1, “Landscaping
Standards”, of the municipal code. (Ord. 2018-03, 5-15-2018; amd. Ord. 2012-01,
4-17-2012; Ord. 2023-11, 9-19-2023)
8-7J-5: UTILITIES AND SERVICES:
   A.   Availability Of Service: All public utilities, including water, sewer,
storm drainage, telecommunication, power, and gas, shall be of adequate
capacity to meet the demand of the subdivision.
   B.   Location Of Utilities: All public utilities shall be located either in
the public right of way or in public utility easements of sufficient width as
determined by the city engineer.
   C.   Utilities To Be Undergrounded: All proposed utilities within or
adjacent to the subdivision shall be provided underground. Any existing utility
located within or adjacent to the subdivision shall also be made underground
except transmission lines of 70 kilovolts- ampere or larger. The Public Works
Director may waive this requirement upon finding that the undergrounding would
not result in a public benefit.
   D.   Centralized Mail Service: Where necessary, easements shall be provided
for centralized postal service facilities within subdivisions. (Ord. 2012-01,
4-17-2012; amd. Ord. 2023-11, 9-19-2023)
8-7J-6: GRADING AND DRAINAGE:
   A.   Grading: Grades of all streets shall be consistent with adequate
surface drainage requirements and the approved grading plan of the proposed
subdivision.
   B.   Drainage: All lots shall be graded to provide adequate, positive
drainage in accordance with the city’s adopted improvement standards. Drainage
across property lines will not be allowed unless the city engineer determines
that there is no practical alternative and appropriate easements are provided
to the satisfaction of the city engineer. Provisions shall be made during
construction for proper erosion control, including the prevention of
sedimentation or damage to off-site property. (Ord. 2012-01, 4-17-2012; amd.
Ord. 2023-11, 9-19-2023)
ARTICLE K. SURVEY AND MONUMENTS
SECTION:
8-7K-1: Purpose
8-7K-2: Survey Procedure And Practice
8-7K-3: Survey And Monumentation Standards
8-7K-1: PURPOSE:
The purpose of this article is to provide the requirements and standards for
survey work of, and placement of monumentation within, subdivisions at the time
of final map or parcel map recordation. (Ord. 2012-01, 4-17-2012)
8-7K-2: SURVEY PROCEDURE AND PRACTICE:
The procedure and practice for the survey of any land subject to a final map or
parcel map shall conform to the standard practices and principles of land
surveying, section 8771 of the business and professions code of the
professional land surveyors’ act , and the requirements listed below.
   A.   Preparation Of Survey And Documentation: All documents related to the
survey shall be signed by a California licensed land surveyor or registered
civil engineer authorized to practice land surveying.
   B.   Survey Monuments: Whenever the city has established a system of
coordinates that is within a reasonable distance of the proposed subdivision,
as determined by the city, the field survey shall be tied to the established
monumentation system.
   C.   Traverse: The traverse of the exterior boundaries of the subdivision
computed from field measurements of the ground must close within a limit of
error of one (1) foot to 10,000 feet of perimeter before balancing the survey.
   D.   Field Documentation: When required by the city, the land surveyor or
registered civil engineer authorized to practice land surveying preparing the
survey shall prepare and submit to the city complete field notes, in a form
satisfactory to the city engineer, showing references, ties, locations,
elevations, and other necessary data relating to monuments. (Ord. 2012-01, 4-
17-2012; amd. Ord. 2023-11, 9-19-2023)
8-7K-3: SURVEY AND MONUMENTATION STANDARDS:
In surveying the subdivision, the land surveyor or registered civil engineer
authorized to practice land surveying shall set sufficient monuments so that
any part of the survey may be readily retraced. Survey monuments shall be set
by the land surveyor or registered civil engineer authorized to practice land
surveying for all new subdivisions requiring a final map or parcel map, unless
waived by the city engineer, in compliance with this section.
   A.   Boundary Monuments:
      1.   Boundary monuments shall be set on the exterior boundary of the
subdivision at all corners, angle points, beginnings and ends of curves. The
locations of inaccessible points may be established by ties and shall be so
noted on the final map or parcel map.
      2.   All exterior boundary monuments shall be set prior to recordation of
the final map or parcel map, or as certified on the final map or parcel map.
   B.   Interior Monuments: Whenever interior monuments are required, the
monuments shall be set at:
      1.   All block and lot corners and angle points;
      2.   The beginnings and ends of curves;
      3.   Points of intersection with centerlines of other existing and
proposed streets and alleys; and
      4.   The points of intersection with the exterior boundary lines.
   C.   Monument Type And Position: All monuments set in the course of the
survey shall be as specified by the city engineer and shall be set to the depth
and in the manner prescribed by the city engineer.
   D.   Identification Of Monuments: All monuments shall be permanently and
visibly marked or tagged with the registration or license number of the land
surveyor or registered civil engineer’s authorized to practice land surveying
who signs the engineer’s or surveyor’s certificate and under whose supervision
the survey is made.
   E.   Replacement Of Damaged Or Destroyed Monuments: Any monument which is
damaged or destroyed before acceptance of all improvements by the city shall be
replaced by the land surveyor or registered civil engineer authorized to
practice land surveying of record.
   F.   Timing of Monument Installation: The timing of the installation of a
monument shall be in compliance with sections 66495 and 66496 of the
subdivision map act.
   G.   Notice Of Completion: Within five (5) days after the final setting of
all monuments has been completed, the engineer or surveyor shall give written
notice to the subdivider and the city engineer that the final monuments have
been set. Verification of payment to the land surveyor or registered civil
engineer authorized to practice land surveying shall be filed as required by
section 66497 of the subdivision map act. The cost of setting monuments shall
be included in the engineer’s estimate for improvements in compliance with
subsection
8-7M-2C of this chapter. If security is provided for monumentation, this amount
of the security may be released upon verification of the setting of the
monuments by the city.
   H.   Inspection And Approval: All monuments shall be subject to the
inspection and approval of the city engineer.
   I.   Survey Information To Be Shown On Final Map Or Parcel Map: The
following survey information shall be shown on each final map or parcel map for
which a field survey was made in compliance with this chapter:
      1.   Monuments (together with their precise position and description), or
other evidence found on the ground, to determine the boundaries of the
subdivision.
      2.   Corners of all adjoining properties identified by lot and block
numbers, subdivision names, numbers, and pages of record, or by section,
township, and range, or other proper designation.
      3.   The location and description of any required monuments to be set
after recordation of the final map, and the statement that they are “to be
set”.
      4.   Bearing and length of each lot line, block line, and boundary line
and each required bearing and distance.
      5.   Length, radius, and angle of each curve and tangent and the bearing
of each radial line to each lot corner on each curve.
      6.   The centerlines of any street or alley in or adjoining the
subdivision which have been established by the city, together with reference to
a field book or map showing the centerline and the monuments which determine
its position. If determined by ties, that fact shall be so stated.
   7.   Any other survey data or information as may be required to be shown by
the city or by the provisions of this chapter. (Ord. 2012-01, 4-17-2012; amd.
Ord. 2023-11, 9-19-2023)
ARTICLE L. DEDICATIONS AND RESERVATIONS
SECTION:
8-7L-1: Purpose
8-7L-2: Dedications
8-7L-3: Reservations
8-7L-4: Dedications Made Outside Of A Map
8-7L-1: PURPOSE:
The purpose of this article is to identify a process for the city to require
and accept, or reserve, dedications of land for public purposes, including
streets, highways, drainage courses, public utility easements, other public
easements, public school sites, and local transit facilities consistent with
the subdivision map act. (Ord. 2012-01, 4-17-2012)
8-7L-2: DEDICATIONS:
   A.   Overview: As a condition of approval of a tentative subdivision map or
tentative parcel map, the city may require, to the extent permitted by
applicable law, dedication, or irrevocable offer of dedication of real property
within a subdivision for public use. For purposes of this article, dedications
include, but are not limited to, streets, bikeways, parks, landscaping,
recreation facilities, irrigation ditches, school sites, alleys, including
access and abutter’s rights, drainage, public utility easements, and other
public easements.
The city may also require the design of a subdivision for which a tentative
subdivision map or tentative parcel map is required to provide one or more
cable television systems, duly franchised by the city, an opportunity to
construct, install, and maintain on land identified on the map as dedicated or
to be dedicated to public utility use any equipment necessary to extend cable
television service to each residential parcel in the subdivision.
   B.   Form Of Dedication: The form of dedications (easement or fee in title)
shall be specified on the final or parcel map and be to the satisfaction of the
city engineer.
      1.   If the dedication is required to be in fee for public purposes, the
subdivider shall include the following language in the dedication clause on the
final map or parcel map, or any separate instrument:
The real property described below is dedicated in fee for public purposes:
(here insert a general description of the dedicated property that is adequate
to convey the property).
      2.   If the dedication is required to be an easement for public purposes,
the subdivider shall include the following language in the dedication clause on
the final map or parcel map, or any separate instrument:
The real property described below is dedicated as an easement for public
purposes: (here insert a general description of the easement that is adequate
to convey the dedicated property).
   C.   Acceptance Or Rejection Of Dedications: At the time the city council
approves a final map or parcel map, it shall also accept, accept subject to
improvement, or reject any offers of dedication. The city clerk shall certify
or state on the final map or parcel map the action of the city council.
Acceptance of offers of dedication on a final map or parcel map shall not be
effective until the final map or parcel map is filed in the county recorder's
office.
   D.   Certificate For Dedications And Reconveyance:
      1.   The city shall record a certificate with the county recorder for all
property which has been dedicated in fee for public purposes other than for
open space, park, or schools. This certificate shall be attached to the final
map or final parcel map and shall include:
         a.   Name and address of subdivider dedicating the property.
         b.   Legal description of the dedicated property.
         c.   A statement that the city shall reconvey the property to the
subdivider if the city council determines that the same public purpose for
which the property was dedicated does not exist, or the property or any portion
thereof is not needed for public utilities.
      2.   The subdivider may request the city to determine whether the same
public purpose for which a dedication was required still exists. The city may
charge the subdivider a fee in the amount reasonably required to make such
determination.
      3.   If the council determines that the same purpose for which a
dedication was required does not exist, the city shall reconvey the property to
the subdivider or his successor in interest, except any portion of the property
required for that same public purpose or for public utilities. (Ord. 2012-01,
4-17-2012; amd. Ord. 2023-11, 9-19-2023)
8-7L-3: RESERVATIONS:
   A.   Overview Of Reservations: As a condition of approval of a tentative map
or tentative parcel map, the city may require, to the extent permitted by law,
that areas of real property within a subdivision be reserved for public use.
For purposes of this article, such reservations include, but are not limited
to, sites appropriate for parks, recreational facilities, fire stations,
libraries, and other public uses.
   B.   Standards For Reservations: Reservations required in connection with
subdivision shall be subject to the following conditions:
      1.   The required reservation(s) shall be based on and in accordance with
policies and standards for such public uses contained in the adopted general
plan or any adopted specific plan.
      2.   The reserved area(s) shall be of such size and shape as to permit
the balance of the property within which the reservation(s) are located to
develop in an orderly manner.
      3.   The amount of land reserved shall not make development of the
remaining land held by the subdivider economically unfeasible.
      4.   Each reserved area shall conform to the adopted general plan or any
adopted specific plan and shall be in such multiples of streets and parcels as
to permit an efficient division of the reserved area in the event the city or
other public agency does not acquire it within the time prescribed by
subsection C1 of this section.
   C.   Reservation Procedures:
      1.   The public agency for whose benefit an area has been reserved shall,
at the time of final map or final parcel map approval, enter into a binding
agreement to acquire such reserved area within two (2) years after the
completion and acceptance of all improvements. Such period of time may be
extended by mutual agreement.
The purchase price for the reserved area shall be the market value thereof at
the time of the filing of the tentative map or tentative parcel map, plus the
taxes against such reserved area from the date of the reservation and any other
costs incurred by the subdivider in the maintenance of the reserved area,
including interest costs on any loan covering the reserved area.
      2.   If the public agency for whose benefit an area has been reserved
does not enter into a binding agreement as described in subsection C1 of this
section, the reservation shall automatically terminate. (Ord. 2012-01, 4-17-
2012; amd. Ord. 2023-11, 9-19-2023)
8-7L-4: DEDICATIONS MADE OUTSIDE OF A MAP:
When a dedication of easement or fee is made to the city and is not included as
part of a final map or parcel map (e.g., off-site improvements), such
dedications shall be offered through perfecting deed, exhibit map, and legal
description with original land surveyor or registered civil engineer’s stamp
and notarized signatures. If the dedication(s) are needed for immediate use,
the city council will consider accepting then recording. If dedications are
needed for future use, the city council will consider acknowledging then
recording documents. Fees shall be paid by the applicant to cover the cost of
reviewing and processing all documents. (Ord. 2012-01, 4-17-2012; amd. Ord.
2023-11, 9-19-2024)
ARTICLE M. IMPROVEMENTS
SECTION:
8-7M-1: Purpose
8-7M-2: Improvement Requirements And Plans
8-7M-3: Oversizing Improvements
8-7M-4: Improvement Deferral
8-7M-1: PURPOSE:
The purpose of this article is to establish a review and permit process for the
construction of physical improvements to land such as streets, sewers, and
other utilities. The intent is also to establish a process for allowing a final
map or parcel map to be recorded prior to the completion of required
improvements upon execution of certain agreements and/or security. (Ord. 2012-
01, 4-17-2012)
8-7M-2: IMPROVEMENT REQUIREMENTS AND PLANS:
   A.   Applicability: After the approval of the final map or parcel map, or a
land use permit or building permit requiring the installation of improvements,
the subdivider shall construct or install all improvements in streets, alleys,
pedestrian ways, bike paths and trails, channels, easements, and other rights
of way as are necessary for the general use of the subdivision, to meet local
traffic and drainage needs in accordance with the provisions of this article,
and to satisfy the conditions of approval of the tentative map.
   B.   Improvement Design: The construction of public improvements, including
materials and methods, shall conform to the standard plans and specifications
of the city as adopted by resolution of the city council.
   C.   Review And Processing Of Improvement Plans: Before the construction of
any improvements, the subdivider or developer shall submit plans to the city as
follows:
      1.   Preparation And Content: Improvement plans shall be prepared by a
registered civil engineer licensed to practice in the state of California.
Improvement plan submittals shall include the following information:
         a.   Any drawings, specifications, calculations, design reports, and
other information required by the city engineer in compliance with the city's
standard specifications and plans;
         b.   Utility master plans (water, sewer, and storm drainage) as
approved by the public works director;
         c.   Grading, drainage, erosion and sediment control, and a stormwater
pollution prevention plan (SWPPP) for the entire subdivision for review and
approval by the public works director;
         d.   Soils report, if not previously submitted;
         e.   Landscape and irrigation plans for any landscaping installed
along streets or in public areas;
         f.   The improvement plan/specification checking and construction
inspection fees as required by resolution of the city council; and
         g.   A detailed engineer's cost estimate of all improvements upon:
            (1)   The submittal of initial improvement plans; and
            (2)   The approval of improvement plans.
      2.   Submittal Of Plans: Three (3) sets of improvement plans shall be
submitted to the planning department, along with the application deposit as
established by resolution of the city council.
      3.   Review And Approval: Improvement plans shall be reviewed and
approved, conditionally approved, or denied by the planning director, public
works director, and city engineer within the time limits provided by section
66456.2 of the subdivision map act. The city engineer will review the plans
based on sound engineering practices, design standards, and applicable city
policies. The public works director will review the plans to ensure conformance
with the city's public works standards. The planning director will review the
plans to determine compliance with the approved tentative map, conditions of
approval, and the city's general plan and any applicable specific plans.
Comments, if any, shall be forwarded to the subdivider in a timely manner.
      4.   AutoCAD file. Upon approval of plans, the developer shall submit an
AutoCAD file (latest version) of all improvements for the City’s incorporation
into the City Geographic Information System.
      5.   Effect of Approval: The final approval of improvement plans shall
generally be required before approval of a final map or parcel. The approval of
improvement plans shall not bind the city to accept the improvements nor waive
any defects in the improvements as installed.
      6.   Changes to Approved Plans: Any changes to approved plans shall be
reviewed and action upon consistent with subsection G of this section.
   D.   Timing of Improvements: Except as listed below, required improvements
shall be constructed or otherwise installed after approval of the improvement
plans and before the approval of the final map or parcel map, or before final
building inspection or any certificate of occupancy.
      1.   Improvements are deferred in compliance with section
8-7M-4, "Improvement Deferral", of this article; or
      2.   Improvements are required as a condition of approval of a
subdivision of four (4) or fewer lots, in which case improvements shall be as
required under section 66411.1 of the subdivision map act.
   E.   Inspection of Improvements: The city engineer shall make any
inspections deemed necessary to ensure that all construction complies with the
approved improvement plans. Where required by the city engineer, the developer
shall enter into an agreement with the city to pay the full cost of any
contract inspection services determined to be necessary by the city engineer.
   F.   Correction of Deficiencies: The developer shall be responsible for
correcting any deficiencies identified during the construction process.
   G.   Revisions To Approved Plans: Revisions to approved improvement plans
may be proposed, and shall be reviewed and approved or disapproved by the city
engineer as follows:
      1.   Requests by the subdivider or project engineer for revisions to the
approved plans shall be submitted in writing to the city engineer and shall be
accompanied by revised drawing(s) showing the proposed revision. If the
revision is acceptable, the original shall be returned to the subdivider and
project engineer for revising. The revised plans shall be immediately
transmitted to the city engineer for initialing. Construction of any proposed
revision will not be permitted to commence until revised plans have been
initialed by the city engineer.
      2.   When revisions are deemed necessary by the city engineer to protect
public health and safety, or as field conditions may require, a request in
writing shall be made to the subdivider and project engineer. The subdivider's
engineer shall revise the plans and transmit the original to the city engineer
for initialing within the time specified by the city engineer.
   H.   Acceptance Of Improvements:
      1.   Verification: Before acceptance for maintenance or final approval by
the city council of development improvements, the city engineer shall verify
that the improvement work has been completed in substantial compliance with the
approved plans and specifications, and the developer shall provide deeds for
dedication of easements or rights of way.
      2.   Acceptance: After all items are completed and all items on the
deficiency list have been corrected and as built improvement plans received,
the city council shall accept the subdivision improvements.
      3.   Notice Of Completion: If the subdivision is accepted by the city,
the city clerk shall file a notice of completion with the county recorder.
(Ord. 2012-01, 4-17-2012; amd. Ord. 2023-11, 9-19-2023)
8-7M-3: OVERSIZING IMPROVEMENTS:
As a condition of approval of a tentative map, it may be required that
improvements installed by the subdivider for the benefit of the subdivision be
of a supplemental size, capacity, or number for the benefit of property not
within the subdivision, and that said improvement be dedicated to the public.
If such a condition is imposed, provision for reimbursement to the subdivider
in the manner provided by section 66486 of the subdivision map act will be
contained in the subdivision improvement agreement or in a separate
reimbursement agreement between the city and the subdivider. (Ord. 2012-01, 4-
17-2012)
8-7M-4: IMPROVEMENT DEFERRAL:
   A.   Right To Defer Improvements And Requirement To Enter Into Improvement
Agreement: Prior to approval of the final map, all public improvements shall be
completed in accordance with approved improvement plans to the satisfaction of
the city engineer or, as a condition of the final map, the subdivider shall
enter into a subdivision improvement agreement with the city, in the form
prepared by and approved by the city, to ensure timely completion of the
improvements at his expense. All public improvements required by the agreement
shall be completed to the satisfaction of the city engineer prior to the
occupancy of any structures in the subdivision.
   B.   Form, Filing, And Term Of Improvement Agreement:
      1.   The improvement agreement shall be in writing, shall be approved as
to form by the city attorney, and shall be secured and conditioned as provided
in this section. An acknowledged abstract of said agreement shall be recorded
simultaneously with the final map or the parcel map.
      2.   The recorded improvement agreement shall be on file with the city
clerk prior to recordation of the final map or parcel map.
      3.   The term of the improvement agreement shall begin on the date of
filing of the final map or parcel map and end upon the date of completion or
fulfillment of all terms and conditions contained therein to the satisfaction
of the city engineer.
   C.   Minimum Requirements For Improvement Agreement: The improvement
agreement shall include all of the following provisions as minimum terms and
conditions of the agreement:
      1.   Mutually agreeable terms to complete all required improvements at
the subdivider's expense;
      2.   A provision that the subdivider shall comply with all requirements
of these regulations, of this code, and of other applicable laws, and with all
terms and conditions of required improvement permits;
      3.   A statement indicating a period of time, satisfactory to the city
engineer, within which the subdivider shall complete all improvement work;
      4.   A provision that if the subdivider fails to complete the work within
the specified period of time, or any extended period of time that may have
lawfully been granted to the subdivider, the city may, at its option, complete
the required improvement work and the subdivider and his or her surety shall be
firmly bound under a continuing obligation for payment of the full cost and
expense incurred or expended by the city in completing such work;
      5.   Provision for the repair and replacement of defective material and
workmanship of said improvements by the subdivider for a period of twelve (12)
months after the improvements have been accepted by the city engineer;
      6.   Provision for the inspection of all improvements of the subdivision
by the city engineer for a period of twelve (12) months after said improvement
acceptance date;
      7.   A provision guaranteeing payment to the city for all engineering and
inspection costs and fees and all other incidental expenses incurred by the
city; and
      8.   A description of all lands within the exterior boundaries of the
subdivision.
   D.   Optional Components For Improvement Agreement: The improvement
agreement may also include the following provisions and other additional items,
terms, and conditions as may be determined necessary by the city to carry out
the intent and purposes of these regulations:
      1.   Provision for the repair, at the subdivider's expense, of any damage
to public streets that may reasonably be expected to result from hauling
operations necessary for subdivision improvements required by these
regulations, including the importing or exporting of earth for grading
purposes;
      2.   Mutually agreeable terms to acquire public easements or dedications
that are outside the boundaries of the subdivision at the subdivider's expense;
      3.   Mutually agreeable terms to improve, at some undetermined future
date, easements or dedications offered and reserved for future public use at
the subdivider's expense; and providing that such improvements shall be secured
by separate cash bond in the manner prescribed by subsection E of this section;
and further providing that only the requirements of this provision shall not
delay the release of any other improvement security provided pursuant to this
article;
      4.   Provision for reimbursement to be paid to the subdivider under the
provisions of section 66486 of the subdivision map act;
      5.   Provision for the setting of required monuments after the
recordation of the final map or parcel map; and
      6.   Provision for the method of payment of any fees imposed by this
article.
   E.   Improvement Security: Where an improvement agreement is entered into
prior to the recordation of a final map or parcel map, the improvements shall
be secured by the subdivider as part of the improvement agreement. Improvement
security shall be provided and released consistent with the requirements below.
      1.   Form Of Security: Security shall be provided in one or more of the
following forms, consistent with section 66499 of the subdivision map act and
in a form satisfactory to the city:
         a.   Bond or bonds by one or more duly authorized corporate sureties;
         b.   A deposit, either with the city or a responsible escrow agent or
trust company, at the opinion of the city, of money or negotiable bonds of the
kind approved for securing deposits of public monies;
         c.   An instrument of credit from an agency of the state, federal, or
local government when any agency of the state, federal, or local government
provides at least twenty percent (20%) of the financing for the portion of the
act or agreement requiring security, or from one or more financial institutions
subject to regulation by the state or federal government and pledging that the
funds necessary to carry out the act or agreement are on deposit and guaranteed
for payment, or a letter of credit issued by such a financial institution;
      2.   Amount Of Security: Security shall be provided in the following
amounts:
         a.   Performance security (performance): An amount of one hundred
percent (100%) of the total city engineer approved estimated cost of the
construction or installation of the improvements or of the acts to be
performed, securing the faithful performance and completion of the improvements
or acts to be performed; and
         b.   Payment security (labor and materials): An amount of fifty
percent (50%) of the total city engineer approved estimated cost of the
improvement or required act, securing payment to the contractor, to the
subcontractors, and to persons furnishing labor, materials or equipment for the
construction or installation of the improvements or the performance of the
required acts; and
         c.   Warranty security: An amount of ten percent (10%) of the total
city engineer approved estimated cost of the improvement to be necessary for
the guarantee and warranty of the work for a period of one year following the
completion and acceptance thereof against any defective work or labor done, or
defective materials or equipment furnished.
      3.   Changes In Approved Improvements: When the approved improvement
plans are changed and are to be approved by the city after surety is provided,
the approval of the changes shall be conditioned, and shall not be fully
exercised, until the surety is modified consistently. No increase in surety
shall be required if the changes do not exceed ten percent (10%) of the
original estimated costs of the improvements.
      4.   Nonprofit California Corporations: Pursuant to section 66499.3 of
the subdivision map act, entities that are California nonprofit corporations,
funded by the United States Of America or one of its agencies, or funded by the
state of California or one of its agencies, are exempt from the requirements of
subsections E1a and E1b of this section, provided they meet and fulfill the
alternative security requirements specified in section 66499.3(c) of the
subdivision map act.
      5.   Release Of Improvement Security Generally: Improvement security
shall be released upon completion of the improvements as follows:
         a.   Performance Security: The performance security shall be released
only upon completion or fulfillment of all terms and conditions of the
improvement agreement and acceptance by the city engineer. Such acceptance
shall occur when the certificate of completion is signed by the city engineer.
If a warranty security is not submitted, performance security shall be released
twelve (12) months after acceptance of improvements and correction of all
warranty deficiencies.
         b.   Payment Security: Security given to secure payment to the
contractor, subcontractors and to persons furnishing labor, materials or
equipment may, six (6) months after the completion and acceptance of the
improvements by the city, be reduced to an amount equal to the amount of all
claims filed and of which notice has been given to the city. The balance of the
security shall be released upon the settlement of all claims and obligations
for which the security was given.
         c.   Warranty Security: The warranty security shall be released upon
satisfactory completion of the warranty period, provided that all warranty
deficiencies have been corrected.
         d.   Release Not Applicable To: Pursuant to sections 66499.7 and
66499.9 of the subdivision map act, the release of improvement security as set
forth above shall not apply to any costs, reasonable expenses, or fees,
including reasonable attorney fees.
      6.   Release Of Security Through Assessment District Proceedings: If the
required subdivision improvements are financed and installed pursuant to
special assessment proceedings, upon the furnishing by the contractor of the
faithful performance and payment bond required by the special assessment act
being used, the improvement security of the subdivider may be reduced by the
city by the amount corresponding to the amount of such bonds furnished by the
contractor. See title 7, chapter 10, “City Maintenance Districts”, of the
municipal code for details regarding establishment and use of maintenance and
assessment districts. (Ord. 2012-01, 4-17-2012; amd. Ord. 2023-11, 9-19-2023)
ARTICLE N. DEDICATIONS OF LAND FOR PARKS AND RECREATION FACILITIES
SECTION:
8-7N-1: Purpose
8-7N-2: Requirements And Exemptions
8-7N-3: Standards And Formulas For Dedication Of Park Land
8-7N-4: Fees In Lieu Of New Development Park Land Dedication
8-7N-5: Fees For Citywide Park Land
8-7N-6: Time Schedule For Use Of Land And Fees
8-7N-7: Credit For Private Open Space
8-7N-8: Sale Of Dedicated Land
8-7N-9: Phased Final Maps And Parcel Maps
8-7N-10: Off Site Dedication
8-7N-1: PURPOSE:
This article is enacted pursuant to the authority granted by section 66477 of
the subdivision map act. The park and recreational facilities for which
dedication of land and/or payment of fee is required shall be in accordance
with the parks, schools, and community facilities element of the general plan.
Land dedication under this article shall conform to the city general plan, to
any adopted specific plan, and to the applicable provisions of section 66477 of
the subdivision map act. (Ord. 2012-01, 4-17-2012)
8-7N-2: REQUIREMENTS AND EXEMPTIONS:
   A.   Park Land Required: As a condition of approval of a final map or parcel
map, the subdivider shall dedicate land, pay a fee in lieu thereof, or both, at
the option of the city, for park or recreational purposes at the time and
according to the standards and formula contained in this article.
This requirement for land dedication and/or in-lieu fee shall be separate from
any park impact fee established by resolution of the city council to address
improvements to existing parks and construction of new parks as is necessary to
support the increase in population provided through new development.
   B.   Exemptions: The provisions of this article shall not apply to
subdivisions:
      1.   Not used for residential purposes, provided, however, that a
condition shall be placed on the approval of such subdivision that if a
building permit is requested for construction of a residential structure or
structure on one or more of the parcels within four (4) years of the filing of
the map, the owner of each such parcel shall be required to pay an in-lieu fee
pursuant to this article, calculated as of the date the building permit is
issued, as a condition to the issuance of a building permit; a note to this
effect shall be placed on the final map.
      2.   To permit separate ownership of two (2) or more existing residential
dwelling units when all such units are more than five (5) years old, and no new
units are added. (Ord. 2012-01, 4-17-2012; amd. Ord. 2023-11, 9-19-2023)
8-7N-3: STANDARDS AND FORMULAS FOR DEDICATION OF PARK LAND:
   A.   Dedication Standards: It is found and determined that the public
interest, convenience, health, welfare, and safety require that no less than
six (6) acres of property for each 1,000 persons residing within the city be
devoted to local recreation and park purposes. This standard shall be broken
down as follows:
      1.   New Development Park Land: A standard of five (5) acres per each
1,000 persons for landscaped open spaces, parks, trail systems, and/or special
community service facilities in new residential developments; and
      2.   Citywide Park Land: A standard of one acre per each 1,000 persons,
to be met with an impact fee, for city owned and operated parks and special
recreation areas that serve all residents.
   B.   When Park Land Dedication Is Required: Where a recreational or park
facility has been designated in the general plan or a specific plan, and is to
be located in whole or in part within the proposed subdivision to serve the
immediate and future needs of the residents of the subdivision, the subdivider
shall dedicate land for a local recreation or park facility sufficient in size
and topography to serve the residents of the subdivision.
   C.   Calculation Of Required Park Land Dedication For New Development:
      1.   The amount of land to be dedicated shall be determined according to
the formula D x F = A in which:
         D = the number of dwelling units
         F = a “factor” herein described
         A = the buildable acres to be dedicated
      2.   A “buildable acre” is a typical acre of the subdivision, with a
slope less than ten percent (10%), and located in other than an area on which
building is excluded because of flooding, public rights of way, easements, or
other restrictions.
      3.   The factors below are constants that, when multiplied by the number
of dwelling units permitted in the subject area, will produce five (5) acres of
new development park land per 1,000 population:
         FS = .0160 relating to single-family dwelling units
         FT = .0148 relating to two-family dwelling units
         FM = .0127 relating to multiple-family dwelling units
         Fmh = .0174 relating to mobilehome dwelling units
      4.   The factors in subsection C3 of this section shall be updated from
time to time with the latest data available from the United States census which
has a low margin of error. As of the 2000 census, this information was
available from tables H032 (tenure by units in structure) and H033 (total
population in occupied housing units by tenure by units in structure) of
summary file 3.
      The factors shall be calculated based upon the following equation:
 
5 acres                  = Park factor
(1,000 ÷ Household Size)
 
   The household size shall be determined based upon the total population in
each dwelling category (table H033) divided by the total number of occupied
units in that dwelling category (table H032).
   Note that the census uses a greater range of unit types than that used in
this article.
Table 8-7N-3-C-1 of this section describes how the census unit types are
converted into the four (4) unit types used in this article.
TABLE 8-7N-3-C-1
CENSUS UNITS CONVERSION TO PARK LAND UNITS
 
Census Unit Type          Park Land Factor Unit Type
      1, detached      Single-family dwelling
      1, attached
      2                Two-family dwelling
      3 or 4
      5 to 9
      10 to 19         Multi-family dwelling
      20 to 49
      50 or more
      Mobilehome       Mobilehome dwelling
      Boat, RV, van,   Not used
 
   D.   Determination Of The Number Of Dwelling Units On Multi-Family Parcels:
Unless the subdivider enters into an agreement with the city for a lower
density, the number of dwelling units on multi- family parcels shall be based
on the maximum development potential allowed by right based upon the general
plan land use map and the gross acreage of the parcel.
   E.   Required Improvements On Dedicated Land: The subdivider shall provide
all of the following prior to the city accepting the park land dedication:
      1.   Provide full street improvements, including, but not limited to,
curbs, gutters, street paving, traffic control devices, streetlights, and
sidewalks, to land which is dedicated pursuant to this article;
      2.   Provide improved surface drainage through the site; and
      3.   Provide other improvements which the designated approving authority
determines to be essential to the acceptance of the land for recreational
purposes. (Ord. 2012-01, 4-17-2012; amd. Ord. 2023-11, 9-19-2023)
8-7N-4: FEES IN LIEU OF NEW DEVELOPMENT PARK LAND DEDICATION:
   A.   Ability To Pay Fee: A new development may pay a fee in lieu of
dedicating land for park land if:
      1.   There is no park or recreational facility designated in the city’s
general plan to be located in whole or in part within the proposed subdivision
to serve the needs of the residents of the subdivision, and/or where the
designed approving authority requires the payment of in-lieu fees; or
      2.   The proposed subdivision contains 50 parcels or less.
   B.   Formula For Fees: When a fee is to be paid in lieu of land dedication,
the amount of such fee shall be based upon the fair market value as described
below, plus 48 percent for off-site improvements such as utility line
extensions, curb, gutter, and pavement, and streetlights.
      For purposes of calculating the in-lieu fee under this section, the fair
market value shall be determined in the following manner:
      1.   The subdivider shall request that an appraisal be prepared pursuant
to the procedures set forth below and shall pay the in-lieu fee based upon the
fair market value established in that appraisal.
      2.   Upon request of the subdivider, the city shall cause an appraisal to
be made. The appraisal shall be made at the subdivider’s expense, payable to
the city in advance, by a person on the city’s list of approved appraisers, who
will be qualified as a certified general real estate appraiser by the
California office of real estate appraisers and shall meet the standards
specified in the uniform standards of professional appraisal practice. The
appraiser shall appraise the property at its unencumbered (free and clear)
value, as if at the approved tentative map stage of development and as if any
assessments or other encumbrances to which the property is subject had been
paid off in full prior to the date of appraisal. Factors to be considered
during the evaluation shall include the following:
         a.   Conditions of the tentative map;
         b.   The general plan;
         c.   Zoning and density;
         d.   Property location;
         e.   Off-site improvements facilitating use of the property;
         f.   Site characteristics of the property;
         g.   Existing public improvements.
   The appraisal shall value the property as of a date no earlier than 90 days
prior to the recording of the final map, or the payment of the fee, whichever
occurs later. The appraisal shall clearly state the fair market value of the
property.
   C.   Use Of Fees: Fees collected pursuant to this section shall be used and
expended solely for the acquisition, improvement, and expansion of the public
parks, playgrounds, and recreational facilities reasonably related to serve the
needs of the residents of the proposed subdivision. (Ord. 2012-01, 4-17-2012;
amd. Ord. 2023-11, 9-19-2023)
8-7N-5: FEES FOR CITYWIDE PARK LAND:
The city has, through its general plan, established a goal of providing one
acre for each 1,000 persons for city owned and operated parks and special
recreation areas that serve all residents. This requirement shall be satisfied
through the payment of a fee in lieu of any dedication requirement. The fee
shall be as established by resolution of the city council. (Ord. 2012-01, 4-17-
2012; amd. Ord. 2023-11, 9-19-2023)
8-7N-6: TIME SCHEDULE FOR USE OF LAND AND FEES:
Any fee collected under this article shall be committed within five (5) years
after the payment of such fees or the issuance of building permits on one-half
(1/2) of the lots created by the subdivision, whichever occurs later. If such
fees are not committed, they shall be distributed and paid to the then record
owners of the subdivision in the same proportion that the size of their lot
bears to the total area of all lots within the subdivision. (Ord. 2012-01, 4-
17-2012)
8-7N-7: CREDIT FOR PRIVATE OPEN SPACE:
The city may grant credits for privately owned and maintained open space or
local recreation facilities, or both, in planned developments as defined in
section 11003 of the Business And Professions Code, condominiums as defined in
section 783 of the Civil Code, and other common interest developments, as
provided in this section.
   A.   Amount Of Credit: Credit shall not exceed 25% of the total required
dedication or fee, or both, otherwise required by this article for the
subdivision, and shall be deducted from the dedication or fees, or both,
otherwise required.
   B.   Qualifying Credits: The city allows all of the following land or
facilities as private open space credit, provided such land or facilities are
held in a recorded easement by the city:
      1.   “Open spaces”, which are generally defined as parks, extensive areas
with tree coverage, when such areas are extensive and have natural features
worthy of scenic preservation, golf courses, or open areas on the site in
excess of 20,000 square feet;
      2.   “Court areas”, which are generally defined as tennis courts,
badminton courts, shuffleboard courts, or similar hard surfaced areas
especially designed and exclusively used for court games;
      3.   “Recreational swimming areas”, which are defined generally as fenced
areas devoted primarily to swimming, diving, or both, including decks, lawn
area, bathhouse, or other facilities developed and used exclusively for
swimming and diving;
      4.   Recreation buildings, designed and primarily used for the
recreational needs of the residents of the development; and
      5.   “Special areas”, which are generally defined as areas of scenic or
natural beauty, historic sites, hiking, riding or motorcycle/bicycle trails,
including pedestrian walkways separated from public roads, planting strips,
improved access or right of way in excess of requirements, and similar type
open space or recreational facilities which, in the sole judgment of the city,
qualifies for a credit.
   C.   Procedure For Allowing Credit: Credit under this section may be allowed
at the discretion of the designated approving authority for the subdivision at
the time of tentative map approval if it can be shown that the allowance of the
credit is consistent with the policies of the general plan. (Ord. 2012-01, 4-
17-2012; amd. Ord. 2023-11, 9-19-2023)
8-7N-8: SALE OF DEDICATED LAND:
If, during the period between dedication of land for park purposes and the
commencement of first stage development, circumstances arise that indicate that
another site would be more suitable for park or recreational purposes serving
the subdivision, by mutual agreement of the subdivider or owner and the city
council, the land may be sold upon the approval of the city council, with the
resultant funds being used for the purchase of a more suitable site. (Ord.
2012-01, 4-17-2012)
8-7N-9: PHASED FINAL MAPS AND PARCEL MAPS:
If the proposed subdivision is recorded through the use of phased final maps or
parcel maps, as provided by this chapter, requirement for dedication of lands
for public parks and recreation facilities or in-lieu payment shall be required
on a proportional share of the area subject to the phased map versus the
overall approved project. The planning director shall, at the time of filing of
each phased map, recalculate the amount of land required to be dedicated in
accordance with this article, based on the land area and units included in the
proposed final map or parcel map. Nothing in this section shall preclude the
subdivider from satisfying the requirements of this article as part of the
first phased map. However, in no instance shall the dedication accepted by the
city or in-lieu fees collected by the city for the subdivision be less than the
proportional requirement that has been recorded. (Ord. 2012-01, 4-17-2012)
8-7N-10: OFF SITE DEDICATION:
Dedication of land outside of the subdivision may be authorized by the city by
action on the tentative map and be credited toward the developer's park land
dedication requirement pursuant to this article. (Ord. 2012-01, 4-17-2012)
ARTICLE O. URBAN LOT SPLIT PARCEL MAP
SECTION:
8-7O-1: Purpose And Scope
8-7O-2: Application
8-7O-3: Approval
8-7O-4: Location Requirements
8-7O-5: Design And Improvement Requirements
8-7O-6: Access Standards
8-7O-7: Map Requirements
8-7O-8: Concurrent Processing With Other Permits
8-7O-9: Prohibition Of Further Subdivision
8-7O-1: PURPOSE AND SCOPE:
   A.   This article implements Government Code .Section 66411. 7 to provide an
alternative method to subdivide a parcel located within a single-family
residential zoning district for the purpose of housing development.
   B.   Urban lot split means the subdivision of an existing legal parcel zoned
single-family residential RN and RLMD, under section
9-3-2 of title 9 “Zoning” municipal code, to create no more than two new
parcels. (Ord. 2023-11, 9-19-2023)
8-7O-2: APPLICATION:
   A.   A completed application form, of which the blank form shall be provided
by the planning department.
   B.   One (1) copy of the urban lot split parcel map, consistent with the
requirements of section
8-7O-7 of this chapter and sections 66444 through 66450 of the subdivision map
act. The urban lot split parcel map must be prepared and signed by a licensed
land surveyor or registered civil engineer authorized to practice land
surveying.
   C.   A fee in an amount established by resolution of the city council must
be paid concurrently with the submission of the urban lot split parcel map.
   D.   A preliminary title report, showing the legal owners at the time of the
filing of the urban lot split parcel map and prepared not more than 90 days
prior to the submittal of the application.
   E.   All items referenced within the preliminary title report shall be
submitted for review (i.e., deeds, easements, and record maps) when submitting
application.
   F.   A title guarantee by a qualified title company, for the benefit of the
city, certifying that the signatures of all persons whose consent is necessary
to pass clear title to the land and all acknowledgments appear on the proper
certificates and are correctly shown on the map and affidavits to dedication.
   G.   Closure Calculations for each individual lot and overall boundary
prepared by a licensed land surveyor or registered civil engineer authorized to
practice land surveying.
   H.   A preliminary drainage plan.
   I.   An urban lot split affidavit, city form provided by the planning
department, must be signed and notarized, and submitted with the application
for an urban lot split parcel map, under penalty of perjury under the laws of
California that declares all of the following:
      1.   The proposed urban lot split will not require or authorize
demolition or alteration of any of the following types of housing:
         a.   A residential unit that is a deed-restricted below-market-rate
residential unit.
         b.   A residential unit that is subject to any form of rent or price
control.
         c.   A residential unit that has been occupied by a tenant in the last
three (3) years.
         d.   A residential unit on property subject to Government Code section
7060 (Ellis Act), whereby the property owner has withdrawn the property from
rent within the past 15 years.
      2.   The parcel was not established through any prior exercise of an
urban lot split under this article.
      3.   Neither the owner of the parcel being subdivided nor any person
acting in concert with the owner has previously subdivided an adjacent parcel
under the provisions of this article.
      4.   The owner intends to occupy one of the residential units located on
a lot created by the parcel map as their principal residence for a minimum of
three (3) years after the date the parcel map was recorded.
      5.   No residential unit on any lot created by the subdivision will be
rented or offered for rent for a term of less than 30 days.
      6.   The uses allowed on a lot created by the parcel map will be limited
to residential uses.
   J.   Any other information as required by the planning department. (Ord.
2023-11, 9-19-2023)
8-7O-3: APPROVAL:
A parcel map for an urban lot split will be approved ministerially without
discretionary review or public hearing by the City Engineer that approves that
the parcel map meets all of the requirements of this article and Government
Code Section 66411.7. A tentative parcel map is not required for an urban lot
split. (Ord. 2023-11, 9-19-2023)
8-7O-4: LOCATION REQUIREMENTS:
   A.   The parcel is located in one of the following single-family residential
zoning districts AR, RVLD, RLD, RN or RLMD, as defined in Title 9, Zoning.
   B.   The parcel is located within the boundaries of an urbanized area or
urban cluster, as designated by the United States Census Bureau.
   C.   The parcel meets the requirements of Government Codes Section 65913.4
(a)(6)(B)-(K).
   D.   The parcel is not located within a historic district or property
included on the State Historic Resources Inventory, as defined by Public
Resources Code Section 5020.1, or on the list of the historical resources, as
determined by the City of Lemoore. (Ord. 2023-11, 9-19-2023)
8-7O-5: DESIGN AND IMPROVEMENT REQUIREMENTS:
   A.   A parcel map may subdivide an existing legal parcel to create no more
than two new lots of approximately equal lot area. Each resulting lot may not
be smaller than 40 percent of the area of the original parcel proposed for
subdivision, and neither resulting lot may be smaller than 1,200 square feet.
   B.   Each lot must be served by a separate water service meter and a
separate sewer connection.
   C.   Each lot must collect and convey all stormwater entering or originating
on the lot, without diversion and within an adequate storm drainage system, to
an adequate natural watercourse having definable bed and banks, or to an
existing adequate public storm drainage system which conveys the stormwater to
an adequate natural watercourse, in accordance with City of Lemoore design
standards. All storm drainage facilities must be designed and constructed in
compliance with this code and City of Lemoore design standards.
   D.   The applicant shall comply with all applicable rules, regulations, and
standards of the City’s National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (NPDES)
permit.
   E.   On-site frontage improvements, including curbs and sidewalks, and
dedications for road widening shall be provided as required by City of Lemoore
development improvement standards. No off-site frontage improvements shall be
required.
   F.   Rights-of-way and development rights shall be dedicated or conveyed as
required by the general plan, a right of way plan line, or City of Lemoore
development improvement standards.
   G.   The placement of lot lines may not result in an accessory building on a
lot without a primary building on the same lot.
   H.   Lot lines may not render an existing structure as nonconforming in any
respect (e.g., setbacks, yard, lot coverage, parking), nor increase the
nonconformity of an existing nonconforming structure. (Ord. 2023-11, 9-19-2023)
8-7O-6: ACCESS STANDARDS:
Each lot must front upon or have access to a public street or be served by an
access easement serving no more than two lots. Access must be provided in
compliance with these standards:
   A.   Vehicle access easements serving a maximum of two residential units
must have a minimum width of 12 feet, unless a wider driveway is required by
the California Fire Code.
   B.   Vehicle access easements serving three to four residential units must
have a minimum width of 25 feet.
   C.   Vehicle access easements may not be located closer than 25 feet to an
intersection.
   D.   If a vehicle access easement length is more than 75 feet, a vehicle
turnaround must be provided.
   E.   Surfacing of easements and turnaround dimensions must meet the
requirements of the California Fire Code and this code. (Ord. 2023-11, 9-19-
2023)
8-7O-7: MAP REQUIREMENTS:
The following content and information must be shown on the urban lot split
parcel map:
   A.   A parcel map for an urban lot split must be prepared by a licensed land
surveyor or registered civil engineer authorized to practice land surveying in
accordance with Government Code Sections 66444 through 66450 and this article.
   B.   The size of each sheet shall be 18" x 26" and to scale not less than 1:
100 with a scale bar, north arrow, date of application, assessor’s parcel
number of the area to be adjusted and a legend, if applicable.
   C.   The owner’s name, assessor parcel number and deed document number of
all adjoining parcels.
   D.   Title Sheet with the relevant statements and certifications for a
parcel map per
8-7G-4.
   E.   A location map shall appear on the map, showing the relative position
of the land to be subdivided with the surrounding existing subdivisions with
their recorded map reference, including their names and tract numbers. The
location map shall show city boundaries crossing or adjoining the subdivision.
   F.   Total area (in acreage and square feet) of each proposed lot.
   G.   The bearings and distances of existing and proposed property lines.
   H.   Zoning district.
   I.   The location and use of all existing and proposed structures.
   J.   All required zoning setbacks for the existing and proposed lots.
   K.   The location of all existing water, sewer, electricity, storm drain, or
gas service lines, pipes, systems, or easements.
   L.   The location of all proposed new water, sewer, electricity, storm
drain, or gas service lines, pipes, or systems.
   M.   The parcel map must show all easements for public utilities necessary
to serve each lot created by the subdivision.
   N.   The parcel map must show all easements necessary to provide each lot
with access as required by this article.
   O.   The location of any proposed easements for access or public utilities
to serve a lot created by the subdivision.
   P.   The location of any existing trees larger than 4" in diameter measure
at 4'-6" above the base and any such trees proposed for removal.
   Q.   Area of the parcel that has a slope of 25% or greater by way of
contours at 5-foot intervals.
   R.   Any area of the parcel that is a watercourse by delineating the flow
line and top of bank of the watercourse.
   S.   The name and dimensions, including right-of-way and improved area, of
public and private streets adjoining the parcel.
   T.   Curb, gutter, sidewalk, parkway, and street trees: type, location, and
dimensions.
   U.   The location of existing or proposed driveway dimensions, materials,
and slope (including cross slope).
   V.   The location of existing or proposed pedestrian pathway access to the
public right-of-way.
   W.   The parcel map shall contain a declaration of each of the following:
      1.   Each lot created by the parcel map must be used solely for
residential uses.
      2.   No more than two single-family dwellings are permitted on each lot.
      3.   Neither an accessory dwelling unit nor junior accessory dwelling
unit is permitted on a lot that includes two single-family dwellings.
      4.   No residential unit on a lot created by the parcel map may be rented
or offered for rent for a term of less than 30 days. (Ord. 2023-11, 9-19-2023)
8-7O-8: CONCURRENT PROCESSING WITH OTHER PERMITS:
   A.   No development, including grading or vegetation removal, may commence
on either lot, concurrent with or subsequent to an urban lot split, unless the
development is approved with a valid building permit for the construction of a
housing development and complies with all the objective development and design
standards outline for two-unit residential development units in adopted design
standards in effect at the time a complete application is submitted.
   B.   A building permit for development on a lot created by an urban lot
split cannot be issued until the parcel map is recorded.
   C.   The City Engineer shall deny an urban lot split if the building
official has made a written finding, based upon a preponderance of the
evidence, that the proposed housing development project would have a specific,
adverse impact, as defined and determined in paragraph (2) of subdivision (d)
of Section 65589.5 of the Government Code, upon public health and safety or the
physical environment and for which there is no feasible method to
satisfactorily mitigate or avoid the specific, adverse impact. (Ord. 2023-11,
9-19-2023)
8-7O-9: PROHIBITION OF FURTHER SUBDIVISION:
A lot created by a parcel map under this article may not be further subdivided.
(Ord. 2023-11, 9-19-2023)
CHAPTER 8
FLOOD DAMAGE PREVENTION
SECTION:
8-8-1: Purpose And Intent
8-8-2: Definitions
8-8-3: Administration
8-8-4: General Provisions
8-8-5: Development Permit
8-8-6: Provisions For Flood Hazard Reduction
8-8-7: Variance Procedure
8-8-1: PURPOSE AND INTENT:
   A.   It is the purpose of this chapter to promote the public health, safety,
and general welfare and to minimize public and private losses due to flood
conditions in specific areas by legally enforceable regulations applied
uniformly throughout the community to all publicly and privately owned land
within flood prone areas. These regulations are designed to:
      1.   Protect human life and health;
      2.   Minimize expenditure of public money for costly flood control
projects;
      3.   Minimize the need for rescue and relief efforts associated with
flooding and generally undertaken at the expense of the general public;
      4.   Minimize prolonged business interruptions;
      5.   Minimize damage to public facilities and utilities such as water and
gas mains; electric, telephone, and sewer lines; and streets and bridges
located in areas of special flood hazard;
      6.   Help maintain a stable tax base by providing for the sound use and
development of areas of special flood hazard so as to minimize future blighted
areas caused by flood damage;
      7.   Ensure that potential buyers are notified that property is in an
area of special flood hazard; and
      8.   Ensure that those who occupy the areas of special flood hazard
assume responsibility for their actions.
   B.   The city's intent in adopting this chapter is to provide floodplain
management regulations, as authorized under Government Code sections 65302,
65560, and 65800, for the purposes of providing for the public health, safety,
and general welfare of its citizenry. The flood hazard areas of the city of
Lemoore are subject to periodic inundation, which has the potential to result
in loss of life and property, health and safety hazards, disruption of commerce
and governmental services, extraordinary public expenditures for flood
protection and relief, and impairment of the tax base, all of which adversely
affect the public health, safety, and general welfare. These flood losses are
caused by uses that are inadequately elevated, floodproofed, or protected from
flood damage. The cumulative effect of obstructions in areas of special flood
hazards that increase flood heights and velocities also contributes to flood
losses. (Ord. 2012-01, 4-17-2012)
8-8-2: DEFINITIONS:
For the purposes of this chapter, the following terms, phrases, and words shall
have the following definitions:
   A.   "A" Definitions:
   A ZONE: See definition of Special Flood Hazard Area (SFHA).
   ACCESSORY STRUCTURE: A structure that is either:
      1.   Solely for the parking of no more than two (2) cars; or
      2.   A small, low cost shed for limited storage, less than one hundred
fifty (150) square feet and one thousand five hundred dollars ($1,500.00) in
value.
   ACCESSORY USE: A use which is incidental and subordinate to the principal
use of the parcel of land on which it is located.
   ALLUVIAL FAN: A geomorphologic feature characterized by a cone or fan shaped
deposit of boulders, gravel, and fine sediments that have been eroded from
mountain slopes, transported by flood flows, and then deposited on the valley
floors, and which is subject to flash flooding, high velocity flows, debris
flows, erosion, sediment movement and deposition, and channel migration.
   APEX: A point on an alluvial fan or similar landform below which the flow
path of the major stream that formed the fan becomes unpredictable and alluvial
fan flooding can occur.
   APPEAL: A request for a review of the floodplain administrator's
interpretation of any provision of this chapter.
   AREA OF SHALLOW FLOODING: A designated AO or AH zone on the flood insurance
rate map (FIRM). The base flood depths range from one to three feet (3'); a
clearly defined channel does not exist; the path of flooding is unpredictable
and indeterminate; and velocity flow may be evident. Such flooding is
characterized by ponding or sheet flow.
   AREA OF SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD: See definition of Special Flood Hazard Area
(SFHA).
   B.   "B" Definitions:
    BASE FLOOD: A flood which has a one percent (1%) chance of being equaled or
exceeded in any given year (also called the 100-year flood). Base flood is the
term used throughout this chapter.
   BASE FLOOD ELEVATION (BFE): The elevation shown on the flood insurance rate
map for zones AE, AH, A1-30, VE, and V1-V30 that indicate the water surface
elevation resulting from a flood that has a one percent (1%) or greater chance
of being equaled or exceeded in any given year.
   BASEMENT: Any area of the building having its floor subgrade (i.e., below
ground level) on all sides.
   BUILDING: See definition of Structure.
   C.   "C" Definitions: Reserved for future use.
   D.   "D" Definitions:
    DEVELOPMENT: Any manmade change to improved or unimproved real estate,
including, but not limited to, buildings or other structures, mining, dredging,
filling, grading, paving, excavation or drilling operations, or storage of
equipment or materials.
   E.   "E" Definitions:
    ENCROACHMENT: The advance or infringement of uses, plant growth, fill,
excavation, buildings, permanent structures, or development into a floodplain
which may impede or alter the flow capacity of a floodplain.
   EXISTING MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION: A manufactured home park or
subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on
which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including, at a minimum, the
installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site
grading or the pouring of concrete pads) was completed before the effective
date of ordinance 2001-05 (August 21, 2001).
   EXPANSION TO AN EXISTING MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION: The
preparation of additional sites by the construction of facilities for servicing
the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including the
installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site
grading or the pouring of concrete pads).
   F.   "F" Definitions:
    FLOOD BOUNDARY AND FLOODWAY MAP (FBFM): The official map on which the
federal emergency management agency or federal insurance administration has
delineated both the areas of special flood hazards and the floodway.
   FLOOD, FLOODING, OR FLOODWATER:
      1.   A general and temporary condition of partial or complete inundation
of normally dry land areas from the overflow of inland waters and the unusual
and rapid accumulation or runoff of surface waters from any source; and
      2.   The condition resulting from flood related erosion.
   FLOOD INSURANCE RATE MAP (FIRM): The official map on which the federal
emergency management agency or federal insurance administration has delineated
both the areas of special flood hazards and the risk premium zones applicable
to the community.
   FLOOD INSURANCE STUDY: The official report provided by the federal insurance
administration that may include flood profiles, the flood insurance rate map,
the flood boundary and floodway map, and the water surface elevation of the
base flood.
   FLOODPLAIN ADMINISTRATOR: The community official designated by title to
administer and enforce the floodplain management regulations. As provided in
section
8-8-3, "Administration", of this chapter, the floodplain administrator shall be
the public works director.
   FLOODPLAIN MANAGEMENT: The operation of an overall program of corrective and
preventive measures for reducing flood damage and preserving and enhancing,
where possible, natural resources in the floodplain, including, but not limited
to, emergency preparedness plans, flood control works, floodplain management
regulations, and open space plans.
   FLOODPLAIN MANAGEMENT REGULATIONS: This chapter and other zoning
regulations, subdivision regulations, building codes, health regulations,
special purpose regulations (such as grading and erosion control), and other
application of police power which control development in flood prone areas.
This term describes federal, state, or local regulations in any combination
thereof which provide standards for preventing and reducing flood loss and
damage.
   FLOODPLAIN OR FLOOD PRONE AREA: Any land area susceptible to being inundated
by water from any source. See definition of Flood, Flooding, Or Floodwater.
   FLOODPROOFING: Any combination of structural and nonstructural additions,
changes, or adjustments to structures which reduce or eliminate flood damage to
real estate or improved real property, water and sanitary facilities,
structures, and their contents. For guidelines on dry and wet floodproofing,
see FEMA technical bulletins TB 1-93, TB 3-93, and TB 7-93.
   FLOODWAY: The channel of a river or other watercourse and the adjacent land
areas that must be reserved in order to discharge the base flood without
cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation more than one foot (1').
Also referred to as regulatory floodway.
   FLOODWAY FRINGE: That area of the floodplain on either side of the
regulatory floodway where encroachment may be permitted.
   FRAUD AND VICTIMIZATION: As related to section
8-8-7, "Variance Procedure", of this chapter, means that the variance granted
must not cause fraud on or victimization of the public. In examining this
requirement, the city council will consider the fact that every newly
constructed building adds to government responsibilities and remains a part of
the community for fifty (50) to one hundred (100) years. Buildings that are
permitted to be constructed below the base flood elevation are subject during
all those years to increased risk of damage from floods, while future owners of
the property and the community as a whole are subject to all the costs,
inconvenience, danger, and suffering that those increased flood damages bring.
In addition, future owners may purchase the property, unaware that it is
subject to potential flood damage and can be insured only at very high flood
insurance rates.
   FUNCTIONALLY DEPENDENT USE: A use which cannot perform its intended purpose
unless it is located or carried out in close proximity to water. The term
includes only docking facilities, port facilities that are necessary for the
loading and unloading of cargo or passengers, and shipbuilding and ship repair
facilities, and does not include long term storage or related manufacturing
facilities.
   G.   "G" Definitions: Reserved for future use.
   H.   "H" Definitions:
    HARDSHIP: As related to section
8-8-7, "Variance Procedure", of this chapter, means the exceptional hardship
that would result from a failure to grant the requested variance. The city
council requires that the variance be exceptional, unusual, and peculiar to the
property involved. Economic or financial hardship alone is not exceptional.
Inconvenience, aesthetic considerations, physical handicaps, personal
preferences, or the disapproval of one's neighbors likewise cannot, as a rule,
qualify as an exceptional hardship. All of these problems can be resolved
through other means without granting a variance, even if the alternative is
more expensive, or requires the property owner to build elsewhere or put the
parcel to a different use than originally intended.
   HAZARD MITIGATION PLAN: A plan that incorporates a process whereby the
potential of future loss due to flooding can be minimized by planning and
implementing one or more alternatives to floodplain management on a community
wide basis.
   HIGHEST ADJACENT GRADE: The highest natural elevation of the ground surface
prior to construction next to the proposed walls of a structure.
   HISTORIC STRUCTURE: Any structure that is:
      1.   Listed individually in the national register of historic places (a
listing maintained by the department of interior) or preliminarily determined
by the secretary of the interior as meeting the requirements for individual
listing on the national register;
      2.   Certified or preliminarily determined by the secretary of the
interior as contributing to the historical significance of a registered
historic district or a district preliminarily determined by the secretary to
qualify as a registered historic district;
      3.   Individually listed on a state inventory of historic places in
states with historic preservation programs which have been approved by the
secretary of interior; or
      4.   Individually listed on a local inventory of historic places in
communities with historic preservation programs that have been certified either
by an approved state program as determined by the secretary of the interior or
directly by the secretary of the interior in states without approved programs.
   I.   "I" Definitions: Reserved for future use.
   J.   "J" Definitions: Reserved for future use.
   K.   "K" Definitions: Reserved for future use.
   L.   "L" Definitions:
    LEVEE: A manmade structure, usually an earthen embankment, designed and
constructed in accordance with sound engineering practices to contain, control,
or divert the flow of water so as to provide protection from temporary
flooding.
   LEVEE SYSTEM: A flood protection system which consists of a levee, or
levees, and associated structures, such as closure and drainage devices, which
are constructed and operated in accord with sound engineering practices.
   LOWEST FLOOR: The lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area, including
basement (see definition of Basement). An unfinished or flood resistant
enclosure below the lowest floor that is usable solely for parking of vehicles,
building access, or storage in an area other than a basement area is not
considered a building's lowest floor provided it conforms to applicable
nonelevation design requirements, including, but not limited to:
      1.   The anchoring standards in subsection
8-8-6A1, "Anchoring", of this chapter;
      2.   The construction materials and methods standards in subsection
8-8-6A2, "Construction Materials And Methods", of this chapter;
      3.   The flood openings standards in subsection
8-8-6A3c, "Flood Openings", of this chapter; and
      4.   The standards for utilities in subsection
8-8-6B, "Standards For Utilities", of this chapter.
For residential structures, all subgrade enclosed areas are prohibited as they
are considered to be basements (see definition of Basement). This prohibition
includes below grade garages and storage areas.
   M.   "M" Definitions:
    MANUFACTURED HOME: A structure, transportable in one or more sections,
which is built on a permanent chassis and is designed for use with or without a
permanent foundation when attached to the required utilities. The term
"manufactured home" does not include a "recreational vehicle".
   MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION: A parcel (or contiguous parcels) of
land divided into two (2) or more manufactured home lots for rent or sale.
   MARKET VALUE: Determined by estimating the cost to replace the structure in
new condition and adjusting that cost figure by the amount of depreciation
which has accrued since the structure was constructed. The cost of replacement
of the structure shall be based on a square foot cost factor determined by
reference to a building cost estimating guide recognized by the building
construction industry. The amount of depreciation shall be determined by taking
into account the age and physical deterioration of the structure and its
functional obsolescence, as approved by the floodplain administrator, but shall
not include economic or other forms of external obsolescence. Use of
replacement costs or accrued depreciation factors different from those
contained in recognized building cost estimating guides may be considered only
if such factors are included in a report prepared by an independent
professional appraiser and supported by a written explanation of the
differences.
   MEAN SEA LEVEL: For purposes of the national flood insurance program, the
national geodetic vertical datum (NGVD) of 1929, North American vertical datum
(NAVD) of 1988, or other datum to which base flood elevations shown on a
community's flood insurance rate map are referenced.
   N.   "N" Definitions:
    NEW CONSTRUCTION: For floodplain management purposes, means structures for
which the "start of construction" commenced on or after the effective date of
ordinance 2001-05, and includes any subsequent improvements to such structures.
   NEW MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION: A manufactured home park or
subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on
which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including at a minimum, the
installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site
grading or the pouring of concrete pads) was completed on or after the
effective date of ordinance 2001-05 (August 21, 2001).
   O.   "O" Definitions:
    OBSTRUCTION: Includes, but is not limited to, any dam, wall, wharf,
embankment, levee, dike, pile, abutment, protection, excavation,
channelization, bridge, conduit, culvert, building, wire, fence, rock, gravel,
refuse, fill, structure, vegetation, or other material in, along, across, or
projecting into any watercourse which may alter, impede, retard, or change the
direction and/or velocity of the flow of water, or due to its location, its
propensity to snare or collect debris carried by the flow of water, or its
likelihood of being carried downstream.
   100-YEAR FLOOD: See definition of Base Flood.
   P.   "P" Definitions:
    PROGRAM DEFICIENCY: A defect in a community's floodplain management
regulations or administrative procedures that impairs effective implementation
of those floodplain management regulations.
   PUBLIC SAFETY AND NUISANCE: As related to section
8-8-7, "Variance Procedure", of this chapter, means that the granting of a
variance must not result in anything which is injurious to safety or health of
an entire community or neighborhood, or any considerable number of persons.
   Q.   "Q" Definitions: Reserved for future use.
   R.   "R" Definitions:
   RECREATIONAL VEHICLE: Means and includes the following:
      ALL-TERRAIN VEHICLE: A recreational vehicle designed for or capable of
travel over rough ground, including but not limited to, 4-wheelers, 3-wheelers,
ATVs, dune buggies, and other similar type vehicles.
      AUXILIARY DOLLY: A vehicle, not designed for carrying persons or property
on its own structure, which is so constructed and used in conjunction with a
semitrailer as to support a portion of the weight of the semitrailer and any
load thereon, but not permanently attached to the semitrailer, although a part
of the weight of such dolly may rest on another vehicle.
      BUS: A motor vehicle designed for carrying more than ten persons
including the driver and used or maintained for the transportation of
passengers.
      COMMERCIAL COACH: A vehicle, with or without motive power, designed and
equipped for human occupancy for industrial, professional, or commercial
purposes, including a trailer coach.
      MOTOR HOME: A vehicle, with or without motive power, designed for human
habitation for recreational or emergency occupancy.
      MOTOR TRUCK: A vehicle, designed, used or maintained primarily for the
transportation of property and which has an unladen weight in excess of 6,500
pounds.
      SEMITRAILER: A vehicle with a gross weight of more than 6,000 pounds,
designed for carrying persons or property, used in conjunction with a motor
vehicle, and so constructed that some of its weight and that of its load rests
upon, or is carried by, another vehicle.
      TENT TRAILER: A vehicle, with or without motive power, designed for human
habitation for recreational or emergency occupancy.
      TRAILER: A vehicle designed for carrying persons or property on its own
structure and for being drawn by a motor vehicle and so constructed that no
part of its weight rests upon any other vehicle and which has a wheelbase in
excess of four feet. For purposes of this chapter, a trailer shall also
include, but not be limited to, a boat trailer and utility trailer or any other
such similar apparatus.
      TRUCK TRAILER: A motor vehicle designed and used primarily for drawing
other vehicles and not so constructed as to carry a load other than a part of
the weight of the vehicle and load so drawn.
      WATERCRAFT: A boat or other vessel that travels on water, including but
not limited to, boats, jet skis, wave runners, or any other similar personal
watercraft or vessel.
   REGULATORY FLOODWAY: The channel of a river or other watercourse and the
adjacent land areas that must be reserved in order to discharge the base flood
without cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation more than one foot
(1').
   REMEDY A VIOLATION: To bring the structure or other development into
compliance with state or local floodplain management regulations, or if this is
not possible, to reduce the impacts of its noncompliance. Ways that impacts may
be reduced include protecting the structure or other affected development from
flood damages, implementing the enforcement provisions of the chapter or
otherwise deterring future similar violations, or reducing state or federal
financial exposure with regard to the structure or other development.
   RIVERINE: Relating to, formed by, or resembling a river (including
tributaries), stream, brook, etc.
   S.   "S" Definitions:
    SHEET FLOW AREA: See definition of Area Of Shallow Flooding.
   SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD AREA (SFHA): An area in the floodplain subject to a one
percent (1%) or greater chance of flooding in any given year. It is shown on an
FHBM or FIRM as zone A, AO, A1-A30, AE, A99, or AH.
   START OF CONSTRUCTION: Includes substantial improvement and other proposed
new development and means the date the building permit was issued, provided the
actual start of construction, repair, reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition,
placement, or other improvement was within one hundred eighty (180) days from
the date of the permit. The actual start means either the first placement of
permanent construction of a structure on a site, such as the pouring of slab or
footings, the installation of piles, the construction of columns, or any work
beyond the stage of excavation, or the placement of a manufactured home on a
foundation. Permanent construction does not include land preparation, such as
clearing, grading, and filling; nor does it include the installation of streets
and/or walkways; nor does it include excavation for a basement, footings,
piers, or foundations or the erection of temporary forms; nor does it include
the installation on the property of accessory buildings, such as garages or
sheds not occupied as dwelling units or not part of the main structure. For a
substantial improvement, the actual start of construction means the first
alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor, or other structural part of a building,
whether or not that alteration affects the external dimensions of the building.
   STRUCTURE: A walled and roofed building that is principally aboveground;
this includes a gas or liquid storage tank or a manufactured home.
   SUBSTANTIAL DAMAGE: Damage of any origin sustained by a structure whereby
the cost of restoring the structure to its before damaged condition would equal
or exceed fifty percent (50%) of the market value of the structure before the
damage occurred.
   SUBSTANTIAL IMPROVEMENT: Any reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition, or
other improvement of a structure, the cost of which equals or exceeds fifty
percent (50%) of the market value of the structure before the start of
construction of the improvement. This term includes structures which have
incurred "substantial damage", regardless of the actual repair work performed.
The term does not, however, include either:
      1.   Any project for improvement of a structure to correct existing
violations or state or local health, sanitary, or safety code specifications
which have been identified by the local code enforcement official and which are
the minimum necessary to assure safe living conditions; or
      2.   Any alteration of a historic structure, provided that the alteration
will not preclude the structure's continued designation as a historic
structure.
   T.   "T" Definitions: Reserved for future use.
   U.   "U" Definitions: Reserved for future use.
   V.   "V" Definitions:
    VARIANCE: A grant of relief from the requirements of this chapter which
permits construction in a manner that would otherwise be prohibited by this
chapter.
   VIOLATION: The failure of a structure or other development to be fully
compliant with this chapter. A structure or other development without the
elevation certificate, other certifications, or other evidence of compliance
required in this chapter is presumed to be in violation until such time as that
documentation is provided.
   W.   "W" Definitions:
    WATER SURFACE ELEVATION: The height, in relation to the national geodetic
vertical datum (NGVD) of 1929, North American vertical datum (NAVD) of 1988, or
other datum, of floods of various magnitudes and frequencies in the floodplains
of riverine areas.
   WATERCOURSE: A lake, river, creek, stream, wash, arroyo, channel, or other
topographic feature on or over which waters flow at least periodically.
Watercourse includes specifically designated areas in which substantial flood
damage may occur.
   X.   "X" Definitions: Reserved for future use.
   Y.   "Y" Definitions: Reserved for future use.
   Z.   "Z" Definitions: Reserved for future use.
(Ord. 2012-01, 4-17-2012; amd. Ord. 2024-07, 12-3-2024)
8-8-3: ADMINISTRATION:
   A.   Designation Of The Floodplain Administrator: The public works director
is hereby appointed to administer, implement, and enforce this chapter by
granting or denying development permits in accord with its provisions.
   B.   Duties And Responsibilities Of The Floodplain Administrator: The duties
and responsibilities of the floodplain administrator shall include, but not be
limited to, the following:
      1.   Permit Review: Review all development permits to determine that:
         a.   Permit requirements of this chapter have been satisfied,
including determination of substantial improvement and substantial damage of
existing structures.
         b.   All other required state and federal permits have been obtained.
         c.   The site is reasonably safe from flooding.
         d.   The proposed development does not adversely affect the carrying
capacity of areas where base flood elevations have been determined but a
floodway has not been designated. This means that the cumulative effect of the
proposed development when combined with all other existing and anticipated
development will not increase the water surface elevation of the base flood
more than one foot (1') at any point within the city of Lemoore.
         e.   Any necessary letters of map revision (LOMRs) are approved prior
to the issuance of building permits. Building permits must not be issued based
on conditional letters of map revision (CLOMRs). Approved CLOMRs allow
construction and land preparation as specified in the "start of construction"
definition.
      2.   Development Of Substantial Improvement And Substantial Damage
Procedures:
         a.   Using FEMA publication FEMA P-758, "Substantial Improvement/
Substantial Damage Desk Reference", develop detailed procedures for identifying
and administering requirements for substantial improvement and substantial
damage, to include defining market value.
         b.   Assure procedures are coordinated with other departments/
divisions and implemented by community staff.
      3.   Review, Use, And Development Of Other Base Flood Data: When base
flood elevation data has not been provided in accordance with subsection
8-8-4B, "Basis For Establishing The Areas Of Special Flood Hazard", of this
chapter, the floodplain administrator shall obtain, review, and reasonably
utilize any base flood elevation and floodway data available from a federal or
state agency, or other source, in order to administer section
8-8-6, "Provisions For Flood Hazard Reduction", of this chapter.
Note: A base flood elevation may be obtained using one of two (2) methods from
the FEMA publication, "FEMA 265, Managing Floodplain Development In Approximate
Zone A Areas - A Guide For Obtaining And Developing Base (100-Year) Flood
Elevations", dated July 1995.
      4.   Notification Of Other Agencies:
         a.   Alteration Or Relocation Of A Watercourse:
            (1)   Notify adjacent communities and the California department of
water resources prior to alteration or relocation;
            (2)   Submit evidence of such notification to the federal emergency
management agency; and
            (3)   Assure that the flood carrying capacity within the altered or
relocated portion of said watercourse is maintained.
         b.   Base Flood Elevation Changes Due To Physical Alterations:
            (1)   Within six (6) months of information becoming available or
project completion, whichever comes first, the floodplain administrator shall
submit or assure that the permit applicant submits technical or scientific data
to FEMA for a letter of map revision (LOMR).
            (2)   All LOMRs for flood control projects are approved prior to
the issuance of building permits. Building permits must not be issued based on
conditional letters of map revision (CLOMRs). Approved CLOMRs allow
construction of the proposed flood control project and land preparation as
specified in the "start of construction" definition.
Such submissions are necessary so that upon confirmation of those physical
changes affecting flooding conditions, risk premium rates and floodplain
management requirements are based on current data.
         c.   Changes In Corporate Boundaries: Notify FEMA in writing whenever
the corporate boundaries have been modified by annexation or other means and
include a copy of a map of the community clearly delineating the new corporate
limits.
      5.   Documentation Of Floodplain Development: Obtain and maintain for
public inspection and make available as needed the following:
         a.   Certification required by subsections
8-8-6A3a, "Residential Construction", and 8-8-6D, "Standards For Manufactured
Homes", of this chapter;
         b.   Certification required by subsection
8-8-6A3b, "Nonresidential Construction", of this chapter;
         c.   Certification required by subsection
8-8-6A3c, "Flood Openings", of this chapter;
         d.   Certification of elevation required by subsection
8-8-6C1c, of this chapter (standards for subdivisions and other proposed
development);
         e.   Certification required by subsection
8-8-6F2 of this chapter (floodways); and
         f.   Maintain a record of all variance actions, including
justification for their issuance, and report such variances issued in its
biennial report submitted to the federal emergency management agency.
      6.   Map Determination: Make interpretations, where needed, as to the
exact location of the boundaries of the areas of special flood hazard, where
there appears to be a conflict between a mapped boundary and actual field
conditions. The person contesting the location of the boundary shall be given a
reasonable opportunity to appeal the interpretation as provided in subsection
8-8-5B, "Appeals", of this chapter.
      7.   Remedial Action: Take action to remedy violations of this chapter as
specified in subsection
8-8-4C, "Compliance", of this chapter.
      8.   Biennial Report: Complete and submit biennial report to FEMA.
      9.   Planning: Assure the city's general plan is consistent with
floodplain management objectives herein. (Ord. 2012-01, 4-17-2012)
8-8-4: GENERAL PROVISIONS:
   A.   Lands To Which This Chapter Applies: This chapter shall apply to all
areas of special flood hazards within the city of Lemoore.
   B.   Basis For Establishing The Areas Of Special Flood Hazard: The areas of
special flood hazard identified by the federal emergency management agency
(FEMA) in the "Flood Insurance Study (FIS) For Kings County, California, And
Incorporated Areas Dated June 16, 2009", with accompanying flood insurance rate
maps (FIRMs) and flood boundary and floodway maps (FBFMs), dated June 16, 2009,
and all subsequent amendments and/or revisions, are hereby adopted by reference
and declared to be a part of this chapter. This FIS and attendant mapping is
the minimum area of applicability of this chapter and may be supplemented by
studies for other areas which allow implementation of this chapter and which
are recommended to the city council by the floodplain administrator. The study,
FIRMs, and FBFMs are on file at the public works building department at the
city of Lemoore.
   C.   Compliance: No structure or land shall hereafter be constructed,
located, extended, converted, or altered without full compliance with the terms
of this chapter and other applicable regulations. Violation of the requirements
(including violations of conditions and safeguards) shall constitute a
misdemeanor. Nothing herein shall prevent the city from taking such lawful
action as is necessary to prevent or remedy any violation.
   D.   Abrogation And Greater Restrictions: This chapter is not intended to
repeal, abrogate, or impair any existing easements, covenants, or deed
restrictions. However, where this chapter and another chapter, easement,
covenant, or deed restriction conflict or overlap, whichever imposes the more
stringent restrictions shall prevail.
   E.   Interpretation: In the interpretation and application of this chapter,
all provisions shall be:
      1.   Considered as minimum requirements;
      2.   Liberally construed in favor of the city council; and
      3.   Deemed neither to limit nor repeal any other powers granted under
state statutes.
   F.   Warning And Disclaimer Of Liability: The degree of flood protection
required by this chapter is considered reasonable for regulatory purposes and
is based on scientific and engineering considerations. Larger floods can and
will occur on rare occasions. Flood heights may be increased by manmade or
natural causes. This chapter does not imply that land outside the areas of
special flood hazards or uses permitted within such areas will be free from
flooding or flood damages. This chapter shall not create liability on the part
of the city council, any officer or employee thereof, the state of California,
or the federal emergency management agency, for any flood damages that result
from reliance on this chapter or any administrative decision lawfully made
hereunder. (Ord. 2012-01, 4-17-2012)
8-8-5: DEVELOPMENT PERMIT:
   A.   Development Permit: A development permit shall be obtained before any
construction or other development, including manufactured homes, within any
area of special flood hazard established in subsection
8-8-4B, "Basis For Establishing The Areas Of Special Flood Hazard", of this
chapter. Application for a development permit shall be made on forms furnished
by the city of Lemoore. The applicant shall provide the following minimum
information:
      1.   Plans in duplicate, drawn to scale, showing:
         a.   Location, dimensions, and elevation of the area in question,
existing or proposed structures, storage of materials and equipment, and their
location;
         b.   Proposed locations of water supply, sanitary sewer, and other
utilities;
         c.   Grading information showing existing and proposed contours, any
proposed fill, and drainage facilities;
         d.   Location of the regulatory floodway when applicable;
         e.   Base flood elevation information as specified in subsection
8-8-4B, "Basis For Establishing The Areas Of Special Flood Hazard" or
8-8-3B3, "Review, Use, And Development Of Other Base Flood Data", of this
chapter;
         f.   Proposed elevation in relation to mean sea level, of the lowest
floor (including basement) of all structures; and
         g.   Proposed elevation in relation to mean sea level to which any
nonresidential structure will be floodproofed, as required in subsection
8-8-6A3b, "Nonresidential Construction", of this chapter and detailed in FEMA
technical bulletin TB 3-93.
      2.   Certification from a registered civil engineer or architect that the
nonresidential floodproofed building meets the floodproofing criteria in
subsection
8-8-6A3b, "Nonresidential Construction", of this chapter.
      3.   For a crawl space foundation, location and total net area of
foundation openings as required in subsection
8-8-6A3c, "Flood Openings", of this chapter and detailed in FEMA technical
bulletins 1-93 and 7-93.
      4.   Description of the extent to which any watercourse will be altered
or relocated as a result of proposed development.
      5.   All appropriate certifications listed in subsection
8-8-3B5, "Documentation Of Floodplain Development", of this chapter.
   B.   Appeals: The city council of the city of Lemoore shall hear and decide
appeals when it is alleged there is an error in any requirement, decision, or
determination made by the floodplain administrator in the enforcement or
administration of this chapter. (Ord. 2012-01, 4-17-2012)
8-8-6: PROVISIONS FOR FLOOD HAZARD REDUCTION:
   A.   Standards Of Construction: In all areas of special flood hazards, the
following standards are required:
      1.   Anchoring: All new construction and substantial improvements of
structures, including manufactured homes, shall be adequately anchored to
prevent flotation, collapse, or lateral movement of the structure resulting
from hydrodynamic and hydrostatic loads, including the effects of buoyancy.
      2.   Construction Materials And Methods: All new construction and
substantial improvements of structures, including manufactured homes, shall be
constructed:
         a.   With flood resistant materials, and utility equipment resistant
to flood damage for areas below the base flood elevation;
         b.   Using methods and practices that minimize flood damage;
         c.   With electrical, heating, ventilation, plumbing, and air
conditioning equipment and other service facilities that are designed and/or
located so as to prevent water from entering or accumulating within the
components during conditions of flooding; and
         d.   Within zones AH or AO, so that there are adequate drainage paths
around structures on slopes to guide floodwaters around and away from proposed
structures.
      3.   Elevation And Floodproofing:
         a.   Residential Construction: All new construction or substantial
improvements of residential structures shall have the lowest floor, including
basement:
            (1)   In AE, AH, A1-30 zones, elevated to or above the base flood
elevation.
            (2)   In an AO zone, elevated above the highest adjacent grade to a
height equal to or exceeding the depth number specified in feet on the FIRM, or
elevated at least two feet (2') above the highest adjacent grade if no depth
number is specified.
            (3)   In an A zone, without BFEs specified on the FIRM, elevated to
or above the base flood elevation, as determined under subsection
8-8-3B3, "Review, Use, And Development Of Other Base Flood Data", of this
chapter.
Upon the completion of the structure, the elevation of the lowest floor,
including basement, shall be certified by a registered civil engineer or
licensed land surveyor, and verified by the community building inspector to be
properly elevated. Such certification and verification shall be provided to the
floodplain administrator.
         b.   Nonresidential Construction: All new construction or substantial
improvements of nonresidential structures shall either be elevated to conform
with subsection A3a, "Residential Construction", of this section or:
            (1)   Be floodproofed, together with attendant utility and sanitary
facilities, below the elevation recommended under subsection A3a of this
section, so that the structure is watertight with walls substantially
impermeable to the passage of water;
            (2)   Have structural components capable of resisting hydrostatic
and hydrodynamic loads and effects of buoyancy; and
            (3)   Be certified by a registered civil engineer or architect that
the standards of subsection A3b(1) and A3b(2) of this section are satisfied.
Such certification shall be provided to the floodplain administrator.
         c.   Flood Openings: All new construction and substantial improvements
of structures with fully enclosed areas below the lowest floor (excluding
basements) that are usable solely for parking of vehicles, building access, or
storage, and which are subject to flooding, shall be designed to automatically
equalize hydrostatic flood forces on exterior walls by allowing for the entry
and exit of floodwater. Designs for meeting this requirement must meet the
following minimum criteria:
            (1)   For nonengineered openings:
               (A)   Have a minimum of two (2) openings on different sides
having a total net area of not less than one square inch for every one square
foot of enclosed area subject to flooding;
               (B)   The bottom of all openings shall be no higher than one
foot (1') above grade;
               (C)   Openings may be equipped with screens, louvers, valves, or
other coverings or devices provided that they permit the automatic entry and
exit of floodwater; and
               (D)   Buildings with more than one enclosed area must have
openings on exterior walls for each area to allow floodwater to directly enter;
or
            (2)   Be certified by a registered civil engineer or architect.
         d.   Manufactured Homes: See subsection D, "Standards For Manufactured
Homes", of this section.
         e.   Garages And Low Cost Accessory Structures:
            (1)   Attached Garages:
               (A)   A garage attached to a residential structure, constructed
with the garage floor slab below the BFE, must be designed to allow for the
automatic entry of floodwaters. See subsection A3c, "Flood Openings", of this
section. Areas of the garage below the BFE must be constructed with flood
resistant materials. See subsection A2, "Construction Materials And Methods",
of this section.
               (B)   A garage attached to a nonresidential structure must meet
the above requirements or be dry floodproofed. For guidance on below grade
parking areas, see FEMA technical bulletin TB-6.
            (2)   Detached Garages And Accessory Structures: An "accessory
structure" used solely for parking (2 car detached garages or smaller) or
limited storage (small, low cost sheds), as defined in section
8-8-2, "Definitions", of this chapter, may be constructed such that its floor
is below the base flood elevation (BFE), provided the structure is designed and
constructed in accordance with the following requirements:
               (A)   Use of the accessory structure must be limited to parking
or limited storage;
               (B)   The portions of the accessory structure located below the
BFE must be built using flood resistant materials;
               (C)   The accessory structure must be adequately anchored to
prevent flotation, collapse, and lateral movement;
               (D)   Any mechanical and utility equipment in the accessory
structure must be elevated or floodproofed to or above the BFE;
               (E)   The accessory structure must comply with floodplain
encroachment provisions in subsection F, "Floodways", of this section;
               (F)   The accessory structure must be designed to allow for the
automatic entry of floodwaters in accordance with subsection A3c, "Flood
Openings", of this section; and
               (G)   Detached garages and accessory structures not meeting the
above standards must be constructed in accordance with all applicable standards
in this subsection A.
   B.   Standards For Utilities:
      1.   All new and replacement water supply and sanitary sewage systems
shall be designed to minimize or eliminate:
         a.   Infiltration of floodwaters into the systems; and
         b.   Discharge from the systems into floodwaters.
      2.   On site waste disposal systems shall be located to avoid impairment
to them, or contamination from them, during flooding.
   C.   Standards For Subdivisions And Other Proposed Development:
      1.   All new subdivision proposals and other proposed development,
including proposals for manufactured home parks and subdivisions, greater than
fifty (50) lots or five (5) acres, whichever is the lesser, shall:
         a.   Identify the special flood hazard areas (SFHA) and base flood
elevations (BFE).
         b.   Identify the elevations of lowest floors of all proposed
structures and pads on the final plans.
         c.   If the site is filled above the base flood elevation, the
following as built information for each structure shall be certified by a
registered civil engineer or licensed land surveyor and provided as part of an
application for a letter of map revision based on fill (LOMR-F) to the
floodplain administrator:
            (1)   Lowest floor elevation;
            (2)   Pad elevation;
            (3)   Lowest adjacent grade.
      2.   All subdivision proposals and other proposed development shall be
consistent with the need to minimize flood damage.
      3.   All subdivision proposals and other proposed development shall have
public utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical, and water
systems located and constructed to minimize flood damage.
      4.   All subdivisions and other proposed development shall provide
adequate drainage to reduce exposure to flood hazards.
   D.   Standards For Manufactured Homes:
      1.   Within zones A1-30, AH, and AE on the community's flood insurance
rate map, all manufactured homes that are placed, or substantially improved, on
sites located: a) outside of a manufactured home park or subdivision; b) in a
new manufactured home park or subdivision; c) in an expansion to an existing
manufactured home park or subdivision; or d) in an existing manufactured home
park or subdivision upon which a manufactured home has incurred "substantial
damage" as the result of a flood, shall be elevated on a permanent foundation
such that the lowest floor of the manufactured home is elevated to or above the
base flood elevation and be securely fastened to an adequately anchored
foundation system to resist flotation, collapse, and lateral movement.
      2.   All manufactured homes to be placed or substantially improved on
sites in an existing manufactured home park or subdivision within zones A1-30,
AH, and AE on the community's flood insurance rate map that are not subject to
the provisions of subsection D1 of this section will be securely fastened to an
adequately anchored foundation system to resist flotation, collapse, and
lateral movement, and be elevated so that either the:
         a.   Lowest floor of the manufactured home is at or above the base
flood elevation; or
         b.   Manufactured home chassis is supported by reinforced piers or
other foundation elements of at least equivalent strength that are no less than
thirty six inches (36") in height above grade.
      3.   Upon the completion of the structure, the elevation of the lowest
floor including basement shall be certified by a registered civil engineer or
licensed land surveyor, and verified by the community building inspector to be
properly elevated. Such certification and verification shall be provided to the
floodplain administrator.
   E.   Standards For Recreational Vehicles: All recreational vehicles placed
in zones A1-30, AH, and AE will either:
      1.   Be on the site for fewer than one hundred eighty (180) consecutive
days.
      2.   Be fully licensed and ready for highway use. A recreational vehicle
is ready for highway use if it is on its wheels or jacking system, is attached
to the site only by quick disconnect type utilities and security devices, and
has no permanently attached additions.
      3.   Meet the permit requirements of subsection
8-8-5A, "Development Permit", of this chapter and the elevation and anchoring
requirements for manufactured homes in subsection D1 of this section (standards
for manufactured homes).
   F.   Floodways: Since floodways are an extremely hazardous area due to the
velocity of floodwaters which carry debris, potential projectiles, and erosion
potential, the following provisions apply:
      1.   Until a regulatory floodway is adopted, no new construction,
substantial development, or other development (including fill) shall be
permitted within zones A1-30 and AE, unless it is demonstrated that the
cumulative effect of the proposed development, when combined with all other
development, will not increase the water surface elevation of the base flood
more than one foot (1') at any point within the city.
      2.   Within an adopted regulatory floodway, the city shall prohibit
encroachments, including fill, new construction, substantial improvements, and
other development, unless certification by a registered civil engineer is
provided demonstrating that the proposed encroachment shall not result in any
increase in flood levels during the occurrence of the base flood discharge.
      3.   If subsections F1 and F2 of this section are satisfied, all new
construction, substantial improvement, and other proposed new development shall
comply with all other applicable flood hazard reduction provisions of this
section. (Ord. 2012-01, 4-17-2012)
8-8-7: VARIANCE PROCEDURE:
   A.   Nature Of Variances: The issuance of a variance is for floodplain
management purposes only. Insurance premium rates are determined by statute
according to actuarial risk and will not be modified by the granting of a
variance.
      The variance criteria set forth in this section are based on the general
principle of law that variances pertain to a piece of property and are not
personal in nature. A variance may be granted for a parcel of property with
physical characteristics so unusual that complying with the requirements of
this chapter would create an exceptional hardship to the applicant or the
surrounding property owners. The characteristics must be unique to the property
and not be shared by adjacent parcels. The unique characteristic must pertain
to the land itself, not to the structure, its inhabitants, or the property
owners. The city council shall be the approving authority for variances.
      It is the duty of the city council to help protect its citizens from
flooding. This need is so compelling and the implications of the cost of
insuring a structure built below flood level are so serious that variances from
the flood elevation or from other requirements in this chapter are quite rare.
The long term goal of preventing and reducing flood loss and damage can only be
met if variances are strictly limited. Therefore, the variance guidelines
provided in this chapter are more detailed and contain multiple provisions that
must be met before a variance can be properly granted. The criteria are
designed to screen out those situations in which alternatives other than a
variance are more appropriate.
      A variance from the provisions of this chapter is different from a land
development variance as provided in title 9, "Zoning", of the municipal code.
   B.   Conditions For Variances:
      1.   Generally, variances may be issued for new construction, substantial
improvement, and other proposed new development to be erected on a lot of one-
half (1/2) acre or less in size contiguous to and surrounded by lots with
existing structures constructed below the base flood level, providing that the
procedures of sections
8-8-3, "Administration", and
8-8-6, "Provisions For Flood Hazard Reduction", of this chapter have been fully
considered. As the lot size increases beyond one-half (1/2) acre, the technical
justification required for issuing the variance increases.
      2.   Variances may be issued for the repair or rehabilitation of
"historic structures" (as defined in section
8-8-2, "Definitions", of this chapter) upon a determination that the proposed
repair or rehabilitation will not preclude the structure's continued
designation as a historic structure and the variance is the minimum necessary
to preserve the historic character and design of the structure.
      3.   Variances shall not be issued within any mapped regulatory floodway
if any increase in flood levels during the base flood discharge would result.
      4.   Variances shall only be issued upon a determination that the
variance is the minimum necessary considering the flood hazard, to afford
relief. "Minimum necessary" means to afford relief with a minimum of deviation
from the requirements of this chapter. For example, in the case of variances to
an elevation requirement, this means the city council need not grant permission
for the applicant to build at grade, or even to whatever elevation the
applicant proposes, but only to that elevation which the city council believes
will both provide relief and preserve the integrity of the local chapter.
      5.   Any applicant to whom a variance is granted shall be given written
notice over the signature of a community official that:
         a.   The issuance of a variance to construct a structure below the
base flood level will result in increased premium rates for flood insurance up
to amounts as high as twenty five dollars ($25.00) for one hundred dollars
($100.00) of insurance coverage; and
         b.   Such construction below the base flood level increases risks to
life and property. It is recommended that a copy of the notice shall be
recorded by the floodplain administrator in the office of the Kings County
recorder and shall be recorded in a manner so that it appears in the chain of
title of the affected parcel of land.
      6.   The floodplain administrator will maintain a record of all variance
actions, including justification for their issuance, and report such variances
issued in its biennial report submitted to the federal emergency management
agency.
   C.   Action By The City Council:
      1.   In passing upon requests for variances, the city council shall
consider all technical evaluations, all relevant factors, standards specified
in other sections of this chapter, and the:
         a.   Danger that materials may be swept onto other lands to the injury
of others;
         b.   Danger of life and property due to flooding or erosion damage;
         c.   Susceptibility of the proposed facility and its contents to flood
damage and the effect of such damage on the existing individual owner and
future owners of the property;
         d.   Importance of the services provided by the proposed facility to
the community;
         e.   Necessity to the facility of a waterfront location, where
applicable;
         f.   Availability of alternative locations for the proposed use which
are not subject to flooding or erosion damage;
         g.   Compatibility of the proposed use with existing and anticipated
development;
         h.   Relationship of the proposed use to the comprehensive plan and
floodplain management program for that area;
         i.   Safety of access to the property in time of flood for ordinary
and emergency vehicles;
         j.   Expected heights, velocity, duration, rate of rise, and sediment
transport of the floodwaters expected at the site; and
         k.   Costs of providing governmental services during and after flood
conditions, including maintenance and repair of public utilities and facilities
such as sewer, gas, electrical, and water systems, and streets and bridges.
      2.   Variances shall only be issued upon a:
         a.   Showing of good and sufficient cause;
         b.   Determination that failure to grant the variance would result in
exceptional hardship to the applicant; and
         c.   Determination that the granting of a variance will not result in
increased flood heights, additional threats to public safety, or extraordinary
public expense, create a nuisance (see section
8-8-2, definition of "public safety and nuisance", of this chapter), cause
fraud and victimization of the public, or conflict with existing local laws or
regulations.
      3.   Variances may be issued for new construction, substantial
improvement, and other proposed new development necessary for the conduct of a
functionally dependent use provided that the provisions of subsections C1
through C4 of this section are satisfied and that the structure or other
development is protected by methods that minimize flood damages during the base
flood, does not result in additional threats to public safety, and does not
create a public nuisance.
      4.   Upon consideration of the factors of subsection B1 of this section
and the purposes of this chapter, the city council may attach such conditions
to the granting of variances as it deems necessary to further the purposes of
this chapter. (Ord. 2012-01, 4-17-2012)
CHAPTER 9
HOUSING INCENTIVES 1
(Rep. by Ord. 2012-01, 4-17-2012)
 
Notes
1 1. See title 9, chapter 5, article G of this code.
CHAPTER 10
IMPACT FEES
SECTION:
8-10-1: Authority To Impose And Charge Development Impact Fee
8-10-2: Content Of Resolutions
8-10-3: Government Code Compliance
8-10-1: AUTHORITY TO IMPOSE AND CHARGE DEVELOPMENT IMPACT FEE:
The city council of the city of Lemoore is hereby granted authority to
establish and charge development impact fees as a condition of approval of a
development project for the purpose of defraying the costs of public facilities
(including public improvements, public services and community amenities)
related to development projects. Development impact fees may be established and
charged to pay for the cost of development of streets and thoroughfares, law
enforcement facilities and equipment, fire facilities and equipment, general
city facilities, storm water drainage facilities, wastewater collection
facilities, water supply and holding facilities, water distribution facilities,
refuse collection, hauling, handling, disposal and recycling facilities, and
parks and recreation facilities. (Ord. 2001-06, 9-4-2001)
8-10-2: CONTENT OF RESOLUTIONS:
In enacting resolutions establishing and imposing such impact fees, the city
council shall set forth the specific amount of the fee, describe the benefit
and impact area on which the development impact fee is imposed, list the
specific public improvements to be financed, describe the estimated cost of the
facilities, describe the reasonable relationship between the fees and the
various types of developments and set forth the time for payment. The city
council may further provide in such resolution that specific limitations will
apply to reductions, adjustments, waivers or deferrals of development impact
fees and the city council may, in such resolution, set forth such specific
limitations. (Ord. 9210, 8-18-1992)
8-10-3: GOVERNMENT CODE COMPLIANCE:
Such resolution shall be adopted in accordance with the provisions of chapter 5
of division 1 of title 7 of the California Government Code (commencing with
section 66000). (Ord. 9210, 8-18-1992)
CHAPTER 11
SMALL RESIDENTIAL ROOFTOP SOLAR ENERGY SYSTEMS
SECTION:
8-11-1: Purpose
8-11-2: Definitions
8-11-3: Applicability
8-11-4: Solar Energy System Requirements
8-11-5: Applications And Documents
8-11-6: Duties Of The Building And Development Division
8-11-7: Permit Review And Inspection Requirements
8-11-1: PURPOSE:
The purpose of this chapter is to provide an expedited, streamlined solar
permitting process that complies with California law in order to achieve timely
and cost effective installations of small residential rooftop solar energy
systems. This chapter encourages the use of small residential rooftop solar
energy systems by removing unreasonable barriers as defined herein, minimizing
costs to property owners and the city, and expanding the ability of residential
property owners to install residential rooftop solar energy systems. The
purpose of this chapter is to encourage the use of small residential rooftop
solar energy systems while protecting public health, safety, and welfare. (Ord.
2016-10, 9-6-2016)
8-11-2: DEFINITIONS:
For purposes of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply:
ELECTRONIC SUBMITTAL: The utilization of electronic e-mail or submittal via the
internet.
REASONABLE RESTRICTIONS ON A SOLAR ENERGY SYSTEM: Those restrictions that do
not significantly increase the cost of the system or significantly decrease its
efficiency or specified performance, or that allow for an alternative system of
comparable cost, efficiency, and energy conservation benefits.
RESTRICTIONS THAT SIGNIFICANTLY INCREASE THE COST OF THE SYSTEM OR DECREASE ITS
EFFICIENCY OR SPECIFIED PERFORMANCE: A. For water heater systems or solar
swimming pool heating systems: An amount exceeding ten percent (10%) of the
cost of the system, but in no case more than one thousand dollars ($1,000.00),
or decreasing the efficiency of the solar energy system by an amount exceeding
ten percent (10%), as originally specified and proposed.
B. For photovoltaic systems: An amount not to exceed one thousand dollars
($1,000.00) over the system cost as originally specified and proposed, or a
decrease in system efficiency of an amount exceeding ten percent (10%) as
originally specified and proposed.
SMALL RESIDENTIAL ROOFTOP SYSTEM: All of the following:
   A.   A solar energy system that is no larger than ten (10) kilowatts
alternating current nameplate rating or thirty (30) kilowatts thermal.
   B.   A solar energy system that conforms to all applicable state fire,
structural, electrical, and other building codes as adopted or amended by the
city and paragraph (3) of subdivision (c) of section 714 of the Civil Code, as
such section or subdivision may be amended, renumbered, or redesignated from
time to time.
   C.   A solar energy system that is installed on a single- or duplex-family
dwelling.
   D.   A solar panel or module array that does not exceed the maximum legal
building height as defined by the city.
SOLAR ENERGY SYSTEM: Either of the following:
   A.   Any solar collector or other solar energy device whose primary purpose
is to provide for the collection, storage, and distribution of storage energy
for space heating, space cooling, electricity generation or for water heating.
   B.   Any structural design feature of a building, whose primary purpose is
to provide for the collection, storage, and distribution of solar energy for
space heating, space cooling, electricity generation, or for water heating.
SPECIFIC ADVERSE IMPACT: A significant, quantifiable, direct, and unavoidable
impact, based on objective, identified, and written public health or safety
standards, policies, or conditions as they existed on the date the application
was deemed complete. (Ord. 2016-10, 9-6-2016)
8-11-3: APPLICABILITY:
   A.   This chapter is applied to the permitting of all small residential
rooftop solar energy systems in the city.
   B.   Small residential rooftop solar energy systems legally established or
permitted prior to the effective date of this chapter are not subject to the
requirements of this chapter unless physical modifications or alterations are
undertaken that materially change the size, type, or components of a small
rooftop energy system in such a way as to require new permitting. Routine
operation and maintenance or like kind replacements shall not require a permit.
   C.   A use permit and/or architectural review may be required for properties
on the city's list of historic resources as deemed necessary by the community
development director. (Ord. 2016-10, 9-6-2016)
8-11-4: SOLAR ENERGY SYSTEM REQUIREMENTS:
   A.   All solar energy systems shall meet applicable health and safety
standards and requirements imposed by the state and city.
   B.   Solar energy systems for heating water in single-family residences and
for heating water in commercial or swimming pool applications shall be
certified by an accredited listing agency as defined by the California plumbing
and mechanical code.
   C.   Solar energy systems for producing electricity shall meet all
applicable safety and performance standards established by the California
electrical code, the Institution Of Electrical And Electronics Engineers, and
accredited testing laboratories such as Underwriters Laboratories and, where
applicable, rules of the public utilities commission regarding safety and
reliability. (Ord. 2016-10, 9-6-2016)
8-11-5: APPLICATIONS AND DOCUMENTS:
   A.   All documents required for the submission of an expedited solar energy
system application shall be made available on the city website.
   B.   Electronic submittal of the required permit application and documents
shall be made available to all small residential rooftop solar energy system
permit applicants.
   C.   The city's development services department shall adopt a standard plan
and checklist of all requirements with which small residential rooftop solar
energy systems shall comply to be eligible for expedited review.
   D.   The small residential rooftop solar energy system permit process,
standard plan(s), and checklist(s) shall substantially conform to
recommendations for expedited permitting, including the checklist and standard
plans contained in the most current version of the "California Solar Permitting
Guidebook" adopted by the governor's office of planning and research.
   E.   An applicant's electronic signature shall be accepted on all forms,
applications, and other documents in lieu of a wet signature and shall be given
equal force and effect as a wet signature pursuant to section 1633.7 of the
Civil Code, as such section may be amended, renumbered, or redesignated from
time to time. (Ord. 2016-10, 9-6-2016)
8-11-6: DUTIES OF THE BUILDING AND DEVELOPMENT DIVISION:
   A.   Within thirty (30) days of adoption of this chapter, the city
development services department shall adopt a standard plan and checklist of
all requirements with which small residential rooftop solar energy systems
shall comply to be eligible for expedited review and a nondiscretionary review
process to expedite approval of small residential rooftop solar energy systems.
   B.   The small residential rooftop solar energy system permit process,
standard plan(s), and checklist(s) shall substantially conform to
recommendations for expediting permitting, including the checklist and standard
plans contained in the most current version of the "California Solar Permitting
Guidebook" adopted by the governor's office of planning and research. (Ord.
2016-10, 9-6-2016)
8-11-7: PERMIT REVIEW AND INSPECTION REQUIREMENTS:
   A.   The community development director shall implement an administrative,
nondiscretionary review process to expedite approval of small residential
rooftop solar energy systems. The development services department shall issue a
building permit, the issuance of which is nondiscretionary, on the same day for
over the counter applications or within one to three (3) business days for
electronic applications upon receipt of a complete application that meets the
requirements of the approved checklist and standard plan. The chief building
official may require an applicant to apply for an administrative use permit if
the official finds, based on substantial evidence, that the solar energy system
could have a specific, adverse impact upon the public health and safety. Such
decisions may be appealed to the city planning commission.
   B.   Review of the application shall be limited to the chief building
official's review of whether the application meets local, state, and federal
health and safety requirements.
   C.   If an administrative use permit is required, the city may deny such
application if it makes written findings based upon substantive evidence in the
record that the proposed installation could have a specific, adverse impact
upon public health or safety and there is no feasible method to satisfactorily
mitigate or avoid, as defined, the adverse impact. Such findings shall include
the basis for the rejection of the potential feasible alternative for
preventing the adverse impact. Such decisions may be appealed to the city
planning commission.
   D.   Any condition imposed on an application shall be designed to mitigate
the specific, adverse impact upon health and safety at the lowest possible
cost.
   E.   "A feasible method to satisfactorily mitigate or avoid the specific,
adverse impact" includes, but is not limited to, any cost effective method,
condition, or mitigation imposed by the city on another similarly situated
application in a prior successful application for a permit. The city shall use
its best efforts to ensure that the selected method, condition, or mitigation
meets the conditions of subparagraphs (A) and (B) of paragraph (1) of
subdivision (d) of section 714 of the Civil Code defining restrictions that do
not significantly increase the cost of the system or decrease its efficiency or
specified performance, as such section may be amended, renumbered, or
redesignated from time to time.
   F.   If an application is deemed incomplete, a written correction notice
detailing all deficiencies in the application and any additional information or
documentation required to be eligible for expedited permit issuance shall be
sent to the applicant for resubmission.
   G.   Only one inspection shall be required and performed by the development
services department for small residential rooftop solar energy systems eligible
for expedited review.
   H.   The inspection shall be done in a timely manner and should include
consolidated inspections.
   I.   If a small residential rooftop solar energy system fails inspection, a
subsequent inspection is authorized. (Ord. 2016-10, 9-6-2016)
TITLE 9
ZONING
CHAPTER 1
ZONING PURPOSE AND ADMINISTRATION
SECTION:
9-1-1: Purpose And Authority
9-1-2: Zoning Administration
9-1-3: Interpretation
9-1-4: Enforcement, Legal Procedures, And Penalties
9-1-1: PURPOSE AND AUTHORITY:
   A.   Title: This title shall be known as the LEMOORE ZONING CODE, hereafter
referred to as the zoning code.
   B.   Purpose Of The Zoning Code: This title establishes regulations
governing the development and use of land in accordance with the city of
Lemoore general plan (general plan) in a manner that protects the public
health, safety, comfort and convenience, and welfare of residents and
businesses of Lemoore. The zoning code provides information to facilitate the
efficient review of development proposals, while providing opportunity for
public review and comment for proposals that may have a significant impact on
the community. Further, the zoning code:
      1.   Supports the general plan's goals, policies, and land use framework
through:
         a.   Compact urban form as depicted on the general plan land use
diagram;
         b.   Promotion of small town character;
         c.   Accommodation of economic development and jobs through adequately
zoned properties;
         d.   Integration of neighborhoods and neighborhood centers;
         e.   Enhancement of community character and aesthetics;
         f.   Promotion of an interconnected network of open space and parks;
         g.   Support for a complete roadway system;
         h.   Promotion of a range of commercial and retail opportunities; and
         i.   Support for adequate, flexible school sites.
      2.   Creates a comprehensive and stable pattern of land uses to help
ensure the provision of adequate water, sewage, transportation, drainage,
parks, open space, and other public facilities and services.
      3.   Protects and promotes appropriately located commercial and
industrial activities in order to preserve and strengthen the city's economic
base.
      4.   Fosters a wholesome, serviceable, and attractive living environment,
the beneficial development of areas that exhibit conflicting patterns of use,
and the stability of existing land uses that conform with objectives, policies,
principles, and standards of the general plan.
      5.   Provides a guide for the prezoning of properties within the sphere
of influence in conjunction with the potential annexation proceedings, as
provided by law.
      6.   Conserves and protects the city's natural resources and features
such as canals, significant trees, and historic and environmental resources in
accordance with the policies of the general plan.
      7.   Requires that permitted uses and development provide reasonable
protection from fire, flood, landslide, erosion, or other manmade or natural
hazards.
      8.   Ensures compatibility between residential and nonresidential
development and land uses.
   C.   Authority: This title is enacted based on the authority vested to the
city of Lemoore by the state of California, including, but not limited to,
article XI, section 7 of the state constitution; the planning and zoning law 1
; and the California environmental quality act 2 .
   D.   Applicability Of Regulations: This title applies to all land uses,
structures, subdivisions, and development within the city of Lemoore,
including:
      1.   Relationship To Prior Code: The provisions of this title, as it
existed prior to the effective date of the ordinance enacting this title, are
repealed and superseded as provided in ordinance 2013-05. No provision of this
title shall validate or legalize any land use or structure established,
constructed, or maintained in violation of the title as it existed prior to its
repeal by ordinance 2013-05.
      2.   Prior Rights And Violations: The enactment of this title shall not
terminate or otherwise affect vested land use development permits, approvals,
or agreements authorized under the provisions of any ordinance, nor shall
violation of prior ordinance be excused by the adoption of this title.
      3.   New Or Altered Land Uses Or Structures: Compliance with this title
is required to lawfully establish, construct, reconstruct, alter, or replace
any use of land or structure.
      4.   Land Use Permits (Entitlements): Land use permits are required when
a "development" as defined by this title is proposed. No person shall initiate
a development requiring a land use permit, and the city shall not issue any
other permit related to the development, until a land use permit has been
approved and the appeals period has expired.
      5.   Existing Uses And Structures: An existing land use or structure is
lawful only when it was legally established and is operated and maintained in
compliance with all applicable provisions of this code. A land use or structure
that was lawfully established before this title was enacted, or before
enactment of any applicable amendment to this title, may continue except as
provided in chapter 2, article C, "Nonconforming Uses, Structures, And
Properties", of this title. No expansion or modification to a preexisting legal
nonconforming use or structure shall be permitted except as allowed by chapter
2, article C, "Nonconforming Uses, Structures, And Properties", of this title.
      6.   Minimum Requirements: The provisions of this title shall be the
minimum to ensure the public health, safety, and welfare. For discretionary
actions, city officials or bodies have the ability to impose more stringent
requirements than set forth in this title as may be necessary to promote
orderly land use development.
      7.   Effect Of Zoning Code Changes On Projects In Process: The enactment
of this title or amendments to its requirements may have the effect of imposing
different standards on new land uses, development, and/or structures than those
that applied to existing land uses, development, and/or structures. Following
the effective date of this title, or any amendments to this title, the
following provisions shall apply:
         a.   Pending Applications: All land use permit applications that are
active and that have been determined by the planning department to be complete
before the effective date of this title or any amendment, will be processed
according to the regulations in effect when the application was accepted as
complete.
         b.   Approved Projects Not Yet Under Construction: Any structure
authorized by a conditional use permit, site plan and architectural review,
temporary use permit, or variance, for which construction has not begun as of
the effective date of this title or any amendment, may still be constructed in
compliance with the approved permit, as long as construction is completed and
the approved land use is established before the expiration of the permit or,
where applicable, before the expiration of any approved time extension.
         c.   Projects Under Construction: A structure that is under
construction pursuant to a valid building permit on the effective date of this
title or any amendment, may be completed and need not be changed to satisfy any
new or different requirements of this title as long as construction is beyond
the approval of the first inspection on the effective date of this title or any
amendment, and provided that construction is diligently pursued to completion.
Such a structure shall be deemed to be a lawfully existing building.
      8.   Conflicting Requirements: Wherever conflict occurs between the
provisions of this title and any other provision of law, the more restrictive
of any such provisions shall apply.
         a.   Municipal Code Provisions: If conflicts occur between
requirements of this title and other portions of the municipal code, or between
this title and other plans and policies adopted by the city, the most
restrictive shall apply.
         b.   General Plan: If conflict occurs between the requirements of this
title and the adopted city general plan, the requirements of the general plan
shall govern.
         c.   Specific Plan: If conflict occurs between the requirements of
this title and any adopted specific plan, the requirements of the specific plan
shall govern.
         d.   Development Agreements: If conflicts occur between the
requirements of this title and standards adopted as part of any development
agreement, the requirements of the development agreement shall govern.
         e.   Private Agreements: This title applies to all land uses and
development regardless of whether it imposes a greater or lesser restriction on
the development or use of structures or land than a private agreement or
restriction (for example, CC&Rs) without affecting the applicability of any
agreement or restriction. The city shall not enforce any private covenant or
agreement unless it is a party to the covenant or agreement.
      9.    Other Requirements/Permits: Nothing in this title eliminates the
need for obtaining any other permits required by the city, or any permit,
approval, or entitlement required by the regulations of any regional, state, or
federal agency.
      10.   Public Nuisance: Neither the provisions of this title nor any
permit or other approval authorized by this title shall authorize the
maintenance of any public nuisance as defined in the municipal code.
      11.   Code Violations: No development shall be permitted and no permits
shall be issued for the division, improvement, or use of land that has been
divided or otherwise developed in violation of this title.
      12.   Severability: If any portion of this title is for any reason held
by a court of competent jurisdiction to be invalid, unconstitutional, or
unenforceable, such decision shall not affect the validity of the remaining
portions of this title. The city council hereby declares that this title and
each chapter, article, section, subsection, paragraph, subparagraph, sentence,
clause, phrase, and portion thereof is adopted, irrespective of the fact that
one or more portions of this title may be declared invalid, unconstitutional,
or unenforceable. (Ord. 2013-05, 2-6-2014)
 
Notes
1 1. GOV § 65000 et seq.
2 2. PRC § 21000 et seq.
9-1-2: ZONING ADMINISTRATION:
   A.   Purpose: The purpose of this section is to establish administrative
responsibilities and to describe which review body (e.g., planning director,
planning commission, or city council) makes recommendations or final decisions
on various types of land use permit applications.
   B.   Planning Agency: California Government Code section 65100 requires each
jurisdiction to establish a planning agency to carry out the land use and
planning functions of the jurisdiction. The functions of the planning agency,
as designated by this title, may be carried out by the following bodies. In the
absence of an assignment, the city council shall retain responsibility and
authority as the legislative body of the city.
      1.   Planning Director: The planning director, or designee, shall have
the responsibility and authority to administer and enforce this title as
follows:
         a.   Maintain this title, the zoning map, and all record of zoning
actions and interpretations;
         b.   Advise the city council, city manager, and planning commission on
planning matters;
         c.   Pursuant to section 65900 of the Government Code, serve as the
administrative zoning body and decide land use entitlements as provided in
chapter 2, "Procedures And Entitlements", of this title;
         d.   Provide staff at meetings and provide administrative services for
the planning commission;
         e.   Direct or prepare planning related policy amendments and special
studies as necessary;
         f.   Conduct administrative functions authorized by this title,
including, but not limited to, distribution and receipt of entitlement
applications and corresponding fees, application review and public noticing,
determination and issuance of administrative entitlements and approvals;
         g.   Prepare staff reports with recommendations, proposed findings,
and proposed conditions for actions for the planning commission, city council,
and other designated review bodies;
         h.   Provide information to the public and facilitate public
participation on planning matters;
         i.   Exercise such other powers and duties as are prescribed by state
law, local ordinance, or as directed by the city manager.
      2.   City Manager: The city manager shall oversee the work of the
planning director and shall exercise such other powers and duties as are
prescribed by state law or local ordinance, or as directed by the city council.
      3.   Planning Commission: Pursuant to section 65101 of the Government
Code, and as provided in title 2, chapter 1, "Planning Commission", of the
municipal code, there is established a planning commission for the city. The
planning commission shall have the following land use responsibilities:
         a.   Hear and decide applications for entitlements as provided in
chapter 2, "Procedures And Entitlements", of this title, including, but not
limited to, conditional use permit, major site plan and architectural review,
variance, and highway oriented sign permit;
         b.   Initiate studies of amendments to this title and make
recommendations to the city council for amendments as provided in chapter 2,
"Procedures And Entitlements", of this title and in section 65853 of the
Government Code;
         c.   Hear and make recommendations to the city council on applications
for zoning amendments, the general plan and amendments thereto, specific plans,
prezoning, and other related planning studies;
         d.   Exercise such other powers and duties as are prescribed by state
law, local ordinance, or as directed by the city council.
      4.   City Council: The city council is the legislative body of the city
and shall have the following land use responsibilities:
         a.   Hear and decide appeals of the decisions of the planning director
and the planning commission;
         b.   Hear and decide applications for entitlements as listed in
chapter 2, "Procedures And Entitlements", of this title, including, but not
limited to, planned unit development, specific plan, development agreement,
zoning amendment (including rezoning), prezoning, and general plan amendment.
In the event that applications for other land use permits are requested in
conjunction with these entitlements, the city council shall also be the final
decision making body for all related land use entitlements;
         c.   Direct planning related policy amendments and special studies as
necessary or desired; and
         d.   Exercise such other powers and duties as are prescribed by state
law or local ordinance. (Ord. 2013-05, 2-6-2014)
9-1-3: INTERPRETATION:
   A.   Purpose: The zoning administrator has the authority to interpret the
zoning code on a regular basis. Certain interpretation may be elevated when
necessary to the planning commission to make formal interpretations that may
have a significant impact on the community at large. This section provides the
framework for interpretations and clarifies the use of some basic terms.
   B.   Rules Of Interpretation: The planning director shall have the authority
and responsibility to interpret terms, provisions, and requirements of this
title according to the following:
      1.   Terminology: The following rules apply to all provisions of this
title:
         a.   Language: The words "shall", "will", "is to", and "are to" and
similar words and phrases are always mandatory. "Should" is not mandatory but
is strongly recommended and "may" is permissive.
         b.   Tense And Number: The present tense includes the past and future
tense, and the future tense includes the present. The singular number includes
the plural, and plural numbers include the singular unless the natural
construction of the word indicates otherwise.
         c.   Conjunctions: "And" indicates that all connected items or
provisions shall apply. "Or" indicates that the connected items or provisions
may apply singly or in any combination. "Either...or" indicates that the
connected items and provisions shall apply singly but not in combination.
"Includes" and "including" shall mean "including, but not limited to".
      2.   Number Of Days: Whenever a number of days is specified in this code,
or in any entitlement, condition of approval, or notice issued or given as
provided in this code, the number of days shall be construed as calendar days,
unless business days are specified. Time limits will extend to the following
business day where the last of the specified number of days falls on a day that
the city is not open for business.
      3.   Minimum Requirements: All provisions of this code are considered to
be minimum requirements, unless specifically stated otherwise.
      4.   Calculations; Rounding: Where any provision of this code requires
calculation to determine applicable requirements, any fractional/decimal
results of the calculation shall be rounded to the nearest whole number (0.5 or
more is rounded up, less than 0.5 is rounded down).
      5.   Exclusive Listings: Any list of any item, including zones or uses,
is exclusive. If a use or other item is not listed, it is not permitted, unless
the use is determined to be similar to a listed use or use category.
      6.   Zone Boundaries: Where uncertainty exists with respect to the
boundaries of the various zones as shown on the zoning map, the provisions of
subsection
9-3-3 E, "Zoning Map Interpretation", of this title shall apply.
   C.   Official Zoning Interpretations: Official interpretations may be
prepared whenever an ambiguity in a zoning regulation exists, or a formal
request for an interpretation is made by an applicant, property owner, or
interested party to the planning director. The procedure for an official zoning
interpretation shall be as provided in section
9-2B-8, "Official Zoning Interpretation", of this title. (Ord. 2013-05, 2-6-
2014)
9-1-4: ENFORCEMENT, LEGAL PROCEDURES, AND PENALTIES:
   A.   Purpose: Provisions within this section are intended to ensure
compliance with the requirements of this title and any conditions of land use
permits to promote the city's planning efforts and for the protection of the
public health, safety, and welfare of the city.
   B.   Authority To Enforce: The city manager, planning director, code
enforcement officer, or designees may issue citations for any violations of the
zoning code pertaining to the use of any land and the addition, alteration,
construction, conversion, erection, moving, reconstruction, or use of any
structure. Other officials of the city charged by the law with the general duty
of enforcing city ordinances shall also enforce the provisions of this title.
   C.   Zoning Code Applicability: No person shall erect, construct, alter,
maintain, or use any building or structure or shall use, divide, or transfer
any land in violation of this title or any amendment thereto, except as
otherwise provided in chapter 2, article C, "Nonconforming Uses, Structures,
And Properties", of this title. All departments, officials, and public
employees of the city who are assigned the authority or duty to issue permits
or licenses shall comply with the provisions of this zoning code. The following
actions are determined to conflict with this code:
      1.   Permits for uses or structures that would be in conflict with the
provisions of this zoning code shall not be issued.
      2.   Any permit issued in conflict with the provisions of this zoning
code shall be deemed void.
      3.   Any action taken by an official or public employee of the city in
conflict with the provisions of this zoning code shall be deemed void.
   D.   Addressing Violations: Any structure constructed or maintained contrary
to the provisions of this title and any use of land or structure operated or
maintained contrary to the provisions of this title are hereby declared to be a
public nuisance.
      1.   Public Nuisance: Any structure or use which is altered, constructed,
or established contrary to the provisions of this title or any applicable
condition of approval imposed on a permit is unlawful and a public nuisance,
and shall be subject to the remedies and penalties identified in this chapter,
the municipal code, and other remedies available to the city.
      2.   Infractions: It is an infraction for any person to do any act
forbidden or fail to perform any act required by this title. Penalties for
infractions shall be in compliance with state law and title 1, chapter 4 of the
municipal code.
      3.   Stop Work Order: Any construction in violation of this title or any
conditions imposed on a permit shall be subject to the issuance of a stop work
order.
      4.   Remedies: Each day any violation of this title continues is a new
and separate offense. Each violation of this title is considered a separate
offense. Should a person be convicted for violation of this zoning code,
whether as an infraction or a misdemeanor, pursuant to title 1, chapter 4 of
the municipal code or as otherwise provided by state law, the conviction shall
not prevent the city from pursuing any other available remedy to correct the
violation.
   E.   Inspections: City officials are authorized to perform inspections
related to permit issuance, as follows:
      1.   Preapproval Inspections: Every applicant seeking a permit or any
other action in compliance with this title shall allow the city officials
handling the application access to any premises or property which is the
subject of the application.
      2.   Postapproval Inspections: If the permit or other action in
compliance with this title is approved, the owner or applicant shall allow city
officials access to the premises in order to determine continued compliance
with the approved permit and/or any conditions of approval imposed on the
permit.
   F.   Permit Revocation Or Modification: This subsection provides procedures
for securing revocation or modification of previously approved land use permits
or entitlements.
      1.   Revocations: The city's action to revoke an entitlement shall have
the effect of terminating the entitlement and denying the privileges granted by
the original approval.
      2.   Modifications: The city may choose to allow the modification of the
operational characteristics instead of revoking an entitlement. These
modifications may include operational aspects, including, but not limited to,
buffers, duration of the entitlement, hours of operation, landscaping,
lighting, parking, performance guarantees, property maintenance, signs,
surfacing, and traffic circulation.
      3.   Hearings And Notice: The appropriate review authority shall hold a
public hearing to revoke or modify an application, entitlement, or permit
granted in compliance with the provisions of this title. A notice shall be
delivered in writing to the applicant and/or owner of the property for which
the permit was granted.
      4.   Review Authority Action And Findings: A land use entitlement or
permit may be revoked or modified by the review authority which originally
approved the entitlement if any of the following findings can be made:
         a.   Circumstances under which the entitlement or permit was granted
have been changed by the applicant to a degree that one or more of the findings
contained in the original permit can no longer be met;
         b.   The entitlement or permit was issued, in whole or in part, on the
basis of a misrepresentation or omission of a material statement in the
application, or in the applicant's testimony presented during the public
hearing, for the entitlement or permit;
         c.   One or more of the conditions of the permit have not been
substantially fulfilled or have been violated;
         d.   The use or structure for which the permit was granted has ceased
to exist or has lost its legal nonconforming use status;
         e.   The improvement authorized in compliance with the permit is in
violation of any code, law, ordinance, regulation, or statute; or
         f.   The improvement/use allowed by the permit has become detrimental
to the public health, safety, or welfare, or the manner of operation
constitutes or is creating a public nuisance.
   G.   Enforcement Action: This subsection describes the procedures for
initiating enforcement action in cases where the planning director, or other
city official, has determined that real property within the city is being used
in violation of the provisions of this title.
      1.   Notice To Responsible Parties: The planning director shall provide
the record owner of the subject site and any person in possession or control of
the site with a written notice of violation, which shall include the following
information:
         a.   A description of the violation and citations of applicable zoning
code provisions being violated;
         b.   A time limit for correcting the violation;
         c.   A statement that the city intends to charge the property owner
for all administrative costs associated with the abatement of the violation;
         d.   A statement that the property owner may request and be provided a
meeting with the director or designee to discuss possible methods and time
limits for the correction of the violations.
      2.   Time Limit For Correction: The notice of violation shall state that
the violations shall be corrected within thirty (30) days from the date of the
notice to avoid further enforcement action by the city. The thirty (30) day
time limit may be extended by the city upon determining that the responsible
party will likely correct the violations within a reasonable time period. The
city may also require through the notice of violation that the correction occur
within less than thirty (30) days if the violation constitutes a hazard to
public health or safety.
      3.   Use Of Other Enforcement Procedures: Failure to remedy the violation
within the time limit for correction shall constitute a violation of this title
and shall entitle the city to pursue criminal and civil remedies as provided by
law and title 1, chapter 4 of the municipal code.
   H.   Cost Recovery: The city has the authority to recover costs related to
enforcement actions as follows:
      1.   Cost Recovery Where No Permit Is Required: The city shall be
reimbursed for administrative costs, including, but not limited to, staff and
city attorney time expended on the enforcement of the provisions of this title,
in cases where no permit is required in order to correct a violation.
         a.   Record Of Cost: The planning department shall maintain records of
all administrative costs incurred by responsible city departments and
associated with the processing of violations and enforcement of this title, and
the city shall be entitled to recover costs from the property owner.
         b.   Notice: Upon investigation and a determination that a violation
of any of the provisions of this zoning code is found to exist, the planning
director or designee shall notify the record owner or any person having
possession or control of the property by mail of the existence of the violation
and the department's intent to charge the property owner for all administrative
costs associated with enforcement.
         c.   Summary Of Costs: At the conclusion of the case, the planning
director shall send a summary of costs associated with enforcement to the owner
and/or persons having possession or control of the property by certified and
first class mail.
         d.   Actions That Require A Permit: Any person who alters or
establishes any land use or structure without first obtaining any permit
required by this title shall pay the additional permit processing fees as
established by the city that result from this action.
      2.   Inspection Fee: An inspection fee as established by the city may be
imposed on each person who receives a notice of violation, notice and order, or
letter of correction of any provision of this title, adopted building code, or
state law. The fee may be assessed for each inspection or reinspection
conducted when the particular violation is not fully abated or corrected as
directed. (Ord. 2013-05, 2-6-2014)
CHAPTER 2
PROCEDURES AND ENTITLEMENTS
ARTICLE A. GENERAL APPLICATION PROCESSING PROCEDURES
SECTION:
9-2A-1: Purpose
9-2A-2: Overview Of Processing Procedures
9-2A-3: Consolidated Review
9-2A-4: Preapplication Conference
9-2A-5: Application Requirements And Process
9-2A-6: Public Notice, Hearings, And Decisions
9-2A-7: Recommending, Approval, And Appeal Authority
9-2A-8: Appeals
9-2A-9: Permit Time Limits, Extensions, And Expiration
9-2A-1: PURPOSE:
This article describes the general procedures that apply to land use
entitlement applications. The implementation of these procedures is consistent
with the requirements of the California Government Code, including chapter 2.7
(public hearings), chapter 3 article 6 (preparation, adoption, and amendment of
the general plan), chapter 3 article 8 (specific plans), chapter 4 (zoning
regulations), and chapter 4.5 (review and approval of development projects,
also known as the permit streamlining act), and division 13 of the California
Public Resources Code (the California environmental quality act). (Ord. 2013-
05, 2-6-2014)
9-2A-2: OVERVIEW OF PROCESSING PROCEDURES:
   A.   Overview Of Process: The entitlement procedures provided in this
article are described according to the various stages of the application review
process.
   B.   Types Of Planning Permits And Entitlements: Each planning permit or
entitlement administered by the city is categorized as one of three (3) types.
These types are listed below. Section
9-2A-7,
table 9-2A-7-1, "Planning Permit And Entitlements And Review And Appeal
Authority", of this article lists the various planning permits and entitlements
in Lemoore, identifies the type of permit required, and lists the designated
approving authority and appeal authority for each.
      1.   Administrative decisions are those that require limited or no
interpretation or exercise of judgment in evaluating approval criteria because
the decision is made according to specific criteria.
      2.   Quasi-judicial decisions typically involve some level of discretion
or policy determination on the part of the approval authority and generally
require findings to be made in order to approve planning permits or
entitlements.
      3.   Legislative decisions must be made by the city council. Legislative
land use decisions apply to the general population and prescribe policy and
require the greatest amount of discretion and evaluation. (Ord. 2013-05, 2-6-
2014)
9-2A-3: CONSOLIDATED REVIEW:
   A.   Multiple Planning Permits And Entitlements: Where a proposal involves
more than one planning permit or entitlement for the same property, the
application shall be reviewed and approved, conditionally approved, or denied
by the highest approving authority.
   B.   Planning Permit Or Entitlement And Subdivision Permit: When a planning
application is accompanied concurrently with an application for a subdivision
permit (e.g., lot line adjustment, tentative subdivision map, tentative parcel
map, vesting tentative map) as provided in title 8, chapter 7, "Land Division",
of the municipal code, all of the applications shall be processed concurrently
and final action shall be taken by the highest level designated approving
authority for all such requested permits. (Ord. 2013-05, 2-6-2014)
9-2A-4: PREAPPLICATION CONFERENCE:
   A.   Optional Preapplication Conference: A preapplication conference is not
required but may be requested by the applicant prior to application submittal
for quasi-judicial and legislative planning permits and entitlements. The
purpose of the preapplication conference is to acquaint applicants with the
requirements of this code, the general plan, and other relevant criteria and to
have a preliminary discussion about the merits and details of a proposed
project. (Ord. 2013-05, 2-6-2014)
9-2A-5: APPLICATION REQUIREMENTS AND PROCESS:
All applications for planning permits and entitlements shall be submitted to
the planning department with the following materials and are subject to the
procedures listed below.
   A.   Application Contents: Form shall include applicant signature(s), agent
authorization (as appropriate), and property ownership certification.
Application form shall be submitted along with:
      1.   Any fee or deposit for services based on the entitlement(s)
requested as adopted by resolution of the city council;
      2.   Plans, maps, and any other information deemed necessary by the city
to provide the approving authority with adequate information to make informed
decisions; and
      3.   Materials listed on the planning permit or entitlement application
form related to the requested entitlement(s).
   B.   Determination Of Application Completeness:
      1.   Application Completeness With Notification: Within thirty (30) days
of application submittal, the planning director shall determine whether or not
the application is complete and shall notify the applicant that either:
         a.   All the submittal requirements have been satisfied and the
application has been accepted as complete; or
         b.   Specific information is still necessary to complete the
application.
      2.   Application Completeness Without Notification: If the written
determination is not made within thirty (30) days after receipt, the
application shall be deemed complete for purposes of this section.
      3.   Resubmittal: Upon receipt and resubmittal of any incomplete
application, a new thirty (30) day period shall begin during which the planning
director shall review materials and determine the completeness of the
application.
      4.   Incomplete Application: If additional information or submittals are
required and the application is not made complete within six (6) months of the
completeness determination letter, the city shall have the discretion to deem
the application as withdrawn. No further action will be taken on the
application. Unexpended fees, as determined by the city, will be returned to
the applicant. If the applicant subsequently wishes to pursue the project, a
new application, including fees, plans, exhibits, and other materials, must
then be filed in compliance with this code.
      5.   Right To Appeal: The applicant may appeal the determination in
accordance with section
9-2A-8, "Appeals", of this article and the permit streamlining act 1 .
   C.   Environmental Assessment:
      1.   Completion Of Environmental Review: The city of Lemoore shall be the
lead agency for the review of projects under the California environmental
quality act (CEQA) that are required as a result of this title.
   D.   Application Review, Report, Determination, And Conditions:
      1.   Review: The planning director, or designee, shall review all
applications to determine compliance with provisions of this title and other
applicable provisions (e.g., subdivision code, other sections of the municipal
code, general plan).
      2.   Project Routing: The planning director shall route the project to
other departments and outside agencies as appropriate prior to the preparation
of a staff report.
      3.   Staff Report: When this code requires planning commission and/or
city council action, the planning director shall provide a written
recommendation to the approving authority to approve, deny, or approve with
conditions the requested entitlement.
         a.   Each staff report shall be furnished to the applicant and
property owner when it is provided to the review authority prior to
consideration of the entitlement request.
         b.   The staff report may be amended as necessary at any time prior to
the hearing to address issues or information not reasonably known at the time
the report is due.
      4.   Determination: The designated approving authority shall notice and
hold a public hearing (if required) and take action to approve, deny, or
conditionally approve the land use permit or entitlement.
      5.   Conditions Of Approval: The approving authority shall have the
authority to impose reasonable conditions of approval to ensure that all
applicable criteria are, or can be, met. Failure to comply with any condition
of approval shall be grounds for revocation of the planning permit(s) or
entitlement(s) and grounds for instituting code enforcement proceedings.
   E.   Withdrawal Of Application:
      1.   Request: An applicant or property owner may withdraw any application
at the request of the applicant, prior to the final written decision on the
entitlement.
      2.   Fees Refunded: Fees for withdrawn applications shall be refunded,
less the actual costs incurred by the city in processing the application
through the date of withdrawal.
   F.   Modification:
      1.   Any person holding a permit granted under this code may request a
modification or amendment to that permit. For the purpose of this section, the
modification of a permit may include modification of the terms of the permit
itself, project design, or the waiver or alteration of conditions imposed in
the granting of the permit.
      2.   If the city determines that a proposed project action is not in
substantial conformance with the original approval, the applicant shall be
notified of the requirement to submit a permit modification application for
consideration and action by the same approving authority as the original
permit.
      3.   A permit modification may be granted only when the approving
authority makes all findings required for the original approval and the
additional finding that there are changed circumstances sufficient to justify
the modification of the approval. (Ord. 2013-05, 2-6-2014)
 
Notes
1 1. GOV § 65943.
9-2A-6: PUBLIC NOTICE, HEARINGS, AND DECISIONS:
   A.   Notice Of Hearing: When this title requires a public hearing before
either the planning commission or city council, notice shall be provided
pursuant to sections 65090 through 65096 of the California Government Code.
   B.   Requests For Notification: Any person who requests to be on a mailing
list for notice of hearing shall submit such request in writing to the city
clerk. The city may impose a reasonable fee for the purpose of recovering the
cost of such notification.
   C.   Receipt Of Notice: Failure of any person or entity to receive any
properly issued notice required by law for any hearing required by this code
shall not constitute grounds for any court to invalidate the actions of a
designated approving authority for which the notice was given.
   D.   Hearing Procedure: Hearings as provided for in this article shall be
held at the date, time, and place for which notice has been given as required.
The approving authority shall conduct the public hearing and hear testimony
from interested persons. The summary minutes shall be prepared and made part of
the permanent file of the case. Any hearing may be continued to a date certain.
If the hearing is not continued to a specific date/time, then the hearing shall
be renoticed.
   E.   Action/Determination Procedures:
      1.   Recommendation: Where the recommending body makes a recommendation
to the city council, the recommendation shall be recorded in a resolution of
the recommending body. The recommendation shall include all required findings
for final action.
      2.   Decision: The approving authority shall declare and document their
decision by either resolution or ordinance.
      3.   Notice Of Decision: After final action has been taken by the
approving authority, notice of the decision shall be mailed to the applicant
and to the property owner, as applicable.
      4.   Effective Date: A decision of the approving authority is final and
effective on the eleventh day following the decision unless an appeal is filed.
(Ord. 2013-05, 2-6-2014)
9-2A-7: RECOMMENDING, APPROVAL, AND APPEAL AUTHORITY:
   A.   Authorities:
Table 9-2A-7-1, "Planning Permit And Entitlements And Review And Appeal
Authority", of this section summarizes the recommending, approving, and appeal
authorities for the various planning permits and entitlements listed in article
B, "Planning Permits And Entitlements", of this chapter. It also identifies the
type of permit or entitlement as described in subsection
9-2A-2B, "Types Of Planning Permits And Entitlements", of this article.
The terms in the table have the following meaning:
      1.   Notice/Hearing Requirement:
         a.   "None" indicates that no hearing or notice is required.
         b.   "Public hearing" indicates that a hearing and public hearing
notice as described in subsection
9-2A-6A, "Notice Of Hearing", of this article is required.
      2.   Authority:
         a.   "Recommending" means that the identified authority makes a
recommendation on the application to another body.
         b.   "Final" means that the identified authority is the designated
approving authority for the application.
         c.   "Appeal" means that the identified authority is the designated
appeal authority for the application in the event that an appeal is filed
pursuant to section
9-2A-8, "Appeals", of this article.
TABLE 9-2A-7-1
PLANNING PERMIT AND ENTITLEMENTS AND REVIEW AND APPEAL AUTHORITY1
Planning Permit Or Notice/Hearing Authority
Entitlement        Requirement    Planning Director Planning   City Council
                                                    Commission
Planning Permit Or Notice/Hearing   Authority
Entitlement        Requirement      Planning Director Planning     City Council
                                                      Commission
Administrative                                                    
permits:
Zoning clearance
(e.g., building    None             Final             Appeal       Appeal
permit, signs,
business license)
Temporary use      None             Final             Appeal       Appeal
permit
Tree permit for
trees on private   None             Final             Appeal       Appeal
property
Reasonable         None             Final             Appeal       Appeal
accommodation
Similar use        None             Final             Appeal       Appeal
determination
Official zoning    None             Final             Appeal       Appeal
interpretation
Minor home         None             Final             Appeal       Appeal
occupation permit
Highway oriented   None             Final             Appeal       Appeal
sign permit
Administrative use None             Final             Appeal       Appeal
permit
Minor deviation    None             Final             Appeal       Appeal
Sign program       None             Final             Appeal       Appeal
Site plan and
architectural      None             Final             Appeal       Appeal
review
Quasi-judicial
permits and                                                      
entitlements:
Conditional use    Public hearing   Recommending      Final        Appeal 2
permit
Major home         Public hearing   Recommending      Final        Appeal
occupation permit
Variance           Public hearing   Recommending      Final        Appeal 2
Public convenience Public hearing   Recommending      Final        Appeal 2
or necessity
Legislative                                                      
approvals:
Specific plan      Public hearing 3 Recommending      Recommending Final
Development        Public hearing 3 Recommending      Recommending Final
agreement
Planned Unit       Public hearing3  Recommending      Recommending Final
Development
Zoning amendment   Public hearing 3 Recommending      Recommending Final
Prezoning          Public hearing 3 Recommending      Recommending Final
General plan       Public hearing 3 Recommending      Recommending Final
amendment
 
Notes:
   1.   Also see title 8, chapter 7, "Land Division", of the municipal code for
subdivision permits.
   2.   The appeal for this permit requires a noticed public hearing.
   3.   A noticed public hearing shall be held for both the planning commission
and city council review.
(Ord. 2013-05, 2-6-2014; Ord. 2023-10, 9-19-2023)
9-2A-8: APPEALS:
This section establishes procedures for the appeal of planning permits and
entitlements. Planning permits and entitlements that are eligible for appeal
and the corresponding appeal authority are listed in section
9-2A-7,
table 9-2A-7-1, "Planning Permit And Entitlements And Review And Appeal
Authority", of this article.
   A.   Standing To File An Appeal: An appeal may be filed by any of the
following persons:
      1.   Any person affected by a determination where an appeal is available
as indicated in section
9-2A-7,
table 9-2A-7-1 of this article, including the applicant; or
      2.   Any person who, in person or through a representative, presented
testimony at a public hearing in connection with the decision being appealed,
or who otherwise informed the city in writing of the nature of their concerns
prior to the hearing.
   B.   Timing And Form Of Appeal: Appeals shall be filed with the planning
department within ten (10) calendar days following the final date of the
determination being appealed. All appeals shall be submitted in writing,
together with the name, address, phone number, and signature of the appellant,
and the required filing fee. The written appeal shall specifically state the
pertinent facts of the case and the basis for the appeal.
   C.   Multiple Actions: In the event an appeal is filed regarding a decision
on one of multiple planning permits or entitlements granted concurrently for a
single project, all concurrently granted planning permits or entitlements for
the project shall be automatically appealed and shall be considered and acted
upon together in compliance with this section.
   D.   Processing:
      1.   Scheduling And Notice Of Hearing: After an appeal has been received,
the matter shall be scheduled for the next available regular meeting according
to the procedure for public notice and hearing listed in section
9-2A-6, "Public Notice, Hearings, And Decisions", of this article, unless the
planning director, the applicant, and the appellant agree on an alternative
meeting date.
      2.   Report: After the hearing has been scheduled, the planning director
shall prepare a report on the matter and forward the report to the appropriate
appeal authority.
      3.   Consolidation Of Multiple Appeals: If more than one party files an
appeal on a land use action, the appeals shall be consolidated and noticed and
heard as one proceeding.
      4.   Withdrawal Of An Appeal: An appeal may be withdrawn by an appellant
at any time prior to the rendering of a final decision. The appeal proceedings
shall terminate as of the date the withdrawal request is received by the city.
      5.   Appeal Hearing And Review: The appeal authority shall review the
matter in full as though it were being reviewed and decided for the first time,
while also taking into consideration the findings of the original decision.
      6.   Decision: After a public hearing, the appeal authority may:
         a.   Approve, modify, or disapprove the planning permit or
entitlement, either in whole or in part, based on the record and the evidence
received at the hearing;
         b.   Adopt additional conditions of approval deemed reasonable and
necessary; or
         c.   Disapprove the planning permit or entitlement approved by the
approving authority, even if the request was to modify the project or to modify
or eliminate one or more of the conditions of approval.
         d.   When the appeal authority is the city council, the appeal
authority may, in its sole discretion, refund any appeal fees or deposit paid
by the appellant if such a request is made by the appellant.
   E.   Rights: Pending a decision on an appeal, all rights emanating from the
planning permit or entitlement, including licenses, building permits, or other
city action, that is the subject of the appeal and all relevant time periods
shall be suspended. (Ord. 2013-05, 2-6-2014)
9-2A-9: PERMIT TIME LIMITS, EXTENSIONS, AND EXPIRATION:
   A.   Exercising Permits:
      1.   The exercise of a permit occurs when the applicant or property owner
has performed substantial work and incurred substantial liabilities in good
faith reliance upon such permit(s). A permit may be otherwise exercised
pursuant to a condition of the permit or corresponding legal agreement that
specifies that other substantial efforts or expenditures constitutes exercise
of the permit.
      2.   Any deviations from the approvals shall require an amendment to the
prior approvals or approval of a new permit or entitlement(s) as determined by
the city
   B.   Time Limits To Exercise Permit:
      1.   Unless a condition of approval establishes a different time limit,
any administrative or quasi-judicial planning permit or entitlement not
exercised within two (2) years of approval shall expire and become void, except
where an extension of time is approved in compliance with subsection C, "Permit
Extensions", of this section.
      2.   Permits or entitlements that are approved together with a
subdivision or parcel map in accordance with the subdivision ordinance shall
expire and become void at the same time as the subdivision or parcel map
expires.
   C.   Permit Extensions:
      1.   The same approving authority that took final action in granting the
original permit may extend the expiration date for two (2) years from the
original permit date.
      2.   The applicant or property owner may file a request for extension
prior to the expiration date of the permit, along with appropriate fees and
application submittal materials. The filing of an application for an extension
shall stay the expiration, but no subsequent permits (e.g., building permit)
shall be issued during the stay period.
      3.   The same approving authority that took final action in granting the
original permit shall consider extending the period within which the exercise
of a permit must occur. Notice and public hearing shall be provided in the same
manner as for the original permit.
      4.   An extension may be granted only when the designated approving
authority finds that the original permit findings can be made and there are
circumstances that warrant such extension.
      5.   The permit, as extended, may be conditioned to comply with any
development standards that may have been enacted since the permit was initially
approved.
   D.   Expiration:
      1.   If a permit or entitlement has not been exercised and the time
limits are reached with no extension requested, or a requested extension is
denied or expires, then the permit or entitlement shall expire.
      2.   If a use authorized by a permit or entitlement that has been
exercised within the allowed time limit is discontinued or abandoned for a
continuous period of twelve (12) months, then the permit or entitlement shall
expire.
   E.   Revocation:
      1.   Revocation of a previously approved planning permit or entitlement
may be considered in the event an applicant, or the applicant's successor in
interest, fails to comply with any of the conditions of entitlement approval.
      2.   The city council or planning commission may institute revocation
proceedings.
      3.   Revocation of a previously approved entitlement shall be considered
and decided by the city council.
      4.   A permit or entitlement shall only be revoked upon findings that:
         a.   One or more conditions of approval have not been implemented;
         b.   One or more conditions of approval have been violated; or
         c.   The activities, or the use itself, are substantially different
from what was approved.
   F.   Permit To Run With Land, Transfer Of Approval Rights:
      1.   Unless stated otherwise in the city's entitlement decision, any
approval granted under this title runs with the land and is transferred with
ownership of that land. Any conditions, time limits, or other restrictions
imposed with a planning permit or entitlement approval shall bind all
subsequent owners of the property for which the entitlement was granted. (Ord.
2013-05, 2-6-2014)
ARTICLE B. PLANNING PERMITS AND ENTITLEMENTS
SECTION:
9-2B-1: Purpose And Applicability
9-2B-2: Application Processing Procedure
9-2B-3: Zoning Clearance
9-2B-4: Temporary Use Permit
9-2B-5: Tree Permit For Trees On Private Property
9-2B-6: Reasonable Accommodation
9-2B-7: Similar Use Determination
9-2B-8: Official Zoning Interpretation
9-2B-9: Home Occupation Permit
9-2B-10: Administrative Use Permit
9-2B-11: Minor Deviation
9-2B-12: Site Plan And Architectural Review
9-2B-13: Sign Program
9-2B-14: Conditional Use Permit
9-2B-15: Major Site Plan And Architectural Review (Rep. by Ord. 2023-10, 9-19-
2023)
9-2B-16: Variance
9-2B-17: Public Convenience Or Necessity
9-2B-18: Highway Oriented Sign Permit
9-2B-19: Planned Unit Development
9-2B-20: Specific Plan
9-2B-21: Development Agreement
9-2B-22: Zoning Amendment
9-2B-23: Prezoning
9-2B-24: General Plan Amendment
9-2B-25: Senate Bill 35 Compliance Procedures
9-2B-1: PURPOSE AND APPLICABILITY:
The purpose of this article is to establish procedures for administering all
planning related permits and entitlements required and regulated by the City.
Each permit and entitlement type is described in this article in terms of
purpose and applicability, approving authority, and processing provisions.
Exemptions to permit requirements are listed throughout. General processing
procedures are established in article A, "General Application Processing
Procedures", of this chapter. (Ord. 2013-05, 2-6-2014)
9-2B-2: APPLICATION PROCESSING PROCEDURE:
The procedure for processing each planning permit and entitlement listed in
this article shall be as provided in article A, "General Application Processing
Procedures", of this chapter, unless otherwise specified herein. (Ord. 2013-05,
2-6-2014)
9-2B-3: ZONING CLEARANCE:
   A.   Purpose: The purpose of the zoning clearance process is to ensure that
all new and modified uses and structures comply with applicable provisions of
this title using administrative procedures.
   B.   Applicability: Zoning clearance is required for the following actions:
      1.   All structures that require a building permit (e.g., new structures
greater than 120 square feet) except permits for interior work only;
      2.   Signs;
      3.   Business licenses; and
      4.   Other City applications that may be subject to the provisions of
this title, including, but not limited to, encroachment permits and grading and
improvement plans as deemed necessary.
   C.   Approving Authority And Procedure: The Planning Director shall be the
designated approving authority for zoning clearance. The procedures shall be as
follows:
      1.   Generally: No application form is necessary for zoning clearance.
This process will be conducted by the Planning Director as part of the building
permit application review. Zoning clearance shall be granted only when the
Planning Director finds the proposal to be in conformance with all applicable
provisions of this title. The Planning Director may modify plans in whole or in
part to ensure compliance with applicable provisions of this title. Building
permits shall not be issued without approval of zoning clearance.
      2.   Signs: The process for reviewing signs shall be as generally
provided above, except that additional information describing the existing
signs on the project site and the new proposed signs shall be required on a
form provided by the planning department.
   D.   Public Hearing And Notice: Public notice and public hearing is not
required for zoning clearance.
   E.   Approval Findings: Zoning clearance shall be granted only when the
planning director finds the proposal to be in conformance with all applicable
provisions of this title. Any permit or application listed in subsection B,
"Applicability", of this section shall not be issued without approval of zoning
clearance. (Ord. 2013-05, 2-6-2014)
9-2B-4: TEMPORARY USE PERMIT:
   A.   Purpose: A temporary use permit provides a mechanism for administrative
review and determinations for proposed and qualifying short term activities and
to ensure that such activities are consistent with the general plan and
provisions of this title.
   B.   Applicability: A temporary use permit is required for short term
activities listed in chapter 4, article C, "Temporary Uses", of this title.
   C.   Approving Authority: The designated approving authority for temporary
use permits shall be the planning director.
   D.   Public Hearing And Notice: The issuance of a temporary use permit is an
administrative function of the planning director, and no public hearing or
notice is required.
   E.   Approval Findings: The planning director shall make all of the
following findings to approve or conditionally approve a temporary use permit:
      1.   The use is a temporary use and will be limited to a specific
duration of time, as established in the temporary use permit.
      2.   The use, as described and conditionally approved, will not be
detrimental to the health, safety, or general welfare of persons, property, or
improvements in the vicinity of the proposed use, or to the general welfare of
the city.
      3.   The use, as described and conditionally approved, will not function
or be located in a manner that restricts access to required parking areas.
      4.   Approved measures for the removal of the use and site restoration
have been required to ensure that no changes to the site would limit the range
of possible future land uses otherwise allowed by this title.
      5.   The approval includes provisions to ensure that each site occupied
by a temporary use shall be cleaned of debris, litter, or any other evidence of
the temporary use upon completion or removal of the use.
      6.   The use is consistent with the general plan, applicable specific
plans, and the provisions of this title.
   F.   Conditions Of Approval: The planning director may place conditions on
the temporary use permit, including, but not limited to, buffers, hours of
operation, landscaping and maintenance, lighting, off site improvements,
parking, performance guarantees, property maintenance, signs, surfacing, time
limits, and traffic circulation. Conditions must be deemed reasonable and
necessary to the specific temporary use permit request. (Ord. 2013-05, 2-6-
2014)
9-2B-5: TREE PERMIT FOR TREES ON PRIVATE PROPERTY:
   A.   Purpose: The purpose of a tree permit for trees on private property
(hereinafter referred to as a "tree permit") is to provide a process for the
review and consideration of the removal of protected trees on private property.
The city has a desire to protect trees on private property through the
development review process and require mitigation for the loss of heritage
trees as established in the general plan.
   B.   Applicability: A tree permit shall be required prior to work within the
critical root zone or the cutting down, removal, topping, or relocation of a
protected tree on private property as defined in subsection
9-5D1-4B, "Protected Trees", of this title that are not exempt per subsection
9-5D1-4D of this title.
   C.   Approving Authority: The designated approving authority for tree
permits shall be the planning director.
   D.   Public Hearing And Notice: The issuance of a tree permit is an
administrative function of the planning director, and no public hearing or
notice is required.
   E.   Approval Findings: The planning director shall make all of the
following findings to approve or conditionally approve a tree permit:
      1.   For a development project, every effort has been made to incorporate
the tree(s) into the design of the project and the only appropriate alternative
is the removal of the tree;
      2.   For requests not associated with a development project, the tree
presents a threat to public health and safety and must be removed; and
      3.   The removal of the tree will not have a negative impact on the
health, safety, or viability of surrounding trees, nor will it negatively
impact the aesthetics or general welfare of the surrounding area.
   F.   Mitigation: Mitigation for the loss of the tree as allowed under an
approved tree permit shall be mitigated in accordance with the requirements of
this title, specifically including subsection
9-5D1-4F of this title. (Ord. 2013-05, 2-6-2014)
9-2B-6: REASONABLE ACCOMMODATION:
   A.   Purpose: The purpose of allowing reasonable accommodation is to provide
a process for individuals with disabilities to make requests for reasonable
accommodation for relief from the various provisions of this title. It is the
policy of the city, pursuant to the federal fair housing act (as amended) and
the California fair employment and housing act, to provide persons with
disabilities reasonable accommodation in rules, policies, and procedures that
may be necessary to ensure equal access to housing.
   B.   Requesting Reasonable Accommodation:
      1.   A disabled person or representative may request reasonable
accommodation(s) relating to the various provisions of this title.
      2.   A request for reasonable accommodation(s) with regard to various
provisions of this title may be filed on an application form provided by the
city at the time that the accommodation may be necessary to ensure equal access
to housing.
   C.   Approval Authority:
      1.   The planning director shall have the authority to consider and take
action on requests for reasonable accommodation. The planning director shall
issue a written determination of his or her action within fifteen (15) days of
the date of receipt of a completed application and may:
         a.   Grant or deny the accommodation request; or
         b.   Grant the accommodation request subject to specified
nondiscriminatory condition(s).
      2.   If necessary to reach a determination or action on the request for
reasonable accommodation, the planning director may request further information
from the applicant specifying in detail what information is required. In the
event a request for further information is made, the fifteen (15) day period to
issue a written determination shall be stayed until the applicant fully and
sufficiently responds to the request.
   D.   Considerations: The city may consider, but is not limited to, the
following factors in determining whether the requested accommodation is
necessary to provide one or more individuals with a disability a reasonable
accommodation:
      1.   Whether the requested accommodation will affirmatively enhance the
quality of life of one or more individuals with a disability;
      2.   Whether the individual or individuals with a disability will be
denied an equal opportunity to enjoy the housing type of their choice absent
the accommodation;
      3.   In the case of a residential care facility, whether the requested
accommodation is necessary to make facilities of a similar nature or operation
economically viable in light of the particularities of the relevant market and
market participants;
      4.   In the case of a residential care facility, whether the existing
supply of facilities of a similar nature and operation in the community is
sufficient to provide individuals with a disability an equal opportunity to
live in a residential setting;
      5.   Whether the requested accommodation would fundamentally alter the
character of the neighborhood;
      6.   Whether the accommodation would result in a substantial increase in
traffic or insufficient parking;
      7.   Whether granting the requested accommodation would substantially
undermine any express purpose of either the city's general plan or an
applicable specific plan;
      8.   In the case of a residential care facility, whether the requested
accommodation would create an institutionalized environment due to the number
of and distance between facilities that are similar in nature or operation.
   E.   Approval Findings: In making a determination regarding the
reasonableness of a requested reasonable accommodation, the approving authority
shall make the following findings:
      1.   The subject site of the request for reasonable accommodation will be
used for an individual protected under the fair housing act.
      2.   The request for reasonable accommodation is necessary to make
specific housing available to an individual protected under the fair housing
act.
      3.   The requested reasonable accommodation does not impose an undue
financial or administrative burden on the city and does not fundamentally alter
city zoning, development standards, policies, or procedures.
      4.   The requested accommodation will not result in a fundamental
alteration in the nature of the city's zoning, as "fundamental alteration" is
defined in fair housing laws and interpretive case law.
      5.   The requested accommodation will not, under the specific facts of
the case, result in a direct threat to the health or safety of other
individuals or physical damage to neighboring property. (Ord. 2013-05, 2-6-
2014)
9-2B-7: SIMILAR USE DETERMINATION:
   A.   Purpose And Applicability: All possible land uses may not be listed
within the provisions of this title, and new uses may evolve over time. When a
particular use is not specifically listed in this zoning code the planning
director determines that an official interpretation is needed. The provisions
established in this section allow the approving authority, by formal action, to
determine whether or not a proposed use is similar to a permitted or
conditionally permitted use and whether such proposed use may be permitted in a
particular zoning district.
   B.   Approving Authority: The planning director shall be the designated
approving authority for similar use determinations.
   C.   Public Hearing And Notice: The issuance of a similar use determination
is an administrative function of the planning director, and no public hearing
or notice is required.
   D.   Approval Findings: In determining "substantial similarity", the
approving authority shall make all of the following findings:
      1.   The characteristics of and activities associated with the proposed
use are equivalent to one or more of the listed uses and will not involve a
higher level of activity or population density than the uses listed in the
zoning district (e.g., traffic, hours of operation, intensity of use,
population density);
      2.   The proposed use will be consistent with the purposes of the
applicable zoning district; and
      3.   The proposed use will be consistent with the general plan, any
applicable specific plan, and this zoning code.
   E.   Documentation Of Determinations: Determinations shall be made in
writing and shall contain the facts that support the determination.
   F.   Keeping Of Similar Use Determinations: The planning director shall
maintain a complete record of all similar use determinations available for
public review. (Ord. 2013-05, 2-6-2014)
9-2B-8: OFFICIAL ZONING INTERPRETATION:
   A.   Applicability And Authority To Prepare: Whenever the planning director
determines that an ambiguity in a zoning regulation exists that requires a
formal decision to serve as precedent, or a formal request for an
interpretation is made by an applicant, property owner, or interested party to
the planning director, an official zoning interpretation shall be prepared as
described herein.
   B.   Official Zoning Interpretation Defined; Threshold For Preparation Of
Official Zoning Interpretation: An "official zoning interpretation" is a
recorded decision on the meaning and/or application of the development
standards, allowed use regulations, or other standards contained within this
title.
   C.   Content Of Official Zoning Interpretation: Official zoning
interpretations shall be prepared by the planning director, in writing, and
shall cite the provisions being interpreted, together with any explanation of
the meaning or applicability of the provision(s) in the particular or general
circumstances that caused the need for the interpretation.
   D.   Procedure For Interpretations: Official zoning interpretations shall be
prepared as follows:
      1.   Action By The Planning Director: The planning director shall prepare
an official zoning interpretation within ten (10) days from the date of
request. A copy of the official zoning interpretation shall be provided to the
city manager, city attorney, city council, and to the applicant, property
owner, or interested party requesting the interpretation.
      2.   Referral To The Planning Commission: The planning director may, in
his or her sole discretion, refer a request for an official zoning
interpretation to the planning commission for review and interpretation.
   E.   Keeping Of Official Zoning Interpretations: The planning director shall
maintain a complete record of all official interpretations available for public
review, indexed by the chapter number of this title that is the subject of the
interpretation.
   F.   Codification Of Official Zoning Interpretations: To the extent
practical, official zoning interpretations shall be incorporated into this
title by amendment as soon as is practical. (Ord. 2013-05, 2-6-2014)
9-2B-9: HOME OCCUPATION PERMIT:
   A.   Purpose: The purpose of the home occupation permit is to provide a
process for the review and permitting of home occupations prior to their
establishment.
   B.   Applicability: All home occupations as described in chapter 4, "Land
Uses", of this title shall obtain a home occupation permit prior to the
issuance of a business license and the establishment of the home occupation.
There are two (2) types of home occupation permits as follows:
      1.   Minor Home Occupation Permit: A minor home occupation permit is a
ministerial approval that is conducted to ensure home occupations are conducted
consistent with the development standards of section
9-4D-5, "Home Occupations", of this title.
      2.   Major Home Occupation Permit: A major home occupation permit is
intended for the review and discretionary approval of those home occupations
that may generate more vehicular and pedestrian traffic than a typical
residential use and thereby have the potential to adversely impact the
surrounding residential neighborhood. (Ord. 2013-05, 2-6-2014)
   C.   Approval Authority: The designated approving authority for minor home
occupation permits shall be the planning director. The designated approving
authority for major home occupation permits shall be the planning commission.
(Ord. 2014-06, 10-21-2014)
   D.   Public Notification: The public notification of an application for a
home occupation permit shall be made as follows:
      1.   Minor Home Occupation Permit: Minor home occupation permits are
ministerial in nature. No public notification shall be required.
      2.   Major Home Occupation Permit: Public hearing and notice are required
for a major home occupation permit pursuant to section
9-2A-6, "Public Notice, Hearings, And Decisions", of this chapter.
   E.   Approval Findings: A home occupation permit shall be granted only when
the designated approving authority determines that the proposed home occupation
complies with all of the following findings:
      1.   The proposed home occupation is consistent with the general plan,
any applicable specific plan, and all applicable provisions of this title
(e.g., section
9-4D-5 of this title); and
      2.   The establishment, maintenance, or operation of the home occupation
applied for will not, under the circumstances of the particular case (location,
size, design, and operating characteristics), be detrimental to the health,
safety, peace, morals, comfort, or general welfare of persons residing or
working in the neighborhood of such use or to the general welfare of the city.
   F.   Postapproval Implementation: Requirements for implementation of an
approved home occupation permit shall be provided as follows:
      1.   Minor Home Occupation Permit: A minor home occupation permit is
ministerial in nature. As such, the planning director may not impose conditions
on the issuance of the permit. However, the applicant may be provided with a
list of items necessary for compliance and conformance with this title and the
general plan.
      2.   Major Home Occupation Permit: The designated approving authority may
impose conditions and/or require guarantees in order to ensure compliance with
this title and to prevent adverse or detrimental impact to the surrounding
neighborhood. (Ord. 2013-05, 2-6-2014)
   G.   Appeals: The decision of the minor or major home occupation permit may
be appealed to the city council. A public hearing and notice is required for an
appeal pursuant to section
9-2A-6, "Public Notice, Hearings, And Decisions", of this chapter. If the
permit was denied for not meeting the performance standards in subsection
9-4D-5E of this title, the city council may approve the permit with alternative
performance standards if the following findings are made:
      1.   There are special circumstances applicable to the property (e.g.,
location, shape, size, surroundings, topography, or other conditions), so that
the strict application of the required performance standards for this home
occupation permit is not necessary to preserve the residential nature of the
neighborhood;
      2.   Alternative performance standards that protect and preserve the
residential nature of the neighborhood have been included as conditions of
approval;
      3.   Granting the home occupation will not adversely affect the interest
of the public or the interest of residents and property owners in the vicinity
of the premises in question; and
      4.   The home occupation permit is consistent with the general plan, any
applicable specific plan or development agreement, and the intent of this
title. (Ord. 2014-06, 10-21-2014)
9-2B-10: ADMINISTRATIVE USE PERMIT:
   A.   Purpose: The purpose of an administrative use permit is to allow for
the individual review of land uses having unique or unusual site development
features or operating characteristics to ensure consistency with this title and
the general plan. These land uses benefit from focused, administrative review
outside of the general business license and zoning clearance process.
   B.   Applicability: An administrative use permit is required prior to the
establishment of any use for which an administrative use permit is required by
this title. See section
9-4B-2,
table 9-4B-2, "Allowed Uses And Required Entitlements For Base Zoning
Districts", of this title, which identifies specific land uses that require an
administrative use permit prior to issuance of subsequent permits (e.g.,
building permit, business license). Examples include, but are not limited to,
child daycare facility - family daycare home, large; dwelling, second unit in
the DMX-2 zoning district; dwelling, two-family in the RLD zoning district;
crop production in the RLD zoning district; and assembly uses.
   C.   Approval Authority: The planning director shall be the designated
approving authority for administrative use permits.
   D.   Process: No public hearing or notice is required for an administrative
use permit.
   E.   Approval Findings: An administrative use permit shall be granted only
when the designated approving authority determines that the proposed use or
activity complies with all of the following findings:
      1.   The proposed use is consistent with the general plan, any applicable
specific plans, and all applicable provisions of this title; and
      2.   The establishment, maintenance, or operation of the use applied for
will not, under the circumstances of the particular case (location, size,
design, and operating characteristics), be detrimental to the health, safety,
peace, morals, comfort, or general welfare of persons residing or working in
the neighborhood of such use or to the general welfare of the city.
   F.   Postapproval Implementation: An administrative use permit is
ministerial in nature. As such, the planning director may not impose conditions
on the issuance of the permit. (Ord. 2013-05, 2-6-2014)
9-2B-11: MINOR DEVIATION:
   A.   Purpose: The purpose of the minor deviation is to allow some
flexibility in project design with regard to specific development standards.
   B.   Applicability: To achieve more flexible standards, the designated
approving authority may grant minor deviations to the building height, setback,
lot coverage, and parking provisions, not to exceed ten percent (10%) of the
respective development standards in the underlying zoning district for the
subject parcel. All other deviations require approval of a variance
application. Minor deviations do not apply to the use of property.
   C.   Approval Authority: The designated approving authority for minor
deviations is the planning director.
   D.   Process: No public hearing or notice is required for a minor deviation.
   E.   Approval Findings: A minor deviation shall be granted only when the
designated approving authority makes all of the following findings:
      1.   The deviation(s) improves the site, architectural, and/or overall
project design; and
      2.   The deviation(s) is materially consistent with the project and is
compatible with surrounding uses and structures.
   F.   Postapproval Implementation: A minor deviation is ministerial in
nature. As such, the Planning Director may not impose conditions on the
issuance of the permit. (Ord. 2013-05, 2-6-2014)
9-2B-12: SITE PLAN AND ARCHITECTURAL REVIEW:
   A.   Purpose: The purpose of site plan and architectural review is for the
review of the design and layout of new development in the City to ensure that
it is consistent with the regulations of this title, other relevant titles in
the Lemoore Municipal Code, and all relevant City policies, requirements, and
development standards that would apply to the project prior to the issuance of
subsequent permits, such as discretionary actions required by the City Zoning
Ordinance or City Subdivision Ordinance, improvement plans, and building
permits. It is the intent that site plan and architectural review be a
ministerial action limited to review of the project development project for
conformance with City of Lemoore ordinances, policies, requirements, and
development standards.
   B.   Applicability: Site plan and architectural review shall be required
prior to the issuance of any ministerial building permits or site improvement
plans and prior to any discretionary action of corresponding development
applications (e.g., conditional use permit, variance). Site plan and
architectural review may serve as the preliminary application for housing
development projects seeking vesting rights pursuant to SB 330, the Housing
Crisis Act of 2019.
      1.   Review Required: Site plan and architectural review is required for
all of the following activities:
         a.   New nonresidential or mixed-use developments;
         b.   Nonresidential building additions greater than 1,000 square feet;
         c.   Conceptual plan for a mixed-use center as required by chapter 7,
“Mixed Use Development Standards”, of this title.
         d.   New multi-family residential developments of more than two units
(e.g., apartments, condominiums, townhomes)
         e.   The design and layout of new residential subdivisions as part of
the tentative subdivision map process as provided in title 8, chapter 7, “Land
Division”, of the Municipal Code;
         f.   Demolition or exterior alterations and additions to
nonresidential buildings that are more than seventy five (75) years old.
      2.   Exemptions: The following activities are specifically exempt from
site plan and architectural review:
         a.   Single-family residential homes and duplexes on an existing lot;
         b.   Additions to or the exterior remodels of single-family
residential homes within normal setbacks;
         c.   Accessory structures consistent with the provisions of section
9-4D-18, “Residential Accessory Structures”, of this title;
         d.   Changes to the exterior facade of existing buildings;
         e.   Painting existing buildings in the DMX zoning districts with
historic color palettes as described in subsection
9-6-4C, “Colors And Painting”, of this title;
         f.   Repairs and maintenance to the site or structure that do not add
to, enlarge, or expand the area occupied by the land use, or the floor area of
the structure and that employ the same materials and design as the original
construction;
         g.   Interior alterations that do not increase the gross floor area
within the structure, or change/expand the permitted use of the structure
(including solar collectors); and
         h.   Construction, alteration, or maintenance by a public utility or
public agency of underground or overhead utilities intended to service existing
or nearby approved developments.
         i.   Nonresidential building additions of 1,000 square feet of gross
floor area or less.
   C.   Approval Authority: The designated approval authority for site plan and
architectural design review shall be the Community Development Director.
   D.   Process: The applicant shall provide a completed application on a form
provided by the City, a site plan and, if new non-residential buildings or
multi-family dwellings are proposed, an elevation plan. No public hearing or
notice is required for a site plan and architectural review. Site plan and
architectural review is a ministerial process conducted by City staff to
determine compliance with existing City of Lemoore ordinances, policies,
requirements, and development standards and is therefore exempt from the
requirements of the California Environmental Quality Act (CEQA) per State CEQA
Guidelines Section 15268.
   E.   Approval: A site plan and architectural review permit, or any
modification thereto, shall be granted only when the designated approving
authority finds that the proposed project is consistent with the objectives of
the general plan and complies with applicable zoning regulations, specific plan
provisions, and policies and improvement standards adopted by the City, or that
a general plan amendment or zoning amendment is going to be subsequently
applied for by the developer. If the site plan submitted requires major changes
before this finding can be made, the developer may be required to make changes
and submit the site plan again.
   F.   Post approval Implementation: A site plan and architectural design
review permit is ministerial in nature. As such, the Planning Director may not
impose discretionary conditions on the issuance of the permit. If the proposed
development project requires approval of a discretionary action after
completion of the site and architectural design review process, conditions of
approval can be placed on the discretionary approval.
   G.   Appeals. If the applicant disagrees with the interpretation or
application of a City ordinance, policy, requirement, or development standard,
they may appeal the interpretation per procedures in Section
9-2A-7 and
9-2A-8.
   H.   Expiration. A site plan and architectural design review permit shall
expire one (1) year after issuance unless an application for a related
discretionary approval or a building permit is submitted. Upon written request
by the applicant prior to expiration, the Community Development Director may
extend the expiration for an additional one (1) year. (Ord. 2013-05, 2-6-2014;
amd. Ord. 2018-03, 5-15-2018; Ord. 2023-10, 9-19-2023)
9-2B-13: SIGN PROGRAM:
   A.   Purpose: A sign program provides a process for the City's review of,
and decisions related to, requests for signs for multi-tenant projects. The
intent of a sign program is to allow for the integration of a project's signs
with the design of the structures to achieve a unified architectural statement
and to approve common sign regulations for multi-tenant projects. No deviations
from City sign standards are allowed through a uniform sign program.
   B.   Applicability: A sign program shall be required for all new multi-
tenant shopping centers, office parks, and other multi- tenant, mixed use, or
otherwise integrated developments of three (3) or more separate tenants/uses
that share buildings, public spaces, landscape, and/or parking facilities.
   C.   Specific Application Requirements: As part of the application, the
applicant shall submit a draft sign program that shall include criteria for
building attached signs, freestanding building signs, and the integrated
development itself to establish consistency of sign type, location, center
logo, and/or letter height, lines of copy, illumination, and construction
details of signs for the project.
   D.   Approval Authority: The designated approving authority for sign
programs shall be the planning director.
   E.   Public Hearing And Notice: No public hearing or notice is required for
a sign program.
   F.   Approval Findings: A sign program or revisions thereto may be approved
only when the designated approving authority makes all of the following
findings:
      1.   That the proposed sign program is consistent with the development
standards for signs as provided in chapter 5, article F, "Signage", of this
title; and
      2.   The design, location, and scale of proposed signs for the integrated
development are in keeping with the architectural character of the development.
   G.   Postapproval Implementation: A sign program is ministerial in nature.
As such, the planning director may not impose conditions on the issuance of the
permit. (Ord. 2013-05, 2-6-2014)
9-2B-14: CONDITIONAL USE PERMIT:
   A.   Purpose: The purpose of a conditional use permit is for the individual
review of uses, typically having unique or unusual site development features or
operating characteristics. A use permit is intended to ensure compatibility
with surrounding areas and uses where such uses are deemed essential or
desirable to the various elements or objectives of the general plan.
   B.   Applicability: A conditional use permit is required prior to the
establishment of any use for which a conditional use permit is required by this
title.
   C.   Approval Authority: The planning commission shall be the designated
approving authority for conditional use permits.
   D.   Public Hearing And Notice: Public hearing and notice are required for a
conditional use permit pursuant to section
9-2A-6, "Public Notice, Hearings, And Decisions", of this chapter.
   E.   Approval Findings: A conditional use permit shall be granted only when
the designated approving authority determines that the proposed use or activity
complies with all of the following findings:
      1.   The proposed use is consistent with the general plan, any applicable
specific plans, and all applicable provisions of this title;
      2.   The establishment, maintenance, or operation of the use applied for
will not, under the circumstances of the particular case (location, size,
design, and operating characteristics), be detrimental to the health, safety,
peace, morals, comfort, or general welfare of persons residing or working in
the neighborhood of such use or to the general welfare of the city;
      3.   The site of the proposed use is physically suitable for the type,
density, and intensity of the use and related structures being proposed; and
      4.   It will not be contrary to the specific intent clauses, development
regulations, or performance standards established for the zoning district in
which it is located. The proposed use and related structures are compatible
with other land uses, transportation, and service facilities in the vicinity.
   F.   Conditions Of Approval: The designated approving authority may impose
conditions and/or require guarantees in order to ensure compliance with this
title and to prevent adverse or detrimental impact to the surrounding
neighborhood. (Ord. 2013-05, 2-6-2014)
9-2B-15: MAJOR SITE PLAN AND ARCHITECTURAL REVIEW:
(Rep. by Ord. 2023-10, 9-19-2023)
9-2B-16: VARIANCE:
   A.   Purpose And Applicability: In accordance with California Government
Code section 65906, variances provide relief from the strict application of
development standards and provisions of this title if specified findings can be
made. A variance from the zoning code may not be granted to:
      1.   Allow a land use not otherwise permitted in the zoning district;
      2.   Increase the maximum allowed residential density except as allowed
by state law;
      3.   Waive or reduce parking requirements by more than thirty percent
(30%); or
      4.   Waive or modify a procedural requirement.
   B.   Approving Authority: The designated approving authority for a variance
shall be the planning commission. The planning director provides a
recommendation and the planning commission approves, conditionally approves, or
denies the variance in accordance with the requirements of this title.
   C.   Public Hearing And Notice: Public hearing and notice are required for a
variance pursuant to section
9-2A-6, "Public Notice, Hearings, And Decisions", of this chapter.
   D.   Approval Findings: The approving authority may approve and/or modify
any variance application in whole or in part, with or without conditions, only
if the applicant can demonstrate that the circumstances of their particular
case can justify making all of the following findings:
      1.   There are special circumstances applicable to the property (e.g.,
location, shape, size, surroundings, topography, or other conditions), so that
the strict application of this zoning code denies the property owner privileges
enjoyed by other property owners in the vicinity and within the same zoning
district;
      2.   Granting the variance is necessary for the preservation and
enjoyment of substantial property rights enjoyed by other property owners in
the same vicinity and zoning district and denied to the property owner for
which the variance is sought;
      3.   Granting the variance will not adversely affect the interests of the
public or the interests of residents and property owners in the vicinity of the
premises in question; and
      4.   The variance is consistent with the general plan, any applicable
specific plan or development agreement, and the intent of this title.
   E.   Conditions Of Approval: In approving a variance, the designated
approving authority:
      1.   Shall impose conditions to ensure that the variance does not grant
special privileges inconsistent with the limitation on other properties in the
vicinity and the zoning district in which the property is located;
      2.   May impose any reasonable conditions (e.g., the placement, height of
structures, buffers, landscaping and maintenance, off site improvements,
performance guarantees, screening, surfacing, hours of operation) to ensure
that the approval complies with the findings required by this section. (Ord.
2013-05, 2-6-2014)
9-2B-17: PUBLIC CONVENIENCE OR NECESSITY:
   A.   Purpose And Applicability: Pursuant to section 23958.4 of the Business
And Professions Code the purpose of this section is to establish a procedure
for processing and considering requests for determinations of public
convenience or necessity for issuance of such licenses.
Any person whose application for any alcohol license is subject to a
determination of public convenience or necessity by the city pursuant to
section 23958.4 of the Business And Professions Code shall submit an
application to the city for a determination whether or not the public
convenience and necessity would be served by the granting of such license.
   B.   Approving Authority: Determinations of whether public convenience or
necessity would be served by issuance of those alcoholic beverage licenses
specified in paragraph (b)(2) of section 23958.4 of the Business And
Professions Code shall be made by the planning commission.
   C.   Process: A public hearing before the designated approving authority
shall be required prior to determining if the application provides for the
public convenience or necessity. Notice of the hearing shall be provided as
described in section
9-2A-6, "Public Notice, Hearings, And Decisions", of this chapter.
   D.   Review Of Applications: The designated approving authority shall review
the application, along with all information submitted by the applicant, as well
as the recommendations of the chief of police, the planning director, and other
departments of the city. The designated approving authority shall consider all
other relevant documents and other written information submitted by the
applicant or other interested persons, shall receive, hear and consider
relevant oral and written testimony by the applicant and other interested
persons; and shall consider any other information, including, without
limitation, written or oral testimony, that the designated approving authority
deems necessary to make the determination of public convenience or necessity.
(Ord. 2013-05, 2-6-2014)
9-2B-18: HIGHWAY ORIENTED SIGN PERMIT:
   A.   Purpose: The purpose of the highway oriented sign permit is to provide
a process for the review approval of commercial signs that are oriented to the
highway as defined in this title. The intent of review is to ensure that the
siting, size, and design of a highway oriented sign is in keeping with the
character of the surrounding environment, that it does not create an unsafe
condition for motorists, and that it does not create a public nuisance.
   B.   Applicability: A highway oriented sign permit shall be obtained prior
to the establishment of a "highway oriented sign" as defined in this title and
as provided in chapter 5, article F, "Signage", of this title.
   C.   Approval Authority: The designated approving authority for a highway
oriented sign permit is the planning director.
   D.   Public Hearing And Notice: A public hearing is not required for this
permit.
   E.   Approval Findings: In approving a highway oriented sign permit, the
designated approving authority shall make all of the following findings:
      1.   The proposed sign is consistent with the general plan and all
applicable provisions of this title;
      2.   The establishment, maintenance, or operation of the highway oriented
sign will not, under the circumstances of the particular case (location, size,
design, and operating characteristics), be detrimental to the health, safety,
peace, morals, comfort, or general welfare of persons residing or working in
the neighborhood of such use, or the general welfare of the city;
      3.   Should the applicant request, and the approving authority grant,
additional height beyond that allowed in subsection
9-5F-5D, "Highway Oriented Signs", of this title to a maximum of eighty feet
(80'), the approving authority shall also make the following additional
findings:
         a.   That the additional height is necessary to ensure safe viewing
from the highway; and
         b.   That approval of the additional height will not be contrary to
the specific intent of the signage regulations established in chapter 5,
article F, "Signage", of this title.
      4.   Should the applicant request, and the approving authority grant, a
reduced spacing of signs than that required in subsection
9-5F-5D, "Highway Oriented Signs", of this title, the approving authority shall
also make the following additional finding:
         a.   The reduced distance between highway oriented signs will not
cause a safety impact or create sign clutter contrary to a small town
atmosphere. (Ord. 2013-05, 2-6-2014)
9-2B-19: PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENT:
   A.   Purpose: The purpose of the planned unit development is to provide a
process to allow diversity in the relationship between buildings and open
spaces to create interesting physical environments and to maximize the
development potential of underutilized or problematic land areas. This land use
entitlement is intended to demonstrate that the development plan with any
proposed deviations is consistent with the general plan and will result in a
quality project that is compatible with surroundings, preserves site resources,
minimizes hazards, and provides a public benefit.
   B.   Applicability: To qualify for a planned unit development designation,
projects must include developed or undeveloped property with one or more
contiguous parcels totaling a minimum of two (2) acres in size. Projects of
less than two (2) acres may be considered when determined that the development
area is underutilized (e.g., infill, reuse, redevelopment) and that the
surrounding area will be better served by the project.
   C.   Approving Authority: The designated approving authority for a planned
unit development is the planning commission.
   D.   Public Hearing And Notice: Public hearing and notice are required for
adoption and amendments to planned unit developments pursuant to section
9-2A-6, "Public Notice, Hearings, And Decisions", of this chapter.
   E.   Deviations From Development Standards: The approving authority may
grant requests to deviate from the development standards (e.g., minimum lot
area, yard requirements, building heights), but shall not grant exceptions to
the allowed land use or density of the base zoning district. Physical
development standards may be modified if the plan includes examples of superior
design, environmental preservation, and public benefit amenities, and the
approving authority makes all of the required findings herein.
   F.   Approval Findings: The approving authority shall make the following
findings to approve a planned unit development application:
      1.   The proposed project does not exceed the total density allowed under
the base zoning district or the general plan land use designation.
      2.   The proposed project shall not be substantially detrimental to
adjacent property, and will not materially impair the purposes of this title or
the public interest.
   G.   Delineation Of Planned Unit Development Areas: On the zoning map, a
planned unit development shall be delineated as an overlay zoning district and
shall be listed in this title as provided in chapter 9, article B, "Planned
Unit Development (PUD) Overlay Zoning Districts", of this title. (Ord. 2013-05,
2-6-2014)
9-2B-20: SPECIFIC PLAN:
   A.   Purpose: The purpose of a specific plan is to provide a vehicle for
implementing the city's general plan on an area specific basis. The specific
plan is intended to serve as a regulatory document, consistent with the general
plan. In the event there is an inconsistency or conflict between an adopted
specific plan and comparable provisions of this title, the specific plan shall
prevail. This section is consistent with California Government Code section
65450 et seq. This section describes the process for adopting and amending
specific plans, and approving subsequent development under a specific plan.
   B.   Applicability: The city's general plan encourages preparation of
specific plans and identifies certain areas of the city which require specific
plans for development. Specific plan zoning may be considered for other areas
of the city.
   C.   Approval Authority: The designated approving authority for specific
plans or amendments to specific plans is the city council.
   D.   Specific Application Requirements: In addition to the minimum content
requirements of California Government Code section 65451, the specific plan
application shall include the following items:
      1.   Statement of the relationship of the specific plan to the general
plan;
      2.   Policies for development and standards for regulating development
within the plan area;
      3.   The proposed land uses for all areas covered by the plan;
      4.   The types and configurations of buildings to be included in all
developments within the plan area;
      5.   The location of and types of streets;
      6.   Public facilities and infrastructure required to serve developments
within the specific plan area;
      7.   A parking and circulation plan for off street parking areas showing
the location of parking lots, the approximate number of spaces, and the
approximate location of entrances and exits;
      8.   Proposed conservation, open space, and/or recreation areas, if any;
and
      9.   Any other programs, guidelines, or standards appropriate for the
area covered by the plan.
   E.   Public Hearing And Notice: Public hearing and notice are required for a
specific plan pursuant to section
9-2A-6, "Public Notice, Hearings, And Decisions", of this chapter.
   F.   Approval Findings: Specific plans and any amendment thereto shall be
approved only when the city council makes all of the following findings:
      1.   Is consistent with the objectives, policies, and general land uses
specified in the general plan;
      2.   Is compatible and in conformity with public convenience, general
welfare, and good land use and zoning practice;
      3.   Will not be detrimental to the health, safety, and general welfare
of the city;
      4.   Will not adversely affect the orderly development of property or the
preservation of property values.
   G.   Adoption: Adoption of the specific plan shall be by ordinance of the
city council and shall constitute final action and approval of the specific
plan. Authorization for construction in accordance with the specific plan may
only be granted after the effective date of the adoption.
   H.   Designation: Specific plans shall be delineated on the zoning map in a
manner similar to that of any other zoning district, except that each specific
plan zoned area shall also bear a name, number, symbol, or other delineation,
as determined by the planning director, which distinguishes it from other
specific plan zones, base zoning districts, or overlay zones. The assignment of
the specific plan zone designation serves to provide a reference to the
corresponding specific plan zoning document adopted by ordinance of the city
council. Applicable zoning regulations and standards applicable to the land
area are provided in the specific plan zones document, as adopted by reference
in this title.
   I.   Application Of Specific Plan Development Requirements: Where conditions
of the specific plan differ from the zoning code development standards, the
conditions of the specific plan shall apply. Where a standard is not addressed
in the specific plan, the zoning code shall apply. (Ord. 2013-05, 2-6-2014)
9-2B-21: DEVELOPMENT AGREEMENT:
   A.   Purpose: This section establishes procedures and requirements for the
review and approval of development agreements when applied for as part of a
land use entitlement in compliance with the provisions of California Government
Code sections 65864 through 65869.5.
   B.   Applicability Of Regulations: Only a qualified applicant, a person who
has legal or equitable interest in the real property which is the subject of
the development agreement (or his or her authorized agent), may submit an
application for a development agreement.
   C.   Approving Authority: The designated approving authority for development
agreements is the city council.
   D.   Flexibility Of Development Regulations: To the extent permitted by law,
any development agreement if adopted by the city may modify development rules,
regulations, and policies governing permitted uses of land and density, and
governing design, improvements, construction standards and specifications, and
phasing applicable to development of the property involved in the agreement.
Nothing contained in these regulations shall prevent the developer or the city
from proceeding with normal tentative map or final map processes on any phase
of a development which is the subject of a development agreement at any time
during its term.
   E.   Application Contents: The contents of a development agreement shall be
as set forth in Government Code sections 65865.2, 65867.5(c) if applicable, and
65868.5.
   F.   Public Hearing And Notice: Public hearing and notice are required for a
development agreement pursuant to section
9-2A-6, "Public Notice, Hearings, And Decisions", of this chapter.
   G.   Approval Findings: A development agreement may only be granted when the
city council makes all of the following findings specifying that the
development agreement:
      1.   Is consistent with the objectives, policies, and general land uses
specified in the general plan and any applicable specific plans;
      2.   Is compatible and in conformity with public convenience, general
welfare, and good land use and zoning practice;
      3.   Will not be detrimental to the health, safety, and general welfare
of the city;
      4.   Will not adversely affect the orderly development of property or the
preservation of property values.
   H.   Amendment And Cancellation Of Agreement: Any party to the agreement may
propose an amendment to or cancellation in whole or part of the development
agreement, the procedure for which is the same as the procedure for entering
into the agreement initially. Notice of intention to amend or cancel any
portion of the development agreement shall be given as provided in section
9-2A-6, "Public Notice, Hearings, And Decisions", of this chapter.
   I.   Recordation: Within ten (10) days after the city enters into the
development agreement or any amendment thereof, the city clerk shall cause the
agreement or amendment to be recorded with the county recorder. Additionally,
the city clerk shall be the official custodian of the development agreement
file. Said file shall include an executed copy of the agreement and the
originals of all exhibits, reports of periodic review, amendments, and/or
cancellations to the development agreement.
   J.   Periodic Review: The planning director shall review the development
agreement every twelve (12) months from the date the development agreement is
entered into and provide a written report to the city council. The applicant
shall provide necessary information verifying good faith compliance with the
terms of the development agreement. The applicant shall also bear the cost of
such review in accordance with the fee established by city council resolution.
If the planning director finds that any aspect of the development project is
not in good faith compliance with the terms of the development agreement, the
planning director may schedule the matter before the appropriate approving
authority for review for possible amendment or revocation. (Ord. 2013-05, 2-6-
2014)
9-2B-22: ZONING AMENDMENT:
   A.   Purpose: The purpose of a zoning amendment is to allow modification to
any provisions of this title (including the adoption of new regulations or
deletion of existing regulations), or to rezone or change the zoning
designation on the zoning map for any parcel(s). This section is consistent
with California Government Code section 65853.
   B.   Approval Authority: The designated approving authority for zoning
amendments is the city council.
   C.   Initiation Of Amendment: A zoning amendment to this title may be
initiated by motion of the planning commission or city council, or by
application by property owner(s) of parcel(s) to be affected by zoning
amendment. When an application is filed by a property owner (or authorized
representative), the submittal requirements for applications of subsection
9-2A-5A, "Application Contents", of this chapter shall be observed. This
includes a completed application on a form as prescribed by the planning
director, any required information listed on the application form for the type
of permit, an application fee as established by city council resolution, and
any other relevant information as may be requested by the planning director in
order to provide the designated approving authority with adequate information
on which to base a decision.
   D.   Public Hearing And Notice: Public hearing and notice are required for a
zoning amendment pursuant to section
9-2A-6, "Public Notice, Hearings, And Decisions", of this chapter.
   E.   Approval Findings: Zoning amendments shall be granted only when the
city council finds that the zoning amendment (text or map) is consistent with
the general plan goals, policies, and implementation programs.
   F.   Adoption: Adoption of the zoning amendment by ordinance of the city
council shall constitute final action and approval of the amendment.
Authorization for construction or occupancy in accordance with the amendment
may only be granted upon or after the effective date of the action. (Ord. 2013-
05, 2-6-2014)
9-2B-23: PREZONING:
   A.   Purpose: The purpose of prezoning is to establish the designation of
land use by zoning district for unincorporated property adjoining the City,
within the sphere of influence, prior to annexation.
   B.   Process: The method of accomplishing prezoning shall be the same as for
zoning amendment as provided in section
9-2B-22, "Zoning Amendment", of this article. Such zoning shall become
effective at the time annexation becomes effective. (Ord. 2013-05, 2-6-2014)
9-2B-24: GENERAL PLAN AMENDMENT:
   A.   Purpose: The purpose of a general plan amendment is to allow for
modifications to the general plan text (e.g., goals, policies, or
implementation programs) or to change the general plan land use designation on
any parcel(s).
   B.   Approval Authority: The designated approving authority for general plan
amendments is the City Council.
   C.   Frequency Of Amendment: There is no limit to the frequency of
amendments to the general plan.
   D.   Initiation Of Amendment: A general plan amendment may be initiated by
the Planning Commission or City Council, or by application by property owner(s)
of parcel(s) to be affected by the general plan amendment. When an application
is filed by a property owner (or authorized representative), the submittal
requirements for applications of subsection
9-2A-5A, "Application Contents", of this chapter shall be observed. This
includes a completed application on a form as prescribed by the Planning
Director, any required information listed on the application form for the type
of permit, an application fee as established by City Council resolution, and
any other relevant information as may be requested by the Planning Director in
order to provide the designated approving authority with adequate information
on which to base a decision.
   E.   Public Hearing And Notice: The City shall provide notice and a public
hearing for the approval, modification, revocation, or appeal of an application
for a general plan amendment in accordance with section
9-2A-6, "Public Notice, Hearings, And Decisions", of this chapter.
   F.   Approval Findings: The City Council may approve a general plan
amendment upon finding that the amendment is in the public interest and that
the general plan as amended will remain internally consistent.
   G.   Adoption: Adoption of the general plan amendment by the City Council
shall constitute final action and approval of the amendment. (Ord. 2013-05, 2-
6-2014)
9-2B-25: SENATE BILL 35 COMPLIANCE PROCEDURES:
As an alternative to the procedures in this chapter, a developer may request
approval through the streamlined ministerial approval process provided for in
California Senate Bill 35, (SB 35), filed with the Secretary of State on
September 29, 2017. A developer making such a request shall submit the
necessary information set forth in subdivision (a) of Government Code section
65913.4, or any other relevant code section thereto, to determine that the
project is not excluded from the SB 35 streamlining process. Should such
information be provided, the project shall be approved pursuant to the process
set forth in subdivisions (b) and (c) of Government Code section 65913.4, or
any other relevant code section thereto. (Ord. 2018-03, 5-15-2018)
ARTICLE C. NONCONFORMING USES, STRUCTURES, AND PROPERTIES
SECTION:
9-2C-1: Purpose And Applicability
9-2C-2: Declaration Of Nonconforming
9-2C-3: Continuation
9-2C-4: Maintenance
9-2C-5: Modification And Expansion
9-2C-6: Abandonment Or Discontinuance Of Nonconforming Use
9-2C-7: Restoration Of Damaged Uses And Structures
9-2C-8: Nonconforming Signs
9-2C-1: PURPOSE AND APPLICABILITY:
This article establishes special regulations for nonconforming land uses and
structures that were lawful before the adoption or amendment of this zoning
code, but which would be prohibited, regulated, or restricted differently under
the current terms of this zoning code or future amendments. It is the intent of
these regulations to allow the continuation of nonconformities under limited
conditions outlined herein and reconstruction in the event of natural disaster.
(Ord. 2013-05, 2-6-2014)
9-2C-2: DECLARATION OF NONCONFORMING:
   A.   Nonconforming Use: Any use that is not permitted under the provisions
of this title (or any amendments thereto) but was legally in place, with
licenses and permits in current status, at the effective date of the ordinance
codified in this article or any subsequent ordinance, shall be deemed to be a
nonconforming use.
   B.   Nonconforming Structure: Any structure, including signs, that is not
permitted under the provisions of this title (or any amendments thereto) but
was legally in place, with licenses and permits in current status, at the
effective date of the ordinance codified in this article or any subsequent
ordinance, shall be deemed to be a nonconforming structure.
   C.   Nonconforming Property: Any property or lot that is less than the
minimum lot size required by this title, or has less than the minimum lot
dimensions required by this title, shall be deemed to be a nonconforming
property.
   D.   Legally Nonconforming: A use, structure, or property shall be deemed to
be legal nonconforming if the use, structure, or property was legally
established prior to the change in this title that made it nonconforming. (Ord.
2013-05, 2-6-2014)
9-2C-3: CONTINUATION:
   A.   Use: A nonconforming use may continue to operate in perpetuity, be
transferred, or be sold, provided that the use shall not be enlarged or
intensified, nor be expanded to occupy a greater area than it lawfully occupied
before becoming nonconforming. Likewise, plans for any use approved as of the
date the ordinance codified in this chapter becomes effective may be carried
out as approved. Any extension of such approval for which the applicant was
entitled to apply as of the effective date may be granted according to the
regulations in effect prior to the effective date; if granted, such extension
will be considered the same as an approval granted before the effective date.
The person asserting the nonconforming use must present evidence that the use
existed before the enactment of the zoning code provision prohibiting the use.
   B.   Structure: A structure lawfully occupying a site on the effective date
of this title, or of amendments hereto, which does not conform with the
standards of coverage, front yard, side yards, rear yard, or distances between
structures prescribed in the regulations for the district in which the
structure is located shall be deemed to be a nonconforming structure and may be
used and maintained, except as otherwise provided in this article.
   C.   Property: Except as otherwise provided in this article, a property or
site having an area, frontage, width, or depth less than the minimum prescribed
for the district in which the site is located, which is shown on a duly
approved and recorded subdivision map, or for which a deed or valid contract of
sale was of record prior to the adoption of this title, and which had a legal
area, frontage, width, and depth at the time that the subdivision map, deed, or
contract of sale was recorded, may be used for any permitted use listed for the
district in which the site is located, but shall be subject to all other
regulations for such district. (Ord. 2013-05, 2-6-2014)
9-2C-4: MAINTENANCE:
A nonconforming structure or site may be maintained or improved as follows:
   A.   Maintenance And Repair: A nonconforming structure may be maintained and
repaired. Maintenance may include repair work necessary to keep the building or
structure in sound condition, but maintenance shall not include the replacement
of a building or structure.
   B.   Seismic Retrofitting And Building Code Compliance: Repairs,
alterations, or reconstruction to reinforce unreinforced masonry structures or
to comply with building code requirements shall be allowed, provided that the
work is exclusively to comply with applicable earthquake safety standards and
the building code.
   C.   Safety Improvements: Structural alteration of a nonconforming structure
to improve safety or to reduce fire hazard. (Ord. 2013-05, 2-6-2014)
9-2C-5: MODIFICATION AND EXPANSION:
   A.   Use: A nonconforming use shall not be expanded or modified.
   B.   Structure: No nonconforming structure shall be altered, enlarged or
reconstructed so as to increase the discrepancy between existing conditions and
the standards of coverage, front yard, side yards, rear yard, height of
structure, or distances between structures prescribed in the regulations for
the district in which the structure is located. No nonconforming structure
shall be moved unless the new location shall conform to the standards
prescribed in the regulations prescribed for the district in which the
structure is located. (Ord. 2013-05, 2-6-2014)
9-2C-6: ABANDONMENT OR DISCONTINUANCE OF NONCONFORMING USE:
   A.   Abandonment Or Discontinuance Generally: Whenever a nonconforming use
has become abandoned or discontinued for a continuous period of twelve (12)
months, the nonconforming use shall not be reestablished and the use of the
site or structure thereafter shall be in conformity with the regulations for
the district in which it is located; provided, however, that a similar type
nonconforming use may be established within the twelve (12) month period. A
determination that a use has been abandoned requires both: 1) evidence of an
intention to abandon, and 2) an act or failure to act which shows or implies
that the owner does not continue to claim or retain an interest in the
nonconforming use. Evidence may include, but is not limited to, removal of
equipment, furniture, machinery, structures, or other components of the
nonconforming use, disconnected or discontinued utilities, or no business
records to document continued operation. Maintenance of a valid business
license shall of itself not be considered a continuation of the use. Without
further action by the city, any subsequent use of the site or structure shall
comply with all of the regulations of the applicable zoning district and all
other applicable provisions of this zoning code.
It is the intent of this section to prohibit the addition of a new
nonconforming use with functions and characteristics which clearly are
different from those of the preexisting nonconforming use. The term "similar
type" means similarity in type and intensity of operations or activities and
shall not be construed so as to allow uses which would be more incompatible
with conforming uses within the vicinity. As examples, one type of business use
may be permitted to replace another type of business use, and one type of
contracting service may be allowed to replace another type of contracting
service; provided, that such uses are of same or less general intensity as to
traffic generation and other operational characteristics associated with the
previous nonconforming use.
   B.   Extension Of Residential Uses In Nonresidential Zoning Districts: The
city recognizes that there are existing single- family residential uses in
nonresidential zoning districts. It is the intent of the city that, in the
future, property owners will proceed with development of their property
consistent with the general plan and this title at such time as they choose.
Until such time, should an existing legal nonconforming single-family
residential dwelling in a nonresidential zoning district become vacated for
more than twelve (12) months, the dwelling may be reoccupied upon issuance of a
temporary use permit as provided in section
9-2B-4, "Temporary Use Permit", of this chapter.
   C.   Extension Of Nonconforming Period: A legal nonconforming use may be
reestablished after twelve (12) months of discontinuance upon approval of a
conditional use permit as provided in section
9-2B-14, "Conditional Use Permit", of this chapter. Approval of the conditional
use permit shall be conditioned upon the physical improvement of the property
to bring it into conformance with the requirements of the general plan and this
title, including, but not limited to, necessary right of way dedications and
streetscape improvements. (Ord. 2013-05, 2-6-2014)
9-2C-7: RESTORATION OF DAMAGED USES AND STRUCTURES:
Whenever a nonconforming use or a nonconforming structure is damaged or
destroyed by fire or other calamity, or by an act of God, or by public enemy,
the following standards shall apply. The extent of damage to any structure
shall be determined by the building official and shall be based upon the ratio
of the estimated cost of restoring the use or structure to its condition prior
to such damage to the estimated cost of duplicating the entire structure as it
existed prior thereto.
   A.   Less Than Seventy Five Percent Damage: To the extent that less than
seventy five percent (75%) of the structure is damaged or destroyed, the
structure may be restored and the nonconforming use may be resumed, provided
that restoration is started within one year and diligently pursued to
completion.
   B.   At Least Seventy Five Percent Damage: To the extent that seventy five
percent (75%) or more of the structure is damaged or destroyed, or shall be
voluntarily razed, or shall be required by law to be razed, the structure shall
not be restored except in full conformity with the regulations for the district
in which it is located, and the nonconforming structure or use shall not be
resumed. (Ord. 2013-05, 2-6-2014)
9-2C-8: NONCONFORMING SIGNS:
Standards for nonconforming signs are provided in subsection
9-5F-2E, "Nonconforming Signs", of this title. (Ord. 2013-05, 2-6-2014)
CHAPTER 3
ZONING DISTRICTS AND MAP
SECTION:
9-3-1: Purpose
9-3-2: Zoning Districts Established
9-3-3: Map Established
9-3-1: PURPOSE:
This chapter establishes the framework of zoning districts within the city of
Lemoore and their relationships to the city's general plan land use categories.
This chapter also establishes the zoning map as the official designation of
zoning district boundaries. (Ord. 2013-05, 2-6-2014)
9-3-2: ZONING DISTRICTS ESTABLISHED:
Zoning districts are established in order to classify, regulate, designate, and
distribute the uses of land and buildings; to regulate and restrict the height
and bulk of buildings; to regulate the area of yards and other open spaces
around buildings; and to regulate the density of population.
The city of Lemoore is divided into zoning districts that are grouped into two
(2) categories: a) base zoning districts, and b) overlay zoning districts.
These districts conform to and implement the city’s general plan land use
categories as described in table
9-3-2, “Zoning Districts”, of this section. Chapter 4, “Land Uses”, of this
title identifies the allowed uses and requirements for planning entitlements.
Chapter 5, article B, “Development Standards By Zoning District”, of this title
identifies development standards unique to each zoning district.
   A.   Base Zoning Districts: The base zoning district is the primary zoning
district that applies to a property. Every parcel throughout the city has a
base zoning district that establishes the primary land use type, density,
intensity, and site development regulations. Base districts are grouped into
five (5) categories as follows:
      1.   Residential zoning districts;
      2.   Special purpose zoning districts;
      3.   Mixed use zoning districts;
      4.   Office, commercial, and industrial zoning districts; and
      5.   Specific plan zoning districts.
   B.   Overlay Zoning Districts: The overlay zoning districts function to
supplement the base zoning district for one or more of the following purposes:
      1.   To allow more flexibility from the standard provisions of the
underlying base zone;
      2.   When special provisions are needed to protect unique site features
or implement location specific provisions; and/or
      3.   To specify a particular standard or guideline for an area.
   In the event of a conflict between the regulations of the base zoning
district and the overlay zoning district, the provisions of the overlay zoning
district shall apply.
TABLE 9-3-2
ZONING DISTRICTS
                       Zoning District Name/ General Plan Land Use
Zoning District Symbol Description           Designation Implemented By
                                             Zoning District
                       Zoning District Name/       General Plan Land Use
Zoning District Symbol Description                 Designation Implemented By
                                                   Zoning District
Residential zoning districts:
                       Agriculture and rural
                       residential. This district
                       is designated for single-
                       family detached residential
                       development in areas with
                       rural and semirural
                       characteristics. Parcel
AR                     sizes are greater than      Agriculture/rural
                       40,000 square feet.         residential
                       Residential density is
                       typically provided at 0.05
                       unit per gross acre (1 unit
                       per 20 acres), with a
                       maximum density of 0.2 unit
                       per gross acre (1 unit per
                       5 acres).
                       Very low density
                       residential. This district
                       is designated to provide
                       transition between
                       semirural residential and
                       single-family detached
RVLD                   residential areas. Lot      Very low density residential
                       sizes are between 10,000
                       and 40,000 square feet.
                       Residential density for
                       this designation ranges
                       from a minimum of 1 to a
                       maximum 3 units per gross
                       acre.
                       Low density residential.
                       This district is designated
                       for single-family
                       residential subdivisions at
RLD                    a range from a minimum of 3 Low density residential
                       to a maximum of 7 units per
                       gross acre. Lot sizes range
                       from 5,000 to 15,000 square
                       feet.
                       Traditional neighborhood
                       residential. This district
                       is designated for older,
                       historic neighborhoods in
                       central Lemoore and new
                       development that is
                       designed with similar
                       characteristics.
                       Development features
                       single-family residential
                       homes at a density range
RN                     from a minimum of 7 to a    Low-medium density
                       maximum of 12 units per     residential
                       gross acre with lot sizes
                       between a minimum of 3,000
                       and a maximum of 7,500
                       square feet. The fronts of
                       homes are typically
                       accessed from the public
                       street, while garages and
                       services (e.g., trash) are
                       accessed from the rear of
                       the lot via a public or
                       private alley.
                       Low-medium density
                       residential. This district
                       is designated for higher
                       density single-family
                       residential development
                       including small lot single-
                       family, attached single-
                       family and duplexes,        Low-medium density
RLMD                   triplexes, fourplexes, and  residential
                       townhomes. Typical
                       residential density for
                       this designation ranges
                       from a minimum of 7 to a
                       maximum of 12 units per
                       gross acre. The lot sizes
                       range from 3,000 to 7,000
                       square feet.
                       Medium density residential.
                       This district is designated
                       for multi-family
                       residential development,
                       including apartments and
                       townhomes. Development is
                       typically 2 and sometimes 3
RMD                    stories, with balconies,    Medium density residential
                       common area open space, and
                       shared amenities.
                       Residential densities range
                       from a minimum of 12 to a
                       maximum of 17 units per
                       gross acre. Lot size to
                       unit ratio is between 2,000
                       and 3,600 square feet.
                       High density residential.
                       This zoning district is
                       designated for multi-family
                       apartments and condominium
                       development. Residential
                       densities range from a
RHD                    minimum of 17 to a maximum  High density residential
                       of 25 units per gross acre.
                       High density residential
                       development is best suited
                       along arterials and around
                       the downtown. Lot size to
                       unit ratio is between 1,700
                       and 2,500 square feet.
Special purpose zoning districts:
                       Wetlands. This district is
                       designated for the
                       preservation and protection
                       of existing and recreated
                       wetland areas; for the
W                      protection of wildlife,     Wetlands
                       hydrological, and
                       biological resources; and
                       for the preservation of
                       open space lands and
                       natural protection areas.
                       Agricultural. This district
                       is designated solely for
                       agricultural activities
AG                     (e.g., crop production,     Agricultural
                       animal keeping) on parcels
                       larger than 40,000 square
                       feet.
                       Parks and recreation/
                       ponding basin. This
                       district is designated for
                       improved and unimproved
                       park facilities, including
                       neighborhood, community,
                       and regional parks; public  Parks/recreation greenway/
PR                     golf courses; and           detention basin
                       recreational facilities
                       that provide visual open
                       space and serve the outdoor
                       recreational needs of the
                       community. Also includes
                       ponding basins and other
                       drainage facilities.
                       Public services and
                       community facilities. This
                       district is designated for
                       lands owned by public
                       entities, including
CF                     schools, administrative     Community facilities
                       offices, corporation yards,
                       and public facilities,
                       including trash collection
                       and solid waste facilities,
                       sewage treatment ponds, and
                       fire stations.
Mixed use zoning districts:
                       Downtown mixed use, core.
                       This district comprises the
                       historical center of the
                       downtown. The district is
                       designated for retail,
                       commercial, professional
                       office, personal services,
                       second story residential,
DMX- 1                 public, and institutional   Mixed use
                       uses. Retail, restaurant,
                       and personal service uses
                       are generally the primary
                       use at the site. Where
                       there is residential
                       development, densities
                       range between 12 and 20
                       units per gross acre.
                       Downtown mixed use, auto
                       oriented. This district
                       comprises the area of the
                       downtown more oriented
                       around the use of the
                       automobile. The district is
                       designated to facilitate
                       the natural transition of   Mixed use, low density
                       the existing structures and residential, low-medium
                       uses to more intensive uses density residential,
DMX- 2                 at the desire of the        neighborhood commercial,
                       property owner. This        professional office, light
                       district allows for retail, industrial, community
                       commercial, professional    facilities
                       office, high density
                       residential or live/work
                       studios, public, and
                       institutional uses. Where
                       there is residential
                       development, densities
                       range between 12 and 17
                       units per gross acre.
                       Downtown mixed use,
                       transitional. This district
                       comprises a combination of
                       light office and low to
                       medium density residential
                       uses. The district is
                       designated for a
                       continuation of the current
                       design pattern with
                       enhancements in the level
                       of architectural design and
                       detailing. The DMX-3 zone
                       completes the transition    Mixed use, low density
                       from the downtown to the    residential, low-medium
DMX- 3                 surrounding residential     density residential,
                       properties by utilizing     professional office,
                       some of the building siting community facilities
                       qualities of the adjacent
                       residential development.
                       This district allows for
                       professional office and
                       medium density residential,
                       with small scale support
                       commercial uses, as well as
                       bed and breakfast. Where
                       there is residential
                       development, densities
                       range between 3 and 17
                       units per gross acre.
                       Mixed use. This district is
                       designated to provide for
                       retail, residential,
                       office, business and
                       personal services, public,
                       and institutional uses in
                       neighborhood oriented
                       centers in a variety of
                       mixed use configurations,
                       such as ground floor
MU                     commercial with residential Mixed use
                       or office uses above, or
                       collocation of buildings
                       with different single uses
                       on a contiguous mixed use
                       area. Development is
                       pedestrian oriented to
                       enhance street life and the
                       vibrancy of neighborhoods.
                       Residential density ranges
                       from 8 to 20 units per
                       gross acre.
Office, commercial, and industrial zoning districts:
                       Neighborhood commercial.
                       This district is designated
                       for small scale commercial
                       uses that primarily provide
                       convenience, personal
                       services, and social
                       services such as small
NC                     scale retail, eating and    Neighborhood commercial
                       drinking establishments,
                       commercial recreation, and
                       professional office as a
                       secondary use. It is
                       designed to foster a
                       pedestrian setting along
                       public streets.
                       Regional commercial. This
                       district is designated for
                       large scale commercial
                       development that serves
                       local and regional needs.
                       Sites are easily accessible
RC                     from freeways and may       Regional commercial
                       contain a variety of goods
                       and services, such as large
                       format retail, department
                       stores, eating and drinking
                       establishments, hotels, and
                       motels.
                       Professional office. This
                       district is designated for
                       professional offices, which
                       typically include
                       administrative, financial,
                       business, professional,
                       medical, dental, and public
                       uses. Churches and places
                       for religious assembly and
PO                     compatible multi-family     Professional office
                       housing also are allowed
                       (density range from a
                       minimum of 17 to a maximum
                       of 25 units per gross
                       acre). Complementary
                       support services, such as
                       business support services
                       and restaurants, also are
                       permitted.
                       Light industrial. This
                       district is designated for
                       manufacturing, warehousing,
                       storage, distribution,
ML                     sales, and services with    Light industrial
                       ancillary commercial and
                       office space. Freestanding
                       retail stores are not
                       permitted.
                       Heavy industrial. This
                       district is designated for
                       manufacturing, refining,
                       packaging, processing, and
                       similar activities
MH                     including those with        Heavy industrial
                       outdoor facilities. It also
                       accommodates warehousing
                       and distribution uses, with
                       support commercial services
                       and ancillary office space.
                       No retail uses are allowed.
Specific plan zoning districts:
                       Specific plan zoning
                       district. This zoning
                       district designates areas
                       for master planning with
                       unique zoning and design
                       standards through adoption
SP                     of a specific plan to       All
                       govern development of land
                       within the plan area. While
                       the city does not currently
                       have an adopted specific
                       plan, the framework is
                       provided for future use
                       consistent with state law.
Overlay zoning districts:
                       Planned unit development
                       overlay zoning district.
                       This district is applied to
                       developments that are
                       approved through the
                       planned unit development
                       (PUD) permit process.
                       Through approval of a PUD,
                       the designated approving
PUD                    authority may authorize     All
                       modifications in
                       development regulations
                       such as setbacks, height,
                       or density, consistent with
                       the general plan, or may
                       establish special design
                       requirements, such as
                       architectural detailing for
                       structures.
                       Naval Air Station Lemoore
                       overlay zone. This district
                       is applied to lands
                       generally west of State
                       Highway 41 and south of the
                       city limits within the
                       military influence area of
                       Naval Air Station Lemoore.
NASL                   The intent of this overlay  All
                       is to recognize the
                       potential adverse impacts
                       on the population from
                       Naval Air Station Lemoore
                       and establish special
                       development regulations to
                       ensure public health,
                       safety, and welfare.
 
(Ord. 2013-05, 2-6-2014; amd. Ord. 2024-01, 6-18-2024)
9-3-3: MAP ESTABLISHED:
The city council hereby adopts the city of Lemoore zoning map (hereafter
referred to as the zoning map) as the official designation of zoning district
boundaries on real property within the city. The zoning map shall be regulated
as set forth below.
   A.   Incorporated By Reference: The zoning map is hereby incorporated into
this zoning code by reference as though it were fully included.
   B.   Map Amendments: Amendments to the zoning map shall follow the zoning
amendment process established in chapter 2, article B, "Planning Permits And
Entitlements", of this title.
   C.   Relationship To General Plan And Other Plans: The zoning map shall
implement and shall be consistent with the city's adopted general plan. The
zoning map shall be specifically consistent with the general plan land use plan
and the roadway sizing diagram, and any adopted specific plans, special
planning areas, or master plans.
   D.   Zoning District Symbol: Zoning districts shall be illustrated on the
zoning map as follows:
      1.   Each base zoning district shall be described on the zoning map by
use of its identified zoning district symbol, as listed in section
9-3-2,
table 9-3-2, "Zoning Districts", of this chapter.
      2.   Each specific plan zoning district shall be delineated with a name,
number, symbol, or other delineation, as determined by the planning director,
which distinguishes it from other special purpose zones, base zoning districts,
or overlay zones. The assignment of the special purpose designation serves to
provide a reference to the corresponding special purpose zoning document (e.g.,
specific plan) adopted by ordinance of the city council.
      3.   Overlay zoning districts shall be designated by their representative
symbol in conjunction with the base zoning district in a format determined by
the planning director (e.g., RLD-PUD).
   E.   Zoning Map Interpretation: If there is uncertainty about the location
of any zoning district boundary shown on the zoning map, the precise location
of the boundary shall be determined by the planning director as follows:
      1.   The boundaries of a zoning district shall be the centerlines of
streets, alleys, railroad right of way, drainage channel, or other watercourse,
or the parcel lines of real property, unless otherwise shown. Where a
district's boundaries approximately follow centerlines or plot lines, those
lines shall be interpreted as the district boundaries.
      2.   If a district boundary divides a parcel and the boundary line
location is not specified by distances printed on the zoning map, the location
of the boundary shall be determined by using the scale appearing on the zoning
map. Except as otherwise provided by this code through integrated development,
each portion of the property shall be developed to the standards and allowed
use provisions of the applied zoning district and any applied overlay zone(s).
      3.   Where the street layout on the ground or the parcel lines differ
from such layout or lines shown on the zoning map, the planning director shall
determine the exact boundary and the map shall be amended to conform to the
layout on the ground.
      4.   Where a public street or alley is officially vacated or abandoned,
the property that was formerly in the street or alley shall be included within
the zoning district of the adjoining property on either side of the centerline
of the vacated or abandoned street or alley, unless the abandonment shifts from
the centerline, which it will then follow. (Ord. 2013-05, 2-6-2014)
CHAPTER 4
LAND USES
ARTICLE A.  USE CLASSIFICATION SYSTEM
SECTION:
9-4A-1: Purpose
9-4A-2: Classification Of Land Uses
9-4A-3: Allowed Land Uses
9-4A-4: Temporary Uses
9-4A-5: Description Of Land Uses
9-4A-1: PURPOSE:
The purpose of this article is to establish the system for classifying land
uses within the city. This article defines the various land uses referred to
elsewhere in this chapter. (Ord. 2013-05, 2-6-2014)
9-4A-2: CLASSIFICATION OF LAND USES:
Land uses listed in this article and throughout this title have been grouped
into general categories on the basis of common function, product, or
compatibility characteristics. These allowed use categories are called use
classifications. Use classifications describe one or more uses having similar
characteristics but do not list every use or activity that may appropriately be
within the classification. Each land use is described in article B, "Allowed
Uses And Required Entitlements", of this chapter.
   A.   The following rules apply to use classifications:
      1.   Special Use Regulations: Additional use regulations for special land
uses are listed in article D, "Special Use Standards", of this chapter.
      2.   Uses Not Listed: Land uses that are not listed in the zoning
district tables are not allowed, except as otherwise provided for in this
title.
      3.   Illegal Uses: No use that is illegal under local, state, or federal
law shall be allowed in any zoning district within the city.
      4.   Specific Plan Zoning District: When a property is located within a
specific plan zoning district, the allowed use provisions of that specific plan
zoning district shall govern. If a specific plan zoning district refers back
to, utilizes, or defers to one or more of the city's base zoning districts, the
allowed use provisions in those base zoning districts shall apply. If there are
any conflicts between a base zoning district and a specific plan zoning
district, the specific plan zoning district shall prevail.
      5.   Overlay Zoning District: When a property is located within an
overlay zoning district, the allowed use provisions of that overlay zoning
district shall prevail. When an overlay zoning district is silent on allowed
use provisions, it defers the allowed use provisions to the base zoning
district. Only where there is a conflict do the overlay zoning district
provisions prevail. See chapter 9, "Overlay Zoning Districts", of this title
for more information.
      6.   Similar Uses: When a use is not specifically listed in this code the
use may be permitted if the planning director determines that the use is
substantially similar to other uses listed based on established criteria and
required findings outlined in section
9-2B-7, "Similar Use Determination", of this title. (Ord. 2013-05, 2-6-2014)
9-4A-3: ALLOWED LAND USES:
Zoning district allowed uses and corresponding requirements for entitlements
are listed in section
9-4B-2,
table 9-4B-2, "Allowed Uses And Required Entitlements For Base Zoning
Districts", of this chapter for all of the city's base zoning districts.
Generally, a use is either allowed by right, allowed through issuance of a
permit, or not permitted. In addition to the requirements for planning
entitlements of this title, other permits may be required prior to
establishment of the use (e.g., building permit or permits required by other
agencies). The requirements for planning entitlements identified in section
9-4B-2,
table 9-4B-2 of this chapter include:
   A.   Permitted (P): A land use shown with a "P" indicates that the land use
is permitted by right in the designated zoning district, subject to compliance
with all applicable provisions of this title (e.g., development standards) as
well as state and federal law.
   B.   Administratively Permitted (A): A land use shown with an "A" indicates
that the land use is permitted in the designated zoning district upon issuance
of an administrative use permit from the designated approving authority,
subject to compliance with all applicable provisions of this Zoning Code (e.g.,
development standards), as well as State and Federal law.
   C.   Conditional Permitted (C): A land use shown with a "C" indicates that
the land use is permitted in the designated zoning district upon issuance of a
conditional use permit from the designated approving authority, subject to
compliance with all applicable provisions of this Zoning Code (e.g.,
development standards), as well as State and Federal law.
   D.   Not Permitted (N): A land use shown with an "N" in the table is not
allowed in the applicable zoning district. Additionally, uses not shown in the
table are not permitted, except as otherwise provided for in this title. (Ord.
2013-05, 2-6-2014)
9-4A-4: TEMPORARY USES:
On occasion, property will be used for an event, activity, or use on a short
term basis. Such use is considered a temporary use. Temporary uses of property
are not regulated through section
9-4B-2,
table 9-4B-2, "Allowed Uses And Required Entitlements For Base Zoning
Districts", of this chapter. Rather, the provisions of article C, "Temporary
Uses", of this chapter provide the regulations for these uses, including
development standards and time limits. (Ord. 2013-05, 2-6-2014)
9-4A-5: DESCRIPTION OF LAND USES:
This section provides a listing and definition of all the land uses referred to
elsewhere in this chapter. The uses are organized alphabetically for ease of
use. (Ord. 2013-05, 2-6-2014)
   A.   "A" Definitions:
      ADULT DAY HEALTHCARE CENTER: A facility, as defined under Health and
Safety Code section 1570.7, that provides nonmedical care and supervision for
adult healthcare, including organized day program of therapeutic, social, and
skilled nursing health activities and services to elderly persons or adults
with disabilities with functional impairments, either physical or mental, for
the purpose of restoring or maintaining optimal capacity for self-care.
Programs offered are on a less than twenty four (24) hour basis. State law does
not limit the City's ability to regulate these uses.
      AGRICULTURAL PRODUCTS PROCESSING: The act of changing an agricultural
crop after harvest from its natural state to the initial stage of processing in
order to prepare it for market and for further processing at an off site
location. Examples of this processing include nut hulling and shelling, bean
cleaning, corn shelling and sorting, grape sorting and crushing, primary
processing of fruits to juice and initial storage of the juice, without
fermentation, and cleaning and packing of fruits. More comprehensive processing
facilities (e.g., raw milk processed to cheese) are considered food and
beverage manufacturing and, as such, are included under the definition of
"manufacturing, minor".
      AGRICULTURAL TOURISM: Establishments that cater to tourists and provide
agricultural products either produced on the site or within the community. Such
uses include, but are not limited to, wineries with tasting rooms and permanent
roadside crop stands or fruit stands.
      AIRPORT: A facility where aircraft such as airplanes can take off and
land. An airport minimally consists of one runway but other common components
are hangars and terminal buildings.
      ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGE SALES, OFF SITE: The retail sale of beer, wine, and/or
other alcoholic beverages for off premises consumption.
      ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGE SALES, ON SITE: See definitions of bar/nightclub and
restaurant.
      AMBULANCE SERVICE: Emergency medical care and transportation, including
incidental storage and maintenance of vehicles.
      ANIMAL HUSBANDRY: Raising and breeding of animals or production of animal
products. Typical uses include grazing, ranching, dairy farming, poultry
farming, beekeeping, and enclosed fisheries, but exclude slaughterhouses and
feedlot operations. This classification includes accessory agricultural
buildings accessory to such uses. Animal sales, boarding, and grooming are
defined separately under "animal sales and grooming". Keeping of animals is
defined separately under "animal keeping".
      ANIMAL KEEPING: The keeping of farm animals, including, but not limited
to, cows, horses, goats, sheep, and fowl or poultry (except roosters). Does not
include the keeping of common household pets, which are separately defined.
      ANIMAL SALES AND GROOMING: Retail sales of domestic and exotic animals,
bathing and trimming services, and boarding of said animals for a maximum
period of seventy two (72) hours conducted entirely within an enclosed building
with no outdoor use. Grooming as part of a veterinary facility is included
under that use listing.
      ART, ANTIQUE, COLLECTIBLE: Retail sales uses including antique shops, art
galleries, curio, gift, and souvenir shops, and the sales of collectible items
including sports cards and comic books. Stores selling handcrafted items that
are produced on the site are defined separately as artisan shops.
      ARTISAN SHOP: Retail stores selling art glass, ceramics, jewelry, and
other handcrafted items, where the facility includes an area for the crafting
of the items being sold.
      ASSEMBLY USES: Any of the following uses:
         1.   Meeting facilities for organizations including facilities for
business associations, civic, social, and fraternal organizations, labor unions
and similar organizations, political organizations, professional membership
organizations, and other membership organizations;
         2.   Churches and other religious institutions, including living
quarters for ministers and staff, but excluding other establishments maintained
by religious organizations such as educational institutions and daycare, which
are separately regulated; and
         3.   Community centers and other multipurpose meeting and recreational
facilities that include one or more meeting or multipurpose facilities,
kitchens, and outdoor barbecue facilities available for use by various groups
for meetings, parties, receptions, dances, etc.
      AUTO AND LIGHT VEHICLE SALES: Retail establishments selling automobiles,
light trucks and motorcycles. May also include repair shops and the sales of
parts and accessories, incidental to vehicle dealerships. It does not include
the sale of heavy trucks, large farm equipment (e.g., combines, tractors),
recreation vehicles, and boats (see "heavy vehicle sales"), the sale of auto
parts/accessories separate from a vehicle dealership (see "auto parts sales"),
bicycle and moped sales (see "retail, general"), tire recapping establishments
(see "vehicle services - major"), businesses dealing exclusively in used parts
(see "recycling facility - scrap and dismantling"), or "fueling station", all
of which are separately defined.
      AUTO AND VEHICLE RENTAL: Retail establishments renting automobiles,
trucks, vans, and large farm equipment (e.g., combines, tractors). This use
listing includes the rental of recreation vehicles, motorcycles, and boats. May
also include repair shops (for rental vehicles only) and the sales of parts and
accessories, incidental to vehicle rental activities.
      AUTO AND VEHICLE SALES, WHOLESALE: Wholesale establishments selling new
and used vehicles and used vehicle parts. This use is normally developed as
part of an auto wrecking, junkyard, or salvage yard. Conventional automobile
dealerships are listed under auto and vehicle sales and rental.
      AUTO AND VEHICLE STORAGE: Facilities for the storage of operative and
inoperative vehicles for limited periods of time. Includes, but is not limited
to, storage of towed vehicles, impound yards, and storage lots for automobiles,
trucks, buses, and recreation vehicles. Does not include vehicle dismantling
(see "auto vehicle dismantling") or retail sales (see "auto and vehicle
sales").
      AUTO PARTS SALES: Stores that sell new automobile parts, tires, and
accessories. May also include minor parts installation (see "vehicle
services"). Does not include tire recapping establishments, which are found
under "vehicle services - major" or businesses dealing exclusively in used
parts, which are included under "auto and vehicle sales, wholesale".
      AUTO VEHICLE DISMANTLING: Establishment for the dismantling of automobile
vehicles, including the dismantling or wrecking of automobiles or other motor
vehicles, and/or the storage or keeping for sale of parts and equipment
resulting from such dismantling or wrecking. Retail sales are included under
the definition of "auto and vehicle sales, wholesale". (Ord. 2013-05, 2-6-2014;
amd. Ord. 2017-08, 6-20-2017)
   B.   "B" Definitions:
      BANKS AND FINANCIAL SERVICES: Financial institutions such as banks and
trust companies, credit agencies, holding (but not primarily operating)
companies, lending and thrift institutions, and investment companies. Also
includes automated teller machines (ATM).
      BAR/NIGHTCLUB: Any bar, cocktail lounge, discotheque, or similar
establishment, which may also provide live entertainment (e.g., music and/or
dancing, comedy) in conjunction with alcoholic beverage sales. These facilities
do not include bars that are part of a larger restaurant. Includes bars,
taverns, pubs, and similar establishments where any food service is subordinate
to the sale of alcoholic beverages. May also include the brewing of beer as
part of a brewpub or microbrewery. Bars and nightclubs may include outdoor food
and beverage areas consistent with the standards of this title and state
regulations. This use specifically includes on site sales of alcohol.
      BED AND BREAKFAST INN: Residential structures with one family in
permanent residence with up to five (5) bedrooms rented for overnight lodging,
where meals may be provided subject to applicable Health Department
regulations. A bed and breakfast inn with more than five (5) guestrooms is
considered a hotel or motel and is included under the definition of "hotel and
motel".
      BROADCASTING AND RECORDING STUDIO: Commercial and public communications
uses including radio and television broadcasting and receiving stations and
studios, with facilities entirely within buildings. Does not include
transmission and receiving apparatus such as antennas and towers, which are
under the definition of "wireless telecommunication facility".
      BUILDING MATERIALS STORE/YARD: Retail establishments selling lumber,
steel, and other large building materials, where most display and sales occur
indoors. Includes paint, wallpaper, glass, and fixtures. Includes stores
selling to the general public, even if contractor sales account for a major
proportion of total sales. Includes incidental retail ready mix concrete
operations. Establishments primarily selling electrical, plumbing, heating, and
air conditioning equipment and supplies are classified in "storage, warehouse"
and "wholesaling and distribution". Hardware stores are listed in the
definition of "retail, general", even if they sell some building materials.
      BUS AND TRANSIT SHELTER: A small structure designed for the protection
and convenience of waiting transit passengers and that has a roof and usually
two (2) or three (3) sides.
      BUSINESS SUPPORT SERVICES: Establishments primarily within buildings,
providing other businesses with services such as maintenance, repair and
service, testing, rental, etc. Support services include, but are not limited
to:
         1.   Equipment repair services (except vehicle repair, see "vehicle
services");
         2.   Commercial art and design (production);
         3.   Computer related services (rental, repair);
         4.   Copying, quick printing, and blueprinting services (other than
those defined as "printing and publishing");
         5.   Equipment rental businesses within buildings (rental yards are
defined under "storage, yard");
         6.   Film processing laboratories;
         7.   Heavy equipment repair services where repair occurs on the client
site;
         8.   Janitorial services;
         9.   Mail advertising services (reproduction and shipping);
         10.   Mailbox services and other heavy service business services;
         11.   Outdoor advertising services; and
         12.   Photocopying and photofinishing. (Ord. 2013-05, 2-6-2014)
   C.   "C" Definitions:
      CALL CENTER: An office equipped to handle a large volume of calls,
especially for taking orders or servicing customers.
      CANNABIS: Shall have the same definition as in California Health and
Safety Code section 11018, and title 4, chapter 8 of the Municipal Code as they
now read or as may be amended.
      CANNABIS COMMERCIAL CULTIVATION: A facility that cultivates cannabis or
cannabis products as a commercial activity.
      CANNABIS COMMERCIAL DISPENSARY: Any facility or location, whether fixed
or mobile, and any building or structure, where cannabis is made available to,
distributed by, or distributed to more than two (2) persons. This definition
includes smoking lounge facilities as defined and regulated in title 4, chapter
8 of the Municipal Code.
      CANNABIS COMMERCIAL DISTRIBUTION: The procurement, sale, and transport of
cannabis and cannabis products between State licensees.
      CANNABIS COMMERCIAL MANUFACTURING : Shall have the same definition as in
the California Business and Professions Code section 26001(ag), and title 4 of
the Municipal Code as they now read or as may be amended, and means to
compound, blend, extract, infuse, or otherwise make or prepare a cannabis
product.
      CANNABIS COMMERCIAL TESTING: A laboratory, facility, or entity in the
State that offers or performs tests of cannabis or cannabis products and that
is both of the following: 1) accredited by an accrediting body that is
independent from all other persons involved in commercial cannabis activity in
the State; and 2) licensed by the State.
      CAR WASHING AND DETAILING: Permanent, drive-through, self-service, and/or
attended car washing establishments, including fully mechanized facilities and
detailing services. Temporary car washes (e.g., fundraising activities
generally conducted at a service station or other automotive related business,
where volunteers wash vehicles by hand, and the duration of the event is
limited to 1 day) are not part of this use classification.
      CARD ROOM: A gambling establishment that offers card games for play by
the public.
      CARETAKER HOUSING: A permanent residence that is accessory to a site with
a nonresidential primary use and that is needed for security, twenty four (24)
hour care or supervision, or monitoring of facilities, equipment, or other
conditions on the site.
      CEMETERY/MAUS OLEUM: Land used for the burial of the dead, and dedicated
for cemetery purposes, including columbaria and mausoleums.
      CHECK CASHING BUSINESS: An establishment that, for compensation, engages
in the business of cashing checks, warrants, drafts, money orders, or other
commercial paper serving a similar purpose. Also includes establishments
primarily engaged in cashing payroll or personal checks for a fee or advancing
funds on future checks. This classification does not include a State or
Federally chartered bank, savings association, credit union or similar
financial institution (see "banks and financial services").
      CHILD DAYCARE FACILITY: Facility that provides nonmedical care and
supervision of minor children for periods of less than twenty four (24) hours
for an individual child. These facilities include the following, all of which
are required to be licensed by the State:
         1.   Child Daycare Center: Commercial or nonprofit child daycare
facility operated outside of a home, typically able to accommodate fifteen (15)
or morechildren, including infant centers, preschools, sick child centers,
daycare centers, and school age daycare facilities. These may be operated in
conjunction with a school or church facility, apartment complex, or as an
independent land use. Also includes employer sponsored childcare centers.
         2.   Family Daycare Home, Large: A home that regularly provides care,
protection, and supervision while the parents or guardians are away for seven
(7) to fourteen (14) children, inclusive, including children under the age of
ten (10) years who reside at the home. This description is consistent with
section 1596.78 of the Health and Safety Code.
         3.   Family Daycare Home, Small: A home that regularly provides care,
protection, and supervision while the parents or guardians are away for six (6)
or fewer children, including children under the age of ten (10) years who
reside at the home, or up to eight (8) children if the conditions of section
1597.44 of the Health and Safety Code are met. Per State law, small family
daycare uses may not be regulated differently than single-family dwellings.
This description is consistent with section 1596.78 of the Health and Safety
Code.
      CITY: The City of Lemoore.
      COMMUNITY FOOD BANK: Any place where food is served or dispensed and the
operation is conducted as a nonprofit, charitable operation, including mission
food banks, soup kitchens, church organization food outlets, and charitable
rehabilitation centers.
      COMMUNITY GARDEN: A site used for growing plants for food, fiber, herbs,
or flowers, which is shared and maintained by City residents or as part of a
co-op.
      CONSIGNMENT STORE: A retail store where goods are placed on
"consignment", which is the act of placing goods in the hands of another, while
still retaining ownership, until the goods are sold.
      CONSTRUCTION YARD/STORAGE SHED: The temporary storage of materials and
equipment, including the use of storage sheds, as part of a construction
project. Construction yards/storage sheds are considered temporary uses
regulated by article C, "Temporary Uses", of this chapter.
      CONVENIENCE STORE: Easy access retail stores of five thousand (5,000)
square feet or less in gross floor area, which carry a range of merchandise
oriented to convenience and travelers' shopping needs. These stores may be part
of a fueling station or an independent facility. Larger stores or stores
oriented toward the daily shopping needs of residents are separately defined as
"neighborhood market" and "grocery store/supermarket".
      COTTAGE FOOD OPERATION: An enterprise at a private home where specific
food products defined by the California Department of Public Health as "non-
potentially hazardous" are prepared and/or packaged for sale to consumers.
      CREMATORY: An establishment or furnace that cremates dead human bodies.
      CROP PRODUCTION: Raising and harvesting of plants, tree crops, row crops,
or field crops on an agricultural or commercial basis, including packing and
processing. Includes horticulture establishments engaged in the cultivation of
flowers, fruits, vegetables, or ornamental trees and shrubs for wholesale and
incidental retail sales. This classification includes agricultural buildings
accessory to such uses and roadside stands for display/sale of agricultural
products grown on the premises. Excludes uses for which other garden, nursery,
or landscape merchandise are stored and sold on the site.
      CULTIVATE OR CULTIVATION: Any activity involving the planting, growing,
harvesting, drying, curing, grading, or trimming of cannabis/marijuana, as set
out in California Business and Professions Code section 26001(l) as amended
from time to time. (Ord. 2013-05, 2-6-2014; amd. Ord. 2016-01, 1-19-2016; Ord.
2019-03, 7-2-2019; Ord. 2023-10, 9-19-2023)
   D.   "D" Definitions:
      DELIVERY: As defined in the California Business and Professions Code
section 26001(p), as such section may be amended from time to time, and
includes the commercial transfer of cannabis and cannabis products to a
customer. "Delivery" also includes the use by a retailer of any technology
platform that enables qualified patients and caregivers to arrange for or
facilitate the transfer.
      DRIVE-IN AND DRIVE-THROUGH SALES AND SERVICE: Facilities where food or
other products may be purchased by motorists without leaving their vehicles.
These facilities include fast food restaurants, drive-through coffee, dairy
products, photo stores, etc.
      DWELLING, ACCESSORY UNIT (ADU): An attached or a detached residential
dwelling unit that provides complete independent living facilities for one or
more persons with permanent provisions for living, sleeping, eating, cooking,
and sanitation. An accessory dwelling unit may be an efficiency unit, as
defined in Health and Safety Code Section 17958.1, and a manufactured home, as
defined in Health and Safety Code Section 18007.
      DWELLING, JUNIOR ACCESSORY UNIT (JADU): A dwelling unit that is no more
than five hundred (500) square feet in size and contained entirely within a
single-family residence that includes a separate entrance from the main
entrance to the single-family residence, separate sanitation facilities, and an
efficiency kitchen consisting of a cooking facility with appliances, a food
preparation counter, and storage cabinets of reasonable size in relation to the
size of the unit.
      DWELLING, MULTI-FAMILY: A building designed and intended for occupancy by
three (3) or more families living independently of each other, each in a
separate dwelling unit, which may be owned individually or by a single landlord
(e.g., apartment, apartment house, townhouse, condominium).
      DWELLING, SINGLE-FAMILY: A building designed exclusively for occupancy by
one family on a single lot. This classification includes factory built, modular
housing units constructed in compliance with the City adopted Building Code and
mobilehomes/manufactured housing on permanent foundations1, and model homes for
the first sale of homes within the subdivision.
      DWELLING, TWO- FAMILY: An attached building (e.g., duplex, halfplex)
designed for occupancy by two (2) families living independently of each other,
where both dwellings are located on a single or adjacent lots. More than one
(1) two-family dwelling may be located on a single lot consistent with the
density provisions of the General Plan. Does not include second dwelling units,
which are separately described as "dwelling, accessory unit". (Ord. 2013-05, 2-
6-2014; amd. Ord. 2016-01, 1-19-2016; Ord. 2016-13, 11-1-2016; Ord. 2017-06, 5-
16-2017; Ord. 2019-03, 7-2-2019; Ord. 2023-10, 9-19-2023)
   E.   "E" Definitions:
      EMERGENCY SHELTER: Any facility, the primary purpose of which is to
provide temporary or transitional shelter for the homeless in general or for
specific populations of the homeless.
      EMPLOYEE HOUSING: Consistent with Health and Safety Code section 17008,
property used temporarily or seasonally (not more than 180 days in any calendar
year) for the residential use of unrelated persons/families employed to perform
agricultural or industrial labor either on or off site of agricultural
activities. The accommodations may consist of any living quarters, dwelling,
boarding house, tent (only temporary occupancy), bunkhouse (only temporary
occupancy), mobilehome, manufactured home, recreational vehicle, travel
trailer, or other housing accommodations maintained in one or more buildings,
or one or more sites, and the premises upon which they are situated, including
area set aside for parking of mobilehomes or camping of employees by the
employer. Employee housing may also involve permanent residency if the housing
accommodation is a mobilehome, manufactured home, travel trailer, or
recreational vehicle. Specifically, there are two (2) types of employee housing
as follows:
         1.   Employee Housing, Large: Employee housing that serves more than
six (6) employees and consists of no more than thirty-six (36) beds in group
quarters or twelve (12) units or spaces designed for use by a single family or
household.
         2.   Employee Housing, Small: Employee housing that serves six (6) or
fewer employees.
      ENTERTAINMENT AND ASSEMBLY EVENTS: The temporary gathering of people,
either out of doors or within a structure, for entertainment or assembly events
in a way that deviates or is in addition to the common use of the property on a
day to day basis. Examples include, but are not limited to, carnivals,
concerts, and fairs. Entertainment and assembly events are considered temporary
uses regulated by article C, "Temporary Uses", of this chapter.
      EQUESTRIAN FACILITY, COMMERCIAL: Commercial horse, donkey, and mule
facilities including horse ranches, boarding stables, riding schools and
academies, horse exhibition facilities (for shows or other competitive events),
pack stations, and barns, stables, corrals, and paddocks accessory and
incidental to these uses.
      EQUESTRIAN FACILITY, HOBBY: Stables, corrals, and paddocks used by the
individual homeowners of corresponding property and their animals.
      EQUIPMENT SALES AND RENTAL: Service establishments with outdoor storage/
rental yards, which may offer a wide variety of materials and equipment for
rental (e.g., construction equipment). (Ord. 2013-05, 2-6-2014)
   F.   "F" Definitions:
      FAMILY: An individual or group of two (2) or more persons occupying a
dwelling and living together as a single housekeeping unit in which each
resident has access to all parts of the dwelling and where the adult residents
share expenses for food or rent. Family does not include institutional group
living situations such as dormitories, fraternities, sororities, monasteries,
convents, residential care facilities or military barracks, nor does it include
such commercial group living arrangements as boardinghouses, lodging houses,
and the like.
      FARMERS' MARKET: The temporary sale of farm fresh produce and other
goods. Farmers' markets are generally held out of doors in public spaces and
are considered temporary uses regulated by article C, "Temporary Uses", of this
chapter. For permanent uses, see "convenience store", "neighborhood market", or
"grocery store/supermarket".
      FREIGHT YARD/TRUCK TERMINAL: Transportation establishments furnishing
services incidental to air, motor freight, and rail transportation including
freight forwarding services, freight terminal facilities, joint terminal and
service facilities, packing, crating, inspection, and weighing services, postal
service bulk mailing distribution centers, transportation arrangement services,
truck repair, truck terminals, trucking facilities including transfer and
storage.
      FUEL STORAGE AND DISTRIBUTION: A large scale facility where fuel (such as
propane and gasoline) is stored and distributed without retail sales.
      FUELING STATION: A retail business selling gasoline, diesel, or other
motor vehicle fuels. Vehicle services which are incidental to fuel services are
included under "vehicle services - minor". (Ord. 2013-05, 2-6-2014; amd. Ord.
2015-08, 1-5-2016)
   G.   "G" Definitions:
      GARAGE/YARD SALE: A temporary sales event associated with a residential
use. Garage/yard sales are considered temporary uses regulated by article C,
"Temporary Uses", of this chapter.
      GARDEN CENTER/PLANT NURSERY: Establishments providing for the cultivation
and sale of trees, shrubs, and plants, including the sale of garden and
landscape materials (packaged and/or bulk sale of unpackaged materials) and
equipment.
      GATED RESIDENTIAL COMMUNITY: Any single-family or multi- family
development that is gated and restricts public access into the development.
      GROCERY STORE/SUPERMARKET: A retail business where the majority of the
floor area open to the public is occupied by food products packaged for
preparation and consumption away from the site of the store. These full service
businesses do not typically have limited hours of operation.
      GROUP RESIDENTIAL: Shared living quarters without separate kitchen and/or
bathroom facilities for each room or unit. This classification includes
residential hotels, dormitories, fraternities, sororities, convents, rectories,
and private residential clubs but does not include living quarters shared
exclusively by a family. This category includes "boarding houses", which are
defined as a building other than a hotel or restaurant where meals or lodging
or both meals and lodging are provided for compensation for four (4) or more
persons.
      GUESTHOUSE: A detached structure accessory to a single-family dwelling,
accommodating living/sleeping quarters, but without kitchen or cooking
facilities. (Ord. 2013-05, 2-6-2014)
   H.   "H" Definitions:
      HEAVY VEHICLE SALES: Retail establishments selling heavy trucks, large
farm equipment (e.g., combines, tractors), recreation vehicles, and boats. May
also include repair shops and the sales of parts and accessories, incidental to
vehicle dealerships. It does not include the sale of vehicle parts/accessories
separate from a vehicle dealership (see "auto parts sales"), automobile, light
trucks and motorcycle sales (see "auto and light vehicle sales"), bicycle and
moped sales (see "retail, general"), tire recapping establishments (see
"vehicle services - major"), businesses dealing exclusively in used parts (see
"recycling facility - scrap and dismantling"), or "fueling station", all of
which are separately defined.
      HELIPORT: A facility, other than an emergency medical services (EMS)
landing site as defined in the California Code of Regulations title 21 section
3527, for the landing and takeoff of one or more helicopters. Such facilities
may include, but are not limited to, and are not required to have, the
following: designated marked landing areas; storage structure(s) and/or tie
downs; refueling facilities; and other support services. This use listing
specifically includes agricultural heliports, public use heliports, heliports
at hospitals, personal use heliports, and temporary helicopter landing sites,
all as defined in California Code of Regulations title 21 section 3527.
      HOME OCCUPATION: The conduct of a business within a dwelling unit or
residential site, employing occupants of the dwelling, with the business
activity being subordinate to the residential use of the property. Examples
include, but are not limited to, accountants, financial advisors, architects,
artists, attorneys, notaries, offices for construction businesses (without
equipment or material storage), gardening service, and real estate sales.
      HOOKAH PARLOR: Any facility or location whose business operation, whether
as its primary use or as an accessory use, is denoted by the smoking of tobacco
or other substances through one or more pipes (commonly known as a hookah,
waterpipe, shisha, or narghile) designed with a tube passing through an urn of
water that cools the smoke as it is drawn through it, including, but not
limited to, establishments known variously as hookah bars, hookah lounges, or
hookah cafes. Hookah parlors are prohibited in all zoning districts.
      HOTEL AND MOTEL: Facility with guestrooms or suites, provided without
kitchen facilities, rented to the general public for transient lodging (less
than 30 days). Hotels provide access to most guestrooms from an interior
walkway and typically include a variety of services in addition to lodging, for
example, restaurants, meeting facilities, personal services, etc. Motels
provide access to most guestrooms from an exterior walkway. Also includes
accessory guest facilities such as swimming pools, tennis courts, indoor
athletic facilities, accessory retail uses, etc. Hotels and motels that provide
full kitchen facilities are listed under "group residential".
      HOUSEHOLD PET: The keeping, primarily for a person's company, of birds,
cats, dogs, chickens, or potbellied pigs. The definition also includes other
small, caged animals that do not generate odor or noise that is noticeable at
the site property line. The definition specifically does not include roosters.
(Ord. 2013-05, 2-6-2014; amd. Ord. 2017-08, 6-20-2017)
   I.   "I" Definitions:
      INDOOR AMUSEMENT/ENTERTAINMENT FACILITY: Establishments providing indoor
amusement and entertainment services for a fee or admission charge, including
dance halls and ballrooms, and electronic game arcades, as primary uses. Four
(4) or more electronic games or coin operated amusements in any establishment,
or a premises where fifty percent (50%) or more of the floor area is occupied
by amusement devices, are considered an electronic game arcade; three (3) or
less machines are not considered a land use separate from the primary use of
the site.
      INDOOR FITNESS AND SPORTS FACILITY: Predominantly participant sports and
health activities conducted entirely within an enclosed building. Typical uses
include bowling alleys, billiard parlors, ice/roller skating rinks, indoor
racquetball courts, indoor climbing facilities, soccer areas, gymnastic
studios, athletic clubs, and health clubs.
      INTERIM AGRICULTURAL USE: The use of property for crop production or
other agricultural use on a temporary basis until such time as it is
economically viable to develop the property to the highest and best use as
defined by the general plan. Interim agricultural uses are considered temporary
uses regulated by article C, "Temporary Uses", of this chapter. These uses
involve commercial agricultural operations, including aspects such as
mechanized commercial equipment, and are different from community based
operations described in community gardens.
   J.   "J" Definitions:
      Reserved for future use.
   K.   "K" Definitions:
      KENNEL: Facility providing for the boarding of animals as the primary use
of the facility. May also include daytime boarding and activity for animals
(e.g., "doggie daycare") and ancillary grooming facilities. A kennel as part of
a veterinary facility is included under that use listing.
   L.   "L" Definitions:
      LIBRARY/MUSEUM: Public or quasi-public facilities including aquariums,
arboretums, art exhibitions, botanical gardens, historic sites and exhibits,
libraries, museums, and planetariums.
      LIVE-WORK FACILITY: A structure or portion of a structure: !DEFEND!
         1.   That combines a commercial or manufacturing activity allowed in
the zone with a residential living space for the owner of the commercial or
manufacturing business, or the owner's employee, and that person's household;
         2.   Where the resident owner or employee of the business is
responsible for the commercial or manufacturing activity performed; and
         3.   Where the commercial or manufacturing activity conducted takes
place subject to a valid business license associated with the premises. (Ord.
2013-05, 2-6-2014)
   M.   "M" Definitions:
      MAINTENANCE AND REPAIR OF SMALL EQUIPMENT: Establishments providing on
site repair and accessory sales of supplies for appliances, office machines,
home electronic/mechanical equipment, bicycles, tools, or garden equipment,
conducted entirely within an enclosed building. This classification does not
include maintenance and repair of vehicles.
      MANUFACTURED HOME: See definition of Dwelling, Single-Family.
      MANUFACTURING, MAJOR: Manufacturing, fabrication, processing, and
assembly of materials in a raw form. Uses in this category typically create
greater than usual amounts of smoke, gas, odor, dust, sound, or other
objectionable influences that might be obnoxious to persons conducting business
on site or on an adjacent site. Uses include, but are not limited to, batch
plants, rendering plants, aggregate processing facilities, plastics and rubber
products manufacturing.
      MANUFACTURING, MINOR: Manufacturing, fabrication, processing, and
assembly of materials from parts that are already in processed form and that,
in their maintenance, assembly, manufacture, or plant operation, do not create
excessive amounts of smoke, gas, odor, dust, sound, or other objectionable
influences that might be noxious to persons conducting business on site or on
an adjacent site. Uses include, but are not limited to, furniture manufacturing
and cabinet shops, laundry and dry cleaning plants, metal products fabrication,
and food and beverage manufacturing (e.g., raw milk processed to cheese).
      MANUFACTURING, SMALL SCALE: Establishments manufacturing and/or
assembling small products primarily by hand, including, but not limited to,
jewelry, pottery and other ceramics, as well as small glass and metal art and
craft products.
      MARIJUANA: Shall have the same definition as in California Health And
Safety Code section 11018, and title 4, chapter 8 of the Municipal Code as they
now read or as may be amended.
      MASSAGE THERAPY: Establishment where customers can receive a massage. See
specific use regulations in title 4, chapter 7, "Massage Regulations", of the
Municipal Code.
      MEDICAL MARIJUANA: Marijuana used for medical purposes in accordance with
California Health and Safety Code section 11362.7 et seq., as may be amended.
      MEDICAL SERVICES: Facilities that provide medical services as further
defined as follows:
         1.   Extended Care: Residential facilities providing nursing and
health related care as a primary use with inpatient beds, such as board and
care homes, convalescent and rest homes, extended care facilities, and skilled
nursing facilities. Long term personal care facilities that do not include
medical treatment are included under "residential care homes" and "residential
care facilities".
         2.   General: Facility primarily engaged in providing outpatient
medical, mental health, surgical, and other personal health services, but which
are separate from hospitals, including medical and dental laboratories,
medical, dental and psychiatric offices, optometrist, outpatient care
facilities, and other allied health services. Counseling services by other than
medical doctors or psychiatrists are included under "office, business and
professional".
         3.   Hospital: Hospitals and similar facilities engaged primarily in
providing diagnostic services and extensive medical treatment (with overnight
stay capabilities), including surgical and other hospital services. These
establishments have an organized medical staff, inpatient beds, and equipment
and facilities to provide complete healthcare, and may include on site
accessory clinics and laboratories.
      MOBILEHOME: See definition of dwelling, single-family.
      MOBILEHOME PARK: Consistent with Government Code section 65852.7, any
site that is planned and improved to accommodate two (2) or more mobilehomes
used for residential purposes, or on which two (2) or more mobilehome lots are
rented, leased, or held out for rent or lease, or were formerly held out for
rent or lease and later converted to a subdivision, cooperative, condominium,
or other form of resident ownership, to accommodate mobilehomes used for
residential purposes.
      MORTUARY/FUNERAL HOME: Funeral homes and parlors, where the deceased are
prepared for burial or cremation and funeral services may be conducted. (Ord.
2013-05, 2-6-2014; amd. Ord. 2016-01, 1-19-2016; Ord. 2016-13, 11-1-2016; Ord.
2017-01, 2-7-2017; Ord. 2019-03, 7-2-2019)
   N.   "N" Definitions:
      NEIGHBORHOOD MARKET: A pedestrian oriented grocery/specialty market store
offering food products packaged for preparation and consumption away from the
site of the store and oriented to the daily shopping needs of surrounding
residential areas. Neighborhood markets are less than fifteen thousand (15,000)
square feet in size and operate less than eighteen (18) hours per day. For
larger stores, see "grocery store/supermarket". Neighborhood markets may
include deli or beverage tasting facilities that are ancillary to the market/
grocery portion of the use. (Ord. 2013-05, 2-6-2014)
   O.   "O" Definitions:
      OFFICE, ACCESSORY: Offices that are incidental and accessory to another
business or sales activity that is the primary use. Incidental offices that are
customarily accessory to another use are allowed as part of an approved primary
use. The qualification criteria for this definition is that the floor area of
the accessory office use shall not exceed twenty five percent (25%) of the
total tenant floor area.
      OFFICE, BUSINESS AND PROFESSIONAL: This use listing includes offices of
administrative businesses providing direct services to consumers (e.g.,
insurance companies, utility companies), government agency and service
facilities (e.g., Post Office, civic center), professional offices (e.g.,
accounting, attorneys, employment, public relations), and offices engaged in
the production of intellectual property (e.g., advertising, architectural,
computer programming, photography studios). This use does not include medical
offices (see definition of medical services), temporary offices, or offices
that are incidental and accessory to another business or sales activity that is
the primary use (see definition of office, accessory). These facilities
typically operate during normal business hours, Monday through Friday, seven
o'clock (7:00) A.M. to six o'clock (6:00) P.M.
      OUTDOOR COMMERCIAL BARBEQUE: An outdoor facility at an approved location
for cooking food for commercial sale directly over hot coals, fire, or other
method approved by the County Health Department.
      OUTDOOR COMMERCIAL RECREATION: Facility for various outdoor participant
sports and types of recreation where a fee is normally charged for use,
including, but not limited to, amphitheaters, amusement and theme parks, golf
courses, golf driving ranges, health and athletic club outdoor facilities,
miniature golf courses, skateboard parks, stadiums and coliseums, racetracks,
swim and tennis clubs, tennis courts, water slides, and zoo. (Ord. 2013-05, 2-
6-2014; amd. Ord. 2017-06, 5-16-2017)
   P.   "P" Definitions:
      PARK AND RIDE FACILITY: A designated area where a vehicle may be left in
order to carpool with other commuters or to ride public transit.
      PARK/PUBLIC PLAZA: Public parks including playgrounds and athletic
fields/courts and public plazas and outdoor gathering places for community use.
If privately owned and restricted to the public (e.g., require payment of fee),
the same facilities are included under the definition of "outdoor commercial
recreation".
      PARKING FACILITY: A parking lot or parking structure used for parking
motor vehicles where the facility is the primary use of the site. Parking
structures and lots that are developed in conjunction with another primary use
of the site to satisfy the on site parking requirements for the development are
not included in this definition.
      PAWNSHOP: Any room, store, building, or other place in which the business
of pawnbrokering, or the business of lending money upon personal property,
pawns or pledges, or the business of purchasing articles from vendors or their
assignees at prices agreed upon at or before the time of such purchase, is
engaged in, carried on, or conducted.
      PERSONAL SERVICES: Establishments providing nonmedical services as a
primary use, including, but not limited to, barber and beauty shops, clothing
rental, day spas (excluding massage therapy), dry cleaning stores with limited
on site cleaning (see definition of manufacturing, minor for larger
operations), home electronics and small appliance repair, laundromats (self-
service laundries), shoe repair shops, and tailors. These uses may also include
accessory retail sales of products related to the services provided, and
tanning salons.
      PRIMARY CAREGIVER: Shall have the same definition as in California Health
and Safety Code section 11362.7 et seq., as it now reads or as amended.
      PRINTING AND PUBLISHING: Establishments engaged in printing by
letterpress, lithography, gravure, screen, offset, or electrostatic
(xerographic) copying, and other establishments serving the printing trade
including bookbinding, typesetting, engraving, photoengraving, and
electrotyping. This use also includes establishments that publish newspapers,
books, and periodicals, and establishments manufacturing business forms and
binding devices. Does not include quick printing services or desktop
publishing, which are included in "business support services".
      PUBLIC SAFETY FACILITY: Facility operated by public agencies including
fire stations, other fire prevention and firefighting facilities, and police
and sheriff substations and headquarters, including interim incarceration
facilities.
   Q.   "Q" Definitions:
      QUALIFIED PATIENT: Shall have the same definition as California Health
and Safety Code section 11362.7 et seq., as it now reads or as amended. (Ord.
2013-05, 2-6-2014; amd. Ord. 2016-01, 1-19-2016)
   R.   "R" Definitions:
      RECREATIONAL VEHICLE PARK: A site where one (1) or more lots are used, or
are intended to be used, by campers with recreational vehicles or tent
trailers. Recreational vehicle parks may include public restrooms, water,
sewer, and electric hookups to each lot and are intended as a higher density,
more intensively developed use than campgrounds. May include accessory retail
uses where they are clearly incidental and intended to serve park patrons only.
These facilities are not intended for long term stay or residency.
      RECYCLING FACILITY - COLLECTION: A recycling facility used for the
acceptance by donation, redemption, or purchase of recyclable materials from
the public that does not occupy more than five hundred (500) square feet. This
classification may include a mobile unit, kiosk type units that may include
permanent structures, and unattended containers placed for the donation of
recyclable materials. This also includes reverse vending machines, an automated
mechanical device that accepts one or more types of empty beverage containers
including, but not limited to, aluminum cans, glass bottles and plastic
bottles, and issues a cash refund or a redeemable credit slip with value of not
less than the container's redemption value as determined by the state. As
required under California Public Resources Code section 14500 et seq., a
recycling collection facility shall be located within a one-half (1/2) mile
radius of a grocery store (referred to as the convenience zone under section
14509.4).
      RECYCLING FACILITY - PROCESSING: A recycling facility located in a
building or enclosed space and used for the collection and processing of
recyclable materials. "Processing" means the preparation of material for
efficient shipment or to an end user's specifications by such means as baling,
briquetting, compacting, flattening, grinding, crushing, mechanical sorting,
shredding, cleaning, and remanufacturing. Collection of recycling materials as
the sole activity is included in the definition of "recycling facility -
collection".
      RECYCLING FACILITY - SCRAP AND DISMANTLING: Uses engaged in the
assembling, breaking up, sorting, temporary storage, and distribution of
recyclable or reusable scrap and waste materials. This use does not include
landfills or other terminal waste disposal sites. Also see definition of Auto
Vehicle Dismantling for related use for automobiles. These facilities may also
be used for collection of recycling materials where the collection is
incidental to the scrap and dismantling operation.
      RESEARCH AND DEVELOPMENT: Indoor facilities for scientific research, and
the design, development, and testing of electrical, electronic, magnetic,
optical, and mechanical components in advance of product manufacturing, that
are not associated with a manufacturing facility on the same site. Includes,
but is not limited to, chemical and biotechnology research and development.
Does not include computer software companies (see definition of Office,
Business And Professional), soils and other materials testing laboratories (see
definition of Business Support Services), or medical laboratories (see
definition of Medical Services: General).
      RESIDENTIAL CARE FACILITY: Consistent with the definitions of state law1,
a residential care facility is a facility that provides twenty four (24) hour
nonmedical care for more than six (6) persons eighteen (18) years of age or
older, or emancipated minors, with chronic, life threatening illness in need of
personal services, protection, supervision, assistance, guidance, or training
essential for sustaining the activities of daily living, or for the protection
of the individual. This classification includes residential care facilities for
the elderly, adult residential facilities, wards of the juvenile court, and
other facilities licensed by the state of California.
      RESIDENTIAL CARE HOME: Consistent with the definitions of state law2, a
residential care home is a home that provides twenty four (24) hour nonmedical
care for six (6) or fewer persons eighteen (18) years of age or older, or
emancipated minors, with chronic, life threatening illness in need of personal
services, protection, supervision, assistance, guidance, or training essential
for sustaining the activities of daily living, or for the protection of the
individual. This classification includes rest homes, residential care
facilities for the elderly, adult residential facilities, wards of the juvenile
court, and other facilities licensed by the state of California. Per state law,
these uses may not be regulated differently than single-family dwellings.
Convalescent homes, nursing homes and similar facilities providing medical care
are included under the definition of "medical services: extended care".
      RESOURCE PROTECTION AND RESTORATION: Activities and management of an area
to preserve, re-create, and enhance natural resource such as fish and wildlife
habitat, rare and endangered plants, vernal pools, erosion control, wetlands,
and floodwater conveyance.
      RESOURCE RELATED RECREATION: Facility related to passive recreation in
open space areas including bicycle and pedestrian trails, picnic areas, parking
areas, and interpretive centers.
      RESTAURANT: A retail business selling food and beverages prepared and/or
served on the site, for on or off premises consumption, from a permanent
structure. Includes eating establishments where customers are served from a
walk-up ordering counter for either on or off premises consumption and
establishments where most customers are served food at tables for on premises
consumption, but may include providing food for takeout. Also includes
coffeehouses and accessory cafeterias as part of office and industrial uses.
This use specifically includes on site sales of alcohol.
      RETAIL, ACCESSORY: The retail sales of various products (including food
service) in a store or similar facility that is located within a healthcare,
hotel, office, or industrial complex. These uses include pharmacies, gift
shops, and food service establishments within hospitals; convenience stores and
food service establishments within hotel, office, and industrial complexes.
This use category also includes retail associated with industrial uses for the
products sold, distributed, or manufactured on site. Such retail area shall not
exceed twenty five percent (25%) of the total square footage for each tenant
space.
      RETAIL, GENERAL: The retail sales of merchandise not specifically listed
under another use classification. This classification includes department
stores; drugstores; furniture, furnishings, and appliance stores; dry goods;
clothing stores; fabric and sewing supplies; home improvement supplies;
florists (except that nurseries are separately defined); and businesses
retailing goods such as the following: toys, hobby materials, handcrafted
items, jewelry, cameras and electronic equipment, audio and video sales and
rental, sporting goods, kitchen utensils, art supplies, and similar activities.
      RETAIL, WAREHOUSE CLUB: Retail stores that emphasize the packaging and
sale of products in large quantities or volumes, some at discounted prices.
Sites and buildings are usually large and industrial in character. Patrons may
be required to pay membership fees. (Ord. 2013-05, 2-6-2014)
   S.   "S" Definitions:
      SCHOOL: A facility that provides for the education and/or training of
individuals or groups as further defined as follows:
         1.   Academic - Private And Charter: Any privately owned and operated
elementary school, middle school, secondary school, high school, or other
institution providing academic instruction for students from kindergarten
through twelfth grade. This listing also includes a private school operating
under a charter from the local school district and not managed directly by the
governing body of the public school district (e.g., school board).
         2.   Academic - Public: Public elementary schools, middle schools,
secondary schools, high schools, and any other public school providing academic
instruction for students from kindergarten through twelfth grade.
         3.   Colleges And Universities - Private: Any privately owned college
or university, including medical schools, law schools, and other instruction of
higher education, including dorms, offices, facility maintenance yards, and
similar supportive functions.
         4.   Colleges And Universities - Public: Public community colleges,
colleges, and universities, including dorms, offices, facility maintenance
yards, and similar supportive functions.
         5.   Equipment/Machinery/Vehicle Training: Facilities and programs for
training students in the repair and maintenance of various equipment,
machinery, and vehicles which tend to have a more industrial nature to them.
Examples include, but are not limited to, maintenance of business equipment and
consumer products (e.g., computers and other electronic equipment, appliance
repair, reupholstery and furniture repair), trade schools (e.g., metalwork/
welding), and vehicle repair and maintenance (e.g., repair, alteration,
restoration, towing, painting, cleaning, or finishing of automobiles,
motorcycles, trucks, recreational vehicles, boats, and other vehicles).
         6.   Specialized Education And Training/Studios: Specialty schools for
instructing and training students in a variety of specialized programs,
including, but not limited to, the following:
            a.   Computers and electronics training schools;
            b.   Drama schools;
            c.   Driver educational schools;
            d.   Language schools;
            e.   Music schools;
            f.   Professional, vocational, and trade schools of a nonindustrial
nature (e.g., culinary, cosmetology, arts and media, accounting and finance,
health and dental including nursing, legal, psychology, and technology); and
            g.   Studio style facilities including, but not limited to, dance/
ballet, art, photography, yoga, martial arts (e.g., karate, kung fu, judo, tae
kwon do, jujitsu), and fitness studios other than "indoor fitness and sports
facilities".
      SEASONAL SALE: The retail sale of goods related to seasonal holidays,
including, but not limited to, Christmas tree sales, pumpkin sales, and
fireworks stands.
      SEMIPERMANENT MOBILE FOOD VEHICLE: Any vehicle as defined in section 670
of the California Vehicle Code, which is equipped and used for retail sales of
prepared, prepackaged, or unprepared, unpackaged food or foodstuffs of any kind
that parks for more than twenty (20) minutes daily for more than fourteen (14)
days in one calendar year at one or more locations within the city. For the
purposes of this title, a mobile food vehicle shall also include any trailer or
wagon equipped and used as described in this definition and pulled by a
vehicle. Excluded from this category are:
         1.   Any person engaged in vending conducted in connection with:
            a.   The operations of a state certified farmers' market,
            city of Lemoore, such as an authorized street fair, or
            c.   An event at a sports complex, little league facility, school
facility, or recreational facility if the vendor is in partnership with the
organization conducting the event and is located on the site of the event; or
         2.   Any person not exceeding the time thresholds listed in the first
sentence of this definition.
      SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESS: Any business that, for any form of
consideration, as a regular and substantial portion of conduct, offers its
patrons products, merchandise, services, or entertainment that, because of its
sexually explicit nature, may, pursuant to state law or local regulatory
authority, be offered only to persons over the age of eighteen (18) years. A
regular and substantial portion of conduct shall mean that either: 1) fifteen
percent (15%) or more of the business's gross revenue is derived from
merchandise, services, or entertainment that is of a sexually explicit nature;
or 2) fifteen percent (15%) or more of the floor space of the area of the
building open to the public is used for the display of products, merchandise,
services, or entertainment that is of a sexually explicit nature. Examples
include, but are not limited to, the following:
         1.   Adult Bookstore: An establishment that has fifteen percent (15%)
or more of its stock in books, magazines, periodicals, or other printed matter,
or of photographs, films, motion pictures, videocassettes, slides, tapes,
records, or other form of visual or audio representations which are
distinguished or characterized by an emphasis upon the depiction or description
of specified sexual activities and/or specified anatomical areas as defined in
this title.
         2.   Adult Cabaret: An establishment that, for any form of
consideration, as a regular and substantial course of conduct presents live
performances that are characterized by an emphasis upon specified sexual
activities (as defined in this title) or feature any seminude person.
         3.   Adult Hotel/Motel: A hotel or motel or similar business
establishment offering public accommodations for any form of consideration
which: a) provides patrons with closed circuit television transmissions, films,
computer generated images, motion pictures, videocassettes, slides, or other
photographic reproductions fifteen percent (15%) or more of the number of which
are distinguished or characterized by an emphasis upon the depiction or
description of specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas (as
defined in this title); and b) rents, leases, or lets any room for less than a
six (6) hour period, or rents, leases, or lets any single room more than twice
in a twenty four (24) hour period.
         4.   Adult Motion Picture Theater: An establishment that, for any form
of consideration, as a regular and substantial course of conduct offers to show
films, computer generated images, motion pictures, videocassettes, slides, or
other photographic reproductions that are characterized by an emphasis upon
specified sexual activities or the exposure of specified anatomical areas as
defined in this title.
         5.   Adult Retail Store: An establishment that, for any form of
consideration, as a regular and substantial course of conduct (15 percent or
more of the stock) offers for sale, rent, or viewing either adult entertainment
material, adult entertainment merchandise, or both.
      SHORT-TERM RENTAL UNIT: Residential structure where all or a portion of
the structure is rented for overnight lodging for a period of less than 30
days. A short-term rental unit or site that provides a meal as part of its
service is considered a bed and breakfast inn and is included under the
definition of "bed and breakfast inn".
      SINGLE ROOM OCCUPANCY (SRO) FACILITY: A room or efficiency unit, as
defined by Health And Safety Code section 17958.1, intended or designed to be
used, or which is used, rented, or hired out, to be occupied, or which is
occupied, as a primary residence, by guests. It is a multi-unit housing
facility that typically consists of a single room and shared bath. It may also
include a shared common kitchen and common activity area. SROs may be
restricted to seniors or be available to persons of all ages. Dormitories are
separately defined under "group residential".
      SMOKE OR VAPE SHOP: An establishment that either devotes more than
fifteen percent (15%) of its total floor area to smoking, vaping, drug, and/or
tobacco paraphernalia, or devotes more than a ten foot by five foot (10' x 5')
(2 feet in depth maximum) section of shelf space for display for sale of
smoking, vaping, drug, and/or tobacco paraphernalia.
      SOLAR POWER STATION: A facility that is the primary use of the site,
where solar energy is collected and converted into electrical energy (e.g.,
solar farms).
      STORAGE, PERSONAL STORAGE FACILITY: A structure or group of structures
containing generally small, individual, compartmentalized stalls or lockers
rented as individual storage spaces, as well as ancillary RV and vehicle
storage, and characterized by low parking demand.
      STORAGE, WAREHOUSE: Facility for the storage of furniture, household
goods, or other commercial goods of any nature. Includes cold storage. Does not
include warehouse, storage, or ministorage facilities offered for rent or lease
to the general public (see definition of storage, personal storage facility) or
warehouse facilities in which the primary purpose of storage is for wholesaling
and distribution (see definition of wholesaling and distribution).
      STORAGE, YARD: The storage of various materials outside of a structure
other than fencing, either as an accessory or principal use.
      SUPPORTIVE HOUSING: Housing with no limit on length of stay, that is
occupied by the target population, and that is linked to an on site or off site
service that assists the supportive housing resident in retaining the housing,
improving his or her health status, and maximizing his or her ability to live
and, when possible, work in the community.
      SWAP MEETS: The temporary gathering of people and secondhand goods for
the sale or trade of those products, whether out of doors or within a
structure. Swap meets are considered temporary uses regulated by article C of
this chapter. (Ord. 2013-05, 2-6-2014; amd. Ord. 2015-08, 1-5-2016; Ord. 2017-
06, 5-16-2017; Ord. 2023-10, 9-19-2023)
   T.   "T" Definitions:
      TARGET POPULATION: Persons with low incomes who have one (1) or more
disabilities, including mental illness, HIV or AIDS, substance abuse, or other
chronic health condition, or individuals eligible for services provided
pursuant to the Lanterman Developmental Disabilities Services Act1 and may
include, among other populations, adults, emancipated minors, families with
children, elderly persons, young adults aging out of the foster care system,
individuals exiting from institutional settings, veterans, and homeless people.
      TATTOO PARLOR: Any establishment that engages in the business of
tattooing including permanent makeup services.
      TEMPORARY CONSTRUCTION OFFICE: An office established for purposes of a
construction project, usually contained within a trailer or other mobile
structure. Temporary construction offices are considered temporary uses
regulated by article C, "Temporary Uses", of this chapter.
      TEMPORARY SALES OFFICE: An office established for purposes of selling
lots or homes as part of new residential subdivisions and located within the
subdivision for which the sales are occurring. Temporary sales offices may be
located within a trailer or other mobile structure or within a model home or
other structure. Temporary sales offices are considered temporary uses
regulated by article C, "Temporary Uses", of this chapter.
      THEATER/ AUDITORIUM: Indoor facilities for public assembly and group
entertainment, other than sporting events (e.g., civic theaters, facilities for
live theater and concerts, exhibition and convention halls, motion picture
theaters, auditoriums). Does not include outdoor theaters, concert and similar
entertainment facilities, and indoor and outdoor facilities for sporting
events; see definition of Outdoor Commercial Recreation.
      THRIFT STORE: A retail establishment selling secondhand goods donated by
members of the public.
      TRANSIT FACILITY: Maintenance and service centers for the vehicles
operated in a mass transportation system. Includes buses, taxis, railways, etc.
Note that taxi operations are subject to police department review as identified
in section 3-6A-6 of the municipal code.
      TRANSIT STATION/ TERMINAL: Passenger stations for vehicular and rail mass
transit systems.
      TRANSITIONAL HOUSING: Buildings configured as rental housing
developments, but operated under program requirements that require the
termination of assistance and recirculating of the assisted unit to another
eligible program recipient at a predetermined future point in time that shall
be no less than six (6) months from the beginning of the assistance.
      TRUCK STOP/ TRAVEL CENTER: A commercial facility that provides multiple
services to travelers and truck drivers, such as fueling stations, restaurants,
rest areas, convenience sales, vehicle parking, and/or shower and laundry
facilities. (Ord. 2013-05, 2-6-2014; amd. Ord. 2015-08, 1-5-2016; Ord. 2016-04,
4-19-2016)
   U.   "U" Definitions:
      UTILITY FACILITY AND INFRASTRUCTURE: Includes the following:
         1.   Fixed Base Structures And Facilities: Facilities serving as
junction points for transferring utility services from one transmission voltage
to another or to local distribution and service voltages. These uses include
any of the following facilities that are not exempted from land use permit
requirements by Government Code section 53091: electrical substations and
switching stations; natural gas regulating and distribution facilities; public
water system wells, treatment plants, and storage; telephone switching
facilities; and wastewater treatment plants, settling ponds, and disposal
fields. These uses do not include office or customer service centers
(classified in "offices") or equipment and material storage yards.
         2.   Transmission Lines And Pipelines: Pipelines for potable water,
reclaimed water, natural gas, and sewage collection and disposal, and
facilities for the transmission of electrical energy for sale, including
transmission lines for a public utility company. Also includes telephone,
telegraph, cable television, and other communications transmission facilities
utilizing direct physical conduits.
   V.   "V" Definitions:
      VEHICLE SERVICES - MAJOR: The repair, alteration, restoration, towing,
painting, cleaning (e.g., self-service and attended car washes), or finishing
of automobiles, trucks, recreational vehicles, boats, farm equipment, and other
vehicles as a primary use, including the incidental wholesale and retail sale
of vehicle parts as an accessory use. This use includes major repair and
bodywork repair facilities dealing with entire vehicles; such establishments
typically provide towing, collision repair, other bodywork, and painting
services and may also include tire recapping establishments.
      VEHICLE SERVICES - MINOR: Minor facilities specialize in limited aspects
of repair and maintenance (e.g., muffler and radiator shops, quick lube, smog
check). Does not include repair shops that are part of a vehicle dealership on
the same site (see definition of Auto And Vehicle Sales) or automobile
dismantling yards, which are included under "recycling facility - scrap and
dismantling".
      VETERINARY FACILITY: Veterinary facility that is primarily enclosed,
containing only enough cage arrangements as necessary to provide services for
domestic and exotic animals requiring acute medical or surgical care with
accessory outdoor use that provides long term medical care. Grooming and
boarding of animals is allowed only if accessory to the facility use.
   W.   "W" Definitions:
      WHOLESALING AND DISTRIBUTION: Establishments engaged in selling
merchandise to retailers; to industrial, commercial, institutional, farm, or
professional business users; or to other wholesalers; or acting as agents or
brokers in buying merchandise for or selling merchandise to such persons or
companies. Includes such establishments as agents, merchandise or commodity
brokers, and commission merchants, assemblers, buyers, and associations engaged
in the cooperative marketing of farm products, merchant wholesalers, and stores
primarily selling electrical, plumbing, heating and air conditioning supplies
and equipment.
      WIRELESS TELECOMMUNICATION FACILITY: Facility designed and/or used for
the purpose of transmitting, receiving, or relaying voice and/or data signals
from various wireless communication devices, including transmission tower,
antenna, and/or other facility designed or used for that purpose. Wireless
telecommunication facilities are divided into two (2) types as follows:
         1.   Wireless Telecommunication Facility - Major: A communication
facility that:
            a.   Is a freestanding ground mounted facility; or
            b.   Is a structure or roof mounted facility that is more than ten
feet (10') above the structure roofline; and
            c.   Is not specifically identified as a minor facility herein.
         Examples include, but are not limited to, the following:
            a.   Wireless telecommunication towers (cellular towers);
            b.   Satellite earth station (SES) antennas that are more than two
meters (2 m) in diameter; and
            c.   Parabolic antennas, direct broadcast satellite (DBS) antennas,
and multipoint distribution service (MDS) antennas that are more than one meter
(1 m) in diameter.
         2.   Wireless Telecommunication Facility - Minor: Any wireless
communication facility that is either: a) operated exclusively as part of a
public safety network, or b) specifically exempt from local regulation by state
or federal law or rule (including, but not limited to, the telecommunications
act of 1996 and 47 CFR section 1.4000). Examples include, but are not limited
to, the following:
            a.   Amateur radio transmission facilities which comply with the
standards of section 9-4D-15, "Wireless Telecommunication Facilities", of this
chapter;
            b.   Satellite earth station (SES) antennas that are two meters (2
m) in diameter or less;
            c.   Parabolic antennas, direct broadcast satellite (DBS) antennas,
and multipoint distribution service (MDS) antennas that are one meter (1 m) in
diameter or less.
   X.   "X" Definitions: Reserved for future use.
   Y.   "Y" Definitions: Reserved for future use.
   Z.   "Z" Definitions: Reserved for future use.
(Ord. 2013-05, 2-6-2014; amd. Ord. 2024-07, 12-3-2024)
ARTICLE B. ALLOWED USES AND REQUIRED ENTITLEMENTS
SECTION:
9-4B-1: Purpose
9-4B-2: Allowed Uses And Required Entitlements; Base Zoning Districts
9-4B-1: PURPOSE:
The purpose of this article is to establish allowed land uses and requirements
for planning entitlements for each of the city's base zoning districts. Allowed
uses herein are consistent with and implement the city's general plan
corresponding land use designations as shown in section
9-4B-2,
table 9-4B-2, "Allowed Uses And Required Entitlements For Base Zoning
Districts", of this article. (Ord. 2013-05, 2-6-2014)
9-4B-2: ALLOWED USES AND REQUIRED ENTITLEMENTS; BASE ZONING DISTRICTS:
A.   
Table 9-4B-2, “Allowed Uses And Required Entitlements For Base Zoning
Districts”, of this section identifies allowed uses and corresponding
requirements for land use permits and entitlements for all base zoning
districts within the city of Lemoore. Definitions for the land uses listed
herein (use classifications) are provided in section
9-4A-5, “Description Of Land Uses”, of this chapter. See additional use
requirements in article D, “Special Use Standards”, of this chapter. Uses are
organized into common categories as follows:
   1.   Residential uses;
   2.   Agricultural and animal related uses;
   3.   Recreation, resource preservation, open space, education, and public
assembly uses;
   4.   Utility, transportation, public facility, and communication uses;
   5.   Retail, service, and office uses;
   6.   Automobile and vehicle uses; and
   7.   Industrial, manufacturing, and processing uses.
B.   Zoning district names for the zoning district symbols used in the table
are as follows:
   1.   Residential zoning districts:
      a.   AR = Agriculture and rural residential;
      b.   RVLD = Very low density residential;
      c.   RLD = Low density residential;
      d.   RN = Traditional neighborhood residential;
      e.   RLMD = Low-medium density residential;
      f.   RMD = Medium density residential;
      g.   RHD = High density residential.
   2.   Special purpose zoning districts:
      a.   W = Wetlands;
      b.   AG = Agricultural;
      c.   PR = Parks and recreation/ponding basin;
      d.   CF = Public services and community facilities.
   3.   Mixed use zoning districts:
      a.   DMX-1 = Downtown mixed use, core;
      b.   DMX-2 = Downtown mixed use, auto oriented;
      c.   DMX-3 = Downtown Mixed Use, Transitional;
      d.   MU = Mixed Use.
   4.   Office, Commercial, and Industrial Zoning Districts:
      a.   NC = Neighborhood Commercial;
      b.   RC = Regional Commercial;
      c.   PO = Professional Office;
      d.   ML = Light Industrial;
      e.   MH = Heavy Industrial.
C.   Any land use shown with a “P” indicates that the land use is permitted by
right; an “A” indicates that the land use is permitted in the designated zoning
district upon issuance of an administrative use permit (pursuant to chapter 2,
article B of this title); a “C” indicates that the land use is permitted in the
designated zoning district upon issuance of a conditional use permit (pursuant
to chapter 2, article B of this title); and an “N” indicates that the use is
not allowed. Except as otherwise provided for in this title, uses not shown in
the table are not permitted. (Ord. 2013-05, 2-6-2014)
TABLE 9-4B-2
ALLOWED USES AND REQUIRED ENTITLEMENTS FOR BASE ZONING DISTRICTS
P = Permitted by right
N = Not permitted
A = Administrative use permit required
C = Conditional use permit required
 
                                  Special                      Office,
Land     Residential Zoning       Purpose    Mixed Use Zoning  Commercial, And
Use/     Districts                Zoning     Districts         Industrial
Zoning                            Districts                    Zoning Districts
District AR RVL RLD RN RLM RM RHD W AG PR CF DMX- DMX- DMX- MU NC RC PO ML MH
            D          D   D                 1    2    3
                                                Special                               Office, Commercial,
                    Residential Zoning          Purpose      Mixed Use Zoning         And
Land Use/           Districts                   Zoning       Districts                Industrial Zoning
Zoning District                                 Districts                             Districts
                    AR  RVL RLD RN  RLM RM  RHD W AG PR  CF  DMX- 1 DMX- 2 DMX- 3 MU  NC  RC  PO  ML  MH
                        D           D   D
Residential uses:                                                                   
 Caretaker housing C   P   P   P   P   P   P   C N  C   C   P      P      P      P   C   C   P   P   P
  Child daycare
 facility - family N   A   A   A   A   A   A   N N  N   N   A      A      A      A   N   N   N   N   N
  daycare home,
  large1
  Child daycare
 facility - family N   P   P   P   P   P   P   N N  N   N   P      P      P      P   N   N   N   N   N
  daycare home,
  small
 Dwelling, multi-  N   N   N   N   P   P   P   N N  N   N   P2     P      P      P   P27 N   C   N   N
  family
 Dwelling,         P   P   P   P   P   P   P   N N  N   N   N      P      P      N   N   N   N   N   N
  accessory unit3
 Dwelling, single- P   P   P   P   P   P   N   N N  N   N   N      A      P      N   N   N   N   N   N
  family
 Dwelling, two-    N   N   A   P   P   P   N   N N  N   N   N      P      P      N   N   N   N   N   N
  family
  Dwelling,
  additional,
 meeting           P   P   P   P   P   N   N   N N  N   N   N      N      P      N   N   N   N   N   N
  provisions of
  Government Code
  Section 66852.21
 Emergency shelter N   N   N   N   N   N   N   N N  N   P   N      N      N      N   N   N   N   C   N
 Employee housing, P   C   N   N   N   N   N   N P  N   N   N      N      N      N   N   N   N   N   N
  large
 Employee housing, P   P   P   P   P   P   N   N P  N   N   N      P      P      N   N   N   N   N   N
  small
 Gated residential C   C   C   C   C   C   C   N N  N   N   N      N      N      N   N   N   N   N   N
  community
 Group residential N   N   N   N   N   P   P   N N  N   C   P      P      P      P   N   N   N   N   N
 Guesthouse        P   P   P   P   P   P   N   N N  N   N   N      P      P      N   N   N   N   N   N
 Live-work         N   N   N   N   N   N   A   N N  N   N   A      A      A      A   A   N   N   N   N
  facility5
  Marijuana
  personal
 cultivation -     P28 P28 P28 P28 P28 P28 P28 N N  N   N   N      N      N      N   N   N   N   N   N
  personal
  recreational and
  medicinal use28
 Mobilehome park6  N   C   C   C   C   A   A   N N  N   N   N      N      N      N   N   N   N   N   N
 Recreational      N   N   N   N   N   N   N   N N  N   N   N      N      N      N   N   C   N   C   N
  vehicle park24
 Residential care  P   P   P   P   P   P   P   N N  N   N   N      A      P      C   C   N   N   N   N
  facility25
 Residential care  N   P   P   P   P   P   P   N N  N   N   C      P      P      P   N   N   N   N   N
  home
  Single room
 occupancy (SRO)   N   N   N   N   N   N   P   N N  N   N   C      C      C      N   N   N   N   N   N
  facility
 Supportive        P   P   P   P   P   P   P   N N  N   N   P      P      P      P   N   N   N   N   N
  housing
 Transitional      P   P   P   P   P   P   P   N N  N   N   P      P      P      P   N   N   N   N   N
  housing
Agricultural and
animal related                                                                      
uses:
 Agricultural      P   N   N   N   N   N   N   N N  N   P   N      C      C      N   N   N   N   P   P
  tourism
 Animal husbandry  C   N   N   N   N   N   N   N P  N   N   N      N      N      N   N   N   N   C   C
 Animal keeping    P   P   N   N   N   N   N   N P  N   N   N      N      N      N   N   N   N   N   N
 Animal sales and  N   N   N   N   N   N   N   N N  N   N   P      P      P      P   P   P   N   N   N
  grooming
 Crop production   P   C   A7  N   N   N   N   N P  N   N   N      N      N      N   N   N   N   A   A
  Equestrian
 facility,         P   N   N   N   N   N   N   N N  P   N   N      N      N      N   N   N   N   N   N
  commercial
 Equestrian        C   P   N   N   N   N   N   N N  C   C   N      N      N      N   N   N   N   N   N
  facility, hobby
 Household pets:                                                                   
 4 or less         P   P   P   P   P   P   P   N N  N   N   P      P      P      P   N   N   N   N   N
 More than 4       C   C   C   C   C   C   C   N N  N   N   C      C      C      C   N   N   N   N   N
 Kennel            P   N   N   N   N   N   N   N N  N   N   N      N      N      N   N   C8  C8  P   N
 Veterinary        P   N   N   N   N   N   N   N N  N   N   P      P      P      P   P   P   P   P   N
  facility
Recreation,
resource
preservation, open                                                                  
space, education,
and public assembly
uses:
 Assembly uses     A   N   C   C   A   A   A   N N  A   A   A      A      A      A   A   A   P   C   N
 Cemetery/         C   N   N   N   N   N   N   N N  C   P   N      N      N      N   N   N   N   N   N
  mausoleum
 Community food    N   N   C26 C26 C26 C26 N   N N  A   A   N      A      N      C   N   N   N   N   N
  bank
 Community garden9 A   A   A   A   A   A   A   N N  A   A   A      A      A      N   N   N   A   N   N
  Indoor amusement/
 entertainmen t    N   N   N   N   N   N   N   N N  P   P   P      P      C      P   P   P   N   A   N
  facility10
  Indoor fitness
 and sports        N   N   N   N   N   N   N   N N  P   P   P      P      C      P   P   P   C   A   N
  facility
 Library/museum    N   N   N   N   N   N   N   N N  P   P   P      P      P      C   N   C   P   C   N
  Outdoor
 commercial        N   N   N   N   N   N   N   N N  A   A   A      A      N      A   A   A   N   N   N
  barbeque
  Outdoor
 commercial        N   N   N   N   N   N   N   N N  P   P   P11    P11    P11    P11 N   N   N   C   N
  recreation
 Park/public plaza N   P   P   P   P   P   P   N N  P   P   P      P      P      P   P   P   P   P   P
  Resource
 protection and    P   N   N   N   N   N   N   P N  P   P   N      N      N      N   N   N   N   N   N
  restoration
 Resource related  P   N   N   N   N   N   N   P N  P   P   N      N      N      N   N   N   N   N   N
  recreation
  School, academic
 - private and     N   N   C   C   C   C   C   N N  N   P   N      N      N      C   N   N   N   C   N
  charter
 School, academic  P   P   P   P   P   P   P   P N  P   P   P      P      P      P   P   P   P   P   P
  - public
  School, colleges
 and universities  N   N   N   N   N   N   N   N N  N   P   C11    C11    N      C   N   N   P   C   N
  - private
  School, colleges
 and universities  P   P   P   P   P   P   P   P N  P   P   P      P      P      P   P   P   P   P   P
  - public
  School,
 equipment/        N   N   N   N   N   N   N   N N  N   P   N      N      N      N   N   N   N   P   C
  machinery/
  vehicle training
  School,
 specialized       N   N   N   N   N   N   N   N N  N   N   P      P      C      P   P   P   P   C   N
  education and
  training/studio
 Theater/          N   N   N   N   N   N   N   N N  P   P   P      C      C      P   P   P   N   N   N
  auditorium
Utility,
transportation,
public facility,                                                                    
and communication
uses:
 Airport           N   N   N   N   N   N   N   N N  N   N   N      N      N      N   N   N   N   N   N
 Ambulance service N   N   C   N   N   N   N   N N  N   N   N      N      N      N   N   P   P   P   N
 Broadcasting and  N   N   N   N   N   N   N   N N  N   N   P11    P11    C11    C   C   P   P   P   N
  recording studio
 Bus and transit   P   P   P   P   P   P   P   P N  P   P   P      P      P      P   P   P   P   P   P
  shelter
 Fuel storage and  N   N   N   N   N   N   N   N N  N   N   N      N      N      N   N   N   N   C   C
  distribution
 Heliport          N   N   N   N   N   N   N   N N  N   N   N      N      N      N   N   C   C   C   C
 Park and ride     N   N   N   N   N   N   N   N N  P   P   P      P      N      P   P   P   P   P   P
  facility
 Parking facility  N   N   N   N   N   N   N   N N  N   N   P      P      C      P   P   P   P   P   P
 Public safety     P   P   P   P   P   P   P   P N  P   P   P      P      P      P   P   P   P   P   P
  facility
 Solar power       C   N   N   N   N   N   N   N N  N   C   N      N      N      N   N   N   N   C   C
  station
 Transit facility  N   N   N   N   N   N   N   N N  N   P   N      N      N      N   N   N   N   P   P
 Transit station/  N   N   N   N   N   N   N   N N  N   P   P      N      N      P   P   P   C   P   P
  terminal
 Truck stop/travel N   N   N   N   N   N   N   N N  N   N   N      N      N      N   N   C   N   C   C
  center
  Utility facility
 and               P   P   P   P   P   P   P   P N  P   P   N      N      N      P   P   P   P   P   P
  infrastructure
  Wireless
 telecommunication                                                                 
  facility:
 Major12           N   N   N   N   N   N   N   N N  C13 C13 C13    C13    N      C13 C13 C13 N   C13 C13
 Minor12           P   P   P   P   P   P   P   P N  P   P   P      P      P      P   P   P   P   P   P
Retail, service,                                                                    
and office uses:
 Adult day         N   N   N   N   N   N   C   N N  N   N   N      C      C      C   C   C   P   N   N
  healthcare center
  Alcoholic
 beverage sales,   N   N   N   N   N   N   N   N N  N   N   C      C      C      C   C   C   C   C   N
  off site14
  Alcoholic
 beverage sales,   See “bar/nightclub” and “restaurant”
  on site14
 Art, antique,     N   N   N   N   N   N   N   N N  N   N   P15    P15    P15    P   P   P   N   N   N
  collectible
 Artisan shop      N   N   N   N   N   N   N   N N  N   N   P15    P15    P15    P   P   P   N   N   N
  Banks and
 financial         N   N   N   N   N   N   N   N N  N   N   P15    P15    P15    P   P   P   P   C   N
  services
 Bar/nightclub14   N   N   N   N   N   N   N   N N  N   N   C      C      N      C   C   C   N   N   N
 Bed and breakfast N   N   N   N   N   N   N   N N  N   N   N      P      P      P   C   N   N   N   N
  inn
  Building
 materials store/  N   N   N   N   N   N   N   N N  N   N   P11,15 P      N      P   P   P   N   P   N
  yard
 Business support  N   N   N   N   N   N   N   N N  N   N   P15    P15    C      P   P   P   P   N   N
  services
 Call center       N   N   N   N   N   N   N   N N  N   N   N      N      N      N   N   N   P   C   N
  Cannabis
 commercial        N   N   N   N   N   N   N   N N  N   N   N      N      N      N   C28 N   N   P28 N
  cultivation28
  Cannabis
 commercial        N   N   N   N   N   N   N   N N  N   N   P28    P28    N      P28 P28 P28 N   P28 N
  dispensary28
  Cannabis
  commercial
 manufacturing,    N   N   N   N   N   N   N   N N  N   N   N      N      N      N   N   N   N   P28 N
  distribution,
  and/or testing28
 Card room         N   N   N   N   N   N   N   N N  N   N   C15    C15    N      N   N   C   N   N   N
 Check cashing     N   N   N   N   N   N   N   N N  N   N   N      N      N      N   C   C   N   N   N
  business
  Child daycare
 facility - child  N   N   N   C   C   A   A   N N  N   N   C      N      P      P   P   P   P   N   N
  daycare center25
 Consignment store N   N   N   N   N   N   N   N N  N   N   P15    C15    N      P   P   P   P   N   N
 Convenience store N   N   N   N   N   N   N   N N  N   N   P15    P15    C15    P   P   P   P   C   N
 Crematory         N   N   N   N   N   N   N   N N  N   N   N      N      N      N   N   C   N   C   P
  Drive-in and
 drive-through     N   N   N   N   N   N   N   N N  N   N   N      N      N      A   A   A   C   A   N
  sales and
  service16
 Equipment sales   N   N   N   N   N   N   N   N N  N   N   N      N      N      C   N   C   N   P   P
  and rental
 Garden center/    N   N   N   N   N   N   N   N N  N   N   P15    P15    N      A   P   P   N   A   N
  plant nursery
 Grocery store/    N   N   N   N   N   N   N   N N  N   N   N      N      N      P   P   P   N   N   N
  supermarket
 Hookah parlor     N   N   N   N   N   N   N   N N  N   N   N      N      N      N   N   N   N   N   N
 Hotel and motel   N   N   N   N   N   N   N   N N  N   N   P      N      N      P   P   P   P   P   N
  Maintenance and
 repair of small   N   N   N   N   N   N   N   N N  N   N   P15    P15    C15    C   P   P   P   P   P
  equipment
 Massage therapy17 N   N   N   N   N   N   N   N N  N   N   A      N      N      A   A   A   N   N   N
 Medical services, N   N   N   N   N   N   N   N N  N   N   C      C      C      P   P   P   P   N   N
  extended care
 Medical services, N   N   N   N   N   N   N   N N  N   N   P      P      P      P   P   P   P   N   N
  general
 Medical services, N   N   C   C   C   C   C   N N  N   N   N      N      N      C   C   P   P   C   N
  hospital25
 Mortuary/funeral  N   N   N   N   N   N   N   N N  N   N   C      C      C      C   P   P   P   N   N
  home
 Neighborhood      N   N   N   N   N   N   N   N N  N   N   A      A      N      P   P   P   N   N   N
  market
 Office, accessory N   N   N   N   N   N   N   N N  P   P   P      P      P      P   P   P   P   P   P
 Office, business  N   N   N   N   N   N   N   N N  N   N   P      P      P      P   A   A   P   N   N
  and professional
 Pawnshop          N   N   N   N   N   N   N   N N  N   N   C      C      N      N   P   P   N   N   N
 Personal services N   N   N   N   N   N   N   N N  N   N   P      P      P      P   P   P   P   N   N
 Restaurant        N   N   N   N   N   N   N   N N  N   N   P      P      P      P   P   P   P   P   N
 Retail, accessory N   N   N   N   N   N   N   N N  N   N   P      P      P      P   P   P   P   P   P
 Retail, general   N   N   N   N   N   N   N   N N  N   N   P11,15 P11,15 P11,15 P18 P18 P   N   N   N
 Retail, warehouse N   N   N   N   N   N   N   N N  N   N   N      N      N      C   N   P   N   N   N
  club
  Semipermanent
 mobile food       N   N   N   N   N   N   N   N N  N   N   N      N      N      A   A   A   N   A   N
  vehicle19
 Sexually oriented N   N   N   N   N   N   N   N N  N   N   N      N      N      N   N   N   N   C   C
  business20
 Short-term rental P   P   P   P   P   P   P   N N  N   N   C      P      P      C   C   C   C   N   N
  unit
 Smoke shop        N   N   N   N   N   N   N   N N  N   N   N      N      N      C   C   P   N   N   N
 Tattoo parlor     N   N   N   N   N   N   N   N N  N   N   P29    P29    N      P29 P29 P29 P29 N   N
 Thrift store21    N   N   N   N   N   N   N   N N  N   N   C      C      N      A   A   A   N   N   N
Automobile and                                                                      
vehicle uses:
 Auto and light    N   N   N   N   N   N   N   N N  N   N   C      C      N      C   N   P   N   P   N
  vehicle sales
 Auto and vehicle  N   N   N   N   N   N   N   N N  N   N   N      N      N      C   C   C   C   P   P
  rental
 Auto and vehicle  N   N   N   N   N   N   N   N N  N   N   N      N      N      N   N   N   N   P   P
  sales, wholesale
 Auto and vehicle  N   N   N   N   N   N   N   N N  N   N   N      N      N      N   N   N   N   P   P
  storage
 Auto parts sales  N   N   N   N   N   N   N   N N  N   N   N      P11,15 N      P   P   P   P   P   P
 Auto vehicle      N   N   N   N   N   N   N   N N  N   N   N      N      N      N   N   N   N   C   P
  dismantling
 Car washing and   N   N   N   N   N   N   N   N N  N   N   N      P      N      C   C   P   N   P   P
  detailing
 Fueling station22 N   N   N   N   N   N   N   N N  N   N   N      C      N      C   C   C   C   C   C
 Heavy vehicle     N   N   N   N   N   N   N   N N  N   N   N      N      N      C   N   P   N   P   N
  sales
 Vehicle services  N   N   N   N   N   N   N   N N  N   N   N      C      N      C   N   N   N   P   P
  - major
 Vehicle services  N   N   N   N   N   N   N   N N  N   N   N      C23    N      C23 C23 C23 N   P   C23
  - minor
Industrial,
manufacturing, and                                                                  
processing uses:
  Agricultural
 products          C   N   N   N   N   N   N   N N  N   N   N      N      N      N   N   N   N   P   P
  processing
 Freight yard/     N   N   N   N   N   N   N   N N  N   N   N      N      N      N   N   N   N   P   P
  truck terminal
 Manufacturing,    N   N   N   N   N   N   N   N N  N   N   N      N      N      N   N   N   N   C   P
  major
 Manufacturing,    N   N   N   N   N   N   N   N N  N   N   N      N      N      N   N   N   C   P   P
  minor
 Manufacturing,    N   N   N   N   N   N   N   N N  N   N   N      N      N      C   N   N   P23 P   P
  small scale
 Printing and      N   N   N   N   N   N   N   N N  N   N   N      C11    N      C   P   P   P   P   P
  publishing
  Recycling
 facility -        N   N   N   N   N   N   N   N N  N   N   N      C      N      A   A   A   N   P   P
  collection
  Recycling
 facility -        N   N   N   N   N   N   N   N N  N   N   N      N      N      N   N   N   N   C   P
  processing
  Recycling
 facility - scrap  N   N   N   N   N   N   N   N N  N   N   N      N      N      N   N   N   N   C   P
  and dismantling
 Research and      N   N   N   N   N   N   N   N N  N   N   N      N      N      C   N   N   P23 P   P
  development
 Storage, personal N   N   C30 N   C30 C30 N   N N  N   N   N      N      N      N   N   N   N   P30 P30
  storage facility
 Storage,          N   N   N   N   N   N   N   N N  N   N   N      N      N      N   N   N   N   P   P
  warehouse
 Storage, yard     N   N   N   N   N   N   N   N N  N   N   N      N      N      N   N   N   N   P   P
 Wholesaling and   N   N   N   N   N   N   N   N N  N   N   N      N      N      N   N   N   N   P   P
  distribution
Temporary uses         See article C, “Temporary Uses”, of this chapter
Nonconforming uses     See chapter 2, article C, “Nonconforming Uses, Structures, And Properties”, of
                    this title
 
Notes:
    1.    See additional regulations for large family daycare homes in section
9-4D-7 of this chapter.
    2.    Only permitted on the first floor when located along an alley or side
street; otherwise must be on an upper floor.
    3.    See additional regulations for accessory dwelling units in section
9-4D-12 of this chapter.
    4.    Reserved.
    5.    See additional regulations for live-work facilities in section
9-4D-8 of this chapter.
    6.    See additional regulations for mobilehome parks in section
9-4D-10 of this chapter.
    7.    Minimum lot size shall be 20,000 square feet.
    8.    All activities and storage shall be located within an enclosed
structure(s).
    9.    See additional regulations for community gardens in section
9-4D-3 of this chapter.
    10.    See special permit requirements in title 3, chapter 4, article C of
the Municipal Code.
    11.    Maximum tenant space shall be 10,000 square feet.
    12.    See additional regulations for wireless telecommunication facilities
in section
9-4D-15 of this chapter.
    13.    Facilities less than 75 feet tall are permitted by right, except
that site plan and architectural review is still required. Otherwise, a
conditional use permit is required in addition to site plan and architectural
review.
    14.    See additional regulations for alcoholic beverage sales in section
9-4D-2 of this chapter.
    15.    Use is permitted by right when located on the ground floor.
Otherwise, a conditional use permit is required.
    16.    See additional regulations for drive-in and drive-through facilities
in section
9-4D-4 of this chapter.
    17.    See additional regulations for massage therapy in section
9-4D-9 of this chapter. Additionally, see additional permit requirements in
title 4, chapter 7 of the Municipal Code.
    18.    Maximum tenant space shall be 30,000 square feet; however, store
size may be larger upon approval of an administrative use permit.
    19.    See additional regulations for semipermanent mobile food vendors in
section
9-4D-13 of this chapter.
    20.    See additional regulations for sexually oriented businesses in
section
9-4D-14 of this chapter.
    21.    See additional regulations for thrift stores in section
9-4D-16 of this chapter.
    22.    See additional regulations for fueling stations in section
9-4D-6 of this chapter.
    23.    Use is permitted by right when located more than 500 feet from a
residential use or district.
    24.    See additional regulations for recreational vehicle parks in section
9-4D-11 of this chapter.
    25.    This “sensitive receptor” use shall not be located within:
      a.    500 feet of a freeway, urban roads carrying 100,000 vehicles per
day, or rural roads carrying 50,000 vehicles per day.
      b.    1,000 feet of a distribution center (that accommodates more than
100 trucks a day, more than 40 trucks with operating transport refrigeration
units [TRUs] a day, or where TRU operation exceeds 300 hours per week).
      c.    300 feet of any dry cleaning operation that uses toxic chemicals.
For operations with 2 or more machines, a minimum 500 feet shall be provided.
For operations with 3 or more machines, a larger distance may be required based
upon consultation with the Kings County Air District.
      d.    300 feet of a “large gas station”, defined as a facility with a
throughput of 3.6 million gallons or more per year.
    26.    If developed incidental to an existing charitable operation, this
use is allowed subject to approval of an administrative use permit.
    27.    Permitted on second floors above retail and neighborhood serving
office when ancillary in size and does not interfere with primary retail use.
    28.    Use is permitted as allowed by State law and as authorized in title
4, chapter 8 of the Municipal Code.
    29.    See additional regulations for tattoo parlors in section
9-4D-21 of this chapter.
    30.    See additional regulations for personal storage facilities in
section
9-4D-22 of this chapter.
(Ord. 2019-03, 7-2-2019; amd. Ord. 2023-10, 9-19-2023; Ord. 2024-01, 6-18-2024)
ARTICLE C. TEMPORARY USES
SECTION:
9-4C-1: Purpose
9-4C-2: Permit Requirements And Exemptions
9-4C-3: General Development Standards For Temporary Uses
9-4C-4: Standards For Specific Temporary Uses
9-4C-5: Temporary Improvements To Property
9-4C-1: PURPOSE:
The purpose of this article is to establish development standards for temporary
activities, such as special events and uses, to ensure the overall health,
safety, and general welfare of the community is maintained. (Ord. 2016-04, 4-
19-2016)
9-4C-2: PERMIT REQUIREMENTS AND EXEMPTIONS:
Uses of property (including land, buildings, and structures) and activities
that are temporary in nature shall comply with the permit requirements
described below. The process for application for and review and issuance of a
temporary use permit shall be as described in section
9-2B-4, "Temporary Use Permit", of this title.
   A.   Temporary Uses Exempt From Permit Requirements: The following temporary
activities and uses are allowed by right and expressly exempt from the
requirement of first obtaining a temporary use permit, provided they conform to
the listed development standards. Uses that fall outside of the categories
defined shall be required to obtain a temporary use permit.
      1.   Car washes of a temporary nature (e.g., school fundraisers).
      2.   Construction yards, storage sheds, and construction offices (on
site) in conjunction with an approved construction project where the yard and/
or shed are located on the same site as the approved project.
      3.   Emergency public health and safety facilities established by a
public agency.
      4.   Entertainment and assembly events held within auditoriums, stadiums,
or other public assembly facilities, provided the proposed use is consistent
with the intended use of the facility.
      5.   Entertainment and assembly events as part of an allowed permanent
use (e.g., race at a raceway).
      6.   Events held exclusively in City parks or City buildings.
      7.   Events held exclusively on school grounds and that are in
conjunction with the school use.
      8.   Events held exclusively on church grounds and that are in
conjunction with the church use.
      9.   Garage and yard sales held on private property and when occurring no
more than three (3) consecutive days two (2) times per calendar year.
      10.   Outdoor promotional events and seasonal sales related to an
existing business with temporary outdoor display and sales of merchandise and
seasonal sales in conjunction with an established commercial business that
holds a valid business license and is in compliance with the development
standards of this title.
      11.   Seasonal sales involving fireworks, as these uses are permitted
through existing State processes and City business license.
      12.   Storage containers not in conjunction with an approved construction
project when:
         a.   Located on residential property for periods less than seventy two
(72) hours, or
         b.   Located on nonresidential property for periods of no more than
forty five (45) days. (Ord. 2017-08, 6-20-2017)
   B.   Temporary Use Permit Required: The following temporary activities and
uses may be allowed, subject to the issuance of a temporary use permit prior to
the commencement of the activity or use. Activities or uses that do not fall
within the categories defined below, and are not otherwise exempted in
subsection A of this section, shall comply with the use and development
regulations and permit requirements that otherwise apply to the property.
      1.   Construction yards, storage sheds, and construction offices (off
site) in conjunction with an approved construction project, where the yard is
located on a site different from the site of the approved construction project.
      2.   Entertainment and assembly events, including carnivals, circuses,
concerts, fairs, festivals, food events, fundraisers, haunted houses, outdoor
entertainment/sporting events, and similar events designed to attract large
crowds and when not otherwise part of or consistent with a permitted use (e.g.,
race at a raceway).
      3.   Extension of nonconforming period as provided in subsection
9-2C-6C, "Extension Of Nonconforming Period", of this title.
      4.   Farmers' markets, as defined in this chapter.
      5.   Interim agricultural uses, as defined in this chapter.
      6.   Temporary sales, including swap meets, flea markets, rummage sales,
and similar events. Temporary sales also includes temporary outdoor sales not
in conjunction with an established commercial business on the site.
      7.   Seasonal sales as defined in this chapter (e.g., Halloween,
Christmas), including temporary residence/security trailers, except when
related to an existing business (see subsection A10 of this section).
      8.   Temporary sales offices as defined in this chapter.
      9.   Temporary land uses on unimproved or partially improved sites in a
zoning district that allows that land use on a permanent basis.
      10.   Temporary community food banks.
      11.   Other temporary activities that the city determines are similar in
nature and intensity to those identified above. (Ord. 2016-04, 4-19-2016)
9-4C-3: GENERAL DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS FOR TEMPORARY USES:
Standards for height, off street parking spaces, setbacks, and other structure
and property development standards that apply to the category of use or the
zoning district of the subject parcel shall apply to all temporary activities.
The planning director may waive requirements for long term improvements that
exceed the duration of the temporary use, including, but not limited to,
landscaping and paving of parking lots. (Ord. 2016-04, 4-19-2016)
9-4C-4: STANDARDS FOR SPECIFIC TEMPORARY USES:
The following standards shall apply to the specific temporary uses described
below:
   A.   Construction Yard/Storage Shed And Temporary Construction Office: Any
temporary use permit for a construction yard, storage shed, or temporary
construction office shall expire upon completion of the construction project,
or the expiration of the accompanying building permit or improvement permit
authorizing construction, whichever occurs first.
   B.   Entertainment And Assembly Events: Entertainment and assembly events
when not part of or consistent with a permitted use shall not be permitted for
periods of longer than seven (7) consecutive days.
   C.   Extension Of Nonconforming Period: As provided in subsection
9-2C-6C, "Extension Of Nonconforming Period", of this title, the twelve (12)
month nonconforming period for nonconforming uses provided in chapter 2,
article C, "Nonconforming Uses, Structures, And Properties", of this title, may
be extended upon issuance of a temporary use permit. All approved extensions
shall comply with the following standards:
      1.   Public Improvements: The city may, as part of the approval of the
extension of the nonconforming use period, require the completion of
improvements to the adjacent public right of way consistent with the
requirements of this title.
      2.   Time Period: The designated approving authority shall establish a
maximum time period for the extension of the legal nonconforming use status. In
no event shall the extension be longer than twenty four (24) months.
   D.   Farmers' Market: Farmers' markets shall not be held for more than two
(2) consecutive days per week at the same location.
   E.   Garage/Yard Sale: Garage sales, yard sales, and similar activities
shall not occur more than two (2) times per year, with no sale exceeding three
(3) consecutive days.
   F.   Interim Agricultural Use: Interim agricultural uses, as defined in this
chapter and of a commercial operation (e.g., using mechanized commercial
equipment) shall only be allowed on vacant property a minimum of one thousand
feet (1,000') from an existing residential use. No buildings or structures,
other than wells, structures for conservation and drainage protection, and
unpaved roads shall be permitted. Operation may include the use of commercial
agricultural equipment. Access to the use shall be reviewed and approved by the
public works director prior to issuance of the temporary use permit.
   G.   Seasonal Sale: Seasonal sales shall only be allowed on nonresidential
property. The maximum period for seasonal sales shall be forty five (45) days
per sale. No more than two (2) such activities shall be allowed for a property
within a twelve (12) month period.
   H.   Swap Meet: Swap meets, flea markets, rummage sales, and similar
activities shall only be allowed on nonresidential property or on vacant
residentially zoned property that is a minimum of one thousand feet (1,000')
from an existing residential use. The maximum period shall be for two (2)
consecutive days per activity. No more than four (4) such activities shall be
allowed for a property within a twelve (12) month period.
   I.   Temporary Sales Office: Temporary sales offices shall be solely for the
sale of homes in the project within which they are located and may be kept
until the project is sold out. (Ord. 2016-04, 4-19-2016)
9-4C-5: TEMPORARY IMPROVEMENTS TO PROPERTY:
   A.   Temporary Improvements Allowed: The city may, on a case by case basis,
allow for the improvement to property at a level less than what is required by
this title to support operations of the property on a limited term basis yet
still ensure public health, safety, and general welfare. This allowance shall
not be used to circumvent or deviate from the requirements for public
improvements required at the time of subdivision of property as required by the
subdivision map act and title 8, chapter 7, "Land Division", of the municipal
code.
   B.   Permit Process And Requirements: Such approval shall be conducted
through the temporary use permit process and the permit shall clearly identify
what improvements are to be completed and what requirements are being set aside
for a limited period of time, as well as the time period for which the permit
is valid. The city shall only approve the permit if the improvements to be
completed are those minimally necessary to ensure public health, safety, and
welfare.
   C.   Requirements At Conclusion Of Temporary Period: At the conclusion of
the period authorized by the permit, either the property shall be brought into
compliance with the requirements of this title or use of the property shall
cease. (Ord. 2016-04, 4-19-2016)
ARTICLE D. SPECIAL USE STANDARDS
SECTION:
9-4D-1: Purpose
9-4D-2: Alcoholic Beverage Sales
9-4D-3: Community Garden
9-4D-4: Drive-In And Drive-Through Facilities
9-4D-5: Home Occupations
9-4D-6: Fueling Stations
9-4D-7: Large Family Daycare Homes
9-4D-8: Live-Work Facilities
9-4D-9: Massage Therapy
9-4D-10: Mobilehome Parks
9-4D-11: Recreational Vehicle Parks
9-4D-12: Accessory Dwelling Units And Junior Accessory Dwelling Units
9-4D-13: Semipermanent Mobile Food Vendors
9-4D-14: Sexually Oriented Businesses
9-4D-15: Wireless Telecommunication Facilities
9-4D-16: Thrift Stores
9-4D-17: Outdoor Display, Sales, And Storage
9-4D-18: Residential Accessory Structures
9-4D-19: Manufactured Homes
9-4D-20: Shopping Carts
9-4D-21: Tattoo Parlors
9-4D-22: Personal Storage Facilities
9-4D-1: PURPOSE:
   A.   The purpose of this article is to establish site planning, development,
and/or operating standards for certain land uses. It is the City's intent in
establishing these standards to mitigate the potential adverse impacts of these
uses and activities on adjacent and surrounding land uses by applying special
design requirements, regulating activities within the use, and establishing
special setback and other development standards.
   B.   The regulations and standards contained within this article shall apply
only to those uses specifically listed in the corresponding section and shall
be in addition to any other development standards and regulations contained
elsewhere within this title (e.g., lighting, landscaping, parking, signage).
These uses may only be located in those zoning districts as described in, and
shall only be authorized in concert with, the permit requirements of article B,
"Allowed Uses And Required Entitlements", of this chapter. Where the special
standards in this article conflict with the standards of the underlying base
zoning district, the special standards in this article shall prevail. (Ord.
2013-05, 2-6-2014)
9-4D-2: ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGE SALES:
   A.   Purpose And Applicability: The purpose of these regulations is to
regulate the location of commercial retail sales of alcoholic beverages for
specific types of on site and off site consumption through the application of
development standards to minimize the potential public health and safety
effects on the community. These standards shall apply to the sale of alcoholic
beverages for on site consumption when not associated with eating places (e.g.,
restaurants) and for off site consumption.
   B.   Allowed Use Regulations: The sale of alcoholic beverages for both on
site and off site consumption shall only be permitted in compliance with the
allowed use and permit requirements listed in article B, "Allowed Uses And
Required Entitlements", of this chapter.
   C.   Special Application Materials: In addition to completing a permit
application for a conditional use permit as required by this title, an
application for a use permit for on site and off site sales of alcoholic
beverage as regulated by this section shall also include the following
information:
      1.   The distance to the nearest park;
      2.   The distance to the nearest school;
      3.   The distance to the nearest church; and
      4.   A listing of all existing sales of alcoholic beverages within one
(1) mile of the proposed location.
   D.   Development Standards: Unless otherwise allowed through subsection E of
this section, all sales of alcoholic beverages for on site or off site
consumption as regulated by this section shall comply with the following
development standards:
      1.   No establishment shall be within five hundred feet (500') of a
church, school, or park;
      2.   There shall be no more than one establishment within any single
shopping center;
      3.   No more than two (2) off site sales establishments shall be located
within five hundred feet (500') of a major roadway intersection.
   E.   Deviations From Development Standards: Establishments selling alcoholic
beverages for on site or off site consumption as regulated by this section may
be allowed to deviate from the development standards listed in subsection D,
"Development Standards", of this section if the approving authority makes all
of the following findings:
      1.   The location of the use will not result in adverse impacts on park
facilities, school facilities, existing religious land uses, and/or existing
residential land uses.
      2.   The traffic increases associated with the use will not result in
potential hazards to existing pedestrian and/or vehicular traffic.
      3.   The development conforms to all applicable provisions of this Zoning
Code. (Ord. 2013-05, 2-6-2014)
9-4D-3: COMMUNITY GARDEN:
   A.   Purpose: The purpose of these regulations is to ensure that community
gardens are operated and maintained in a manner compatible with surrounding
(primarily residential) development. (Ord. 2013-05, 2-6-2014)
   B.   Development Standards: Community gardens shall comply with all of the
following development standards:
      1.   Use: Community gardens are limited to the cultivation of herbs,
fruits, flowers, or vegetables, including the cultivation and tillage of soil
and the production, cultivation, growing, and harvesting of any agricultural,
floricultural, or horticultural commodity. Medicinal and commercial cannabis
operations are prohibited in community gardens. (Ord. 2019-03, 7-2-2019)
      2.   Animal Keeping: The keeping of livestock and animals is prohibited.
      3.   Setbacks: Accessory buildings and structures shall comply with the
accessory structure setback requirements listed in section
9-4D-18, "Residential Accessory Structures", of this article. Crop areas must
be set back at least three feet (3') from all property lines.
      4.   Height: Garden and farm related buildings and structures may not
exceed twenty feet (20') in height.
      5.   Fencing: Fencing shall be provided around the site consistent with
the standards of section
9-5B-5, "Fences And Walls", of this title.
      6.   Use Of Chemicals: The use of commercial grade pesticides as part of
a community garden is prohibited.
      7.   Harvest Sales: A maximum of four (4) harvest sales shall be allowed
annually from the garden site. (Ord. 2013-05, 2-6-2014)
9-4D-4: DRIVE-IN AND DRIVE-THROUGH FACILITIES:
   A.   Purpose: The purpose of this section is to regulate drive- through
windows and remote tellers with development standards that address the
mitigation of traffic, congestion, excessive pavement, pedestrian connections,
litter, and noise.
   B.   Applicability: Development standards herein shall apply to all new
facilities with drive-in and drive-through sales and services and will be
reviewed in conjunction with the required conditional use permit and/or site
plan and architectural review application.
   C.   Development And Design Standards: The following standards shall be the
minimum requirements for all drive-in and drive- through facilities. Deviations
to these provisions may be considered through the issuance of a site plan and
architectural review permit.
      1.   Aisles: The minimum standards for drive-through aisles are as
follows:
         a.   Width: Aisles shall have a twelve foot (12') minimum width on
curves and an eleven foot (11') minimum width on straight sections.
         b.   Reservoir Space: Aisles shall provide at least one hundred eighty
feet (180') of reservoir space for each facility, as measured from the service
window to the entry point into the drive-up lane. Nonfood and/or nonbeverage
businesses may reduce the stacking space to a minimum of sixty feet (60').
Exceptions may be granted by the designated approving authority when an
applicant demonstrates that the required reservoir space is unnecessary.
         c.   Entrances And Exits: Aisle entrances and exits shall be at least
one hundred fifty feet (150') from an intersection of public rights of way,
measured at the closest intersecting curbs, and at least fifty feet (50') from
the curb cut on an adjacent property. Exceptions may be granted by the
designated approving authority when aisle pullout spaces are provided.
         d.   Separation: Aisles shall be separated from the site's ingress and
egress routes or access to a parking space.
         e.   Passing Lane: Where two (2) drive-through service windows are
provided, the aisle shall be designed with a passing lane to allow customers
that complete their transaction at the first window to pass customers that are
waiting at the second window.
      2.   Pedestrian Access And Crossings: Pedestrian access shall be provided
from each abutting street to the primary entrance with a continuous, minimum
four foot (4') wide sidewalk or delineated walkway. Generally, pedestrian
walkways should not intersect the drive-through aisles, but where they do the
walkways shall have clear visibility and shall be delineated by textured and
colored paving and shall be clearly signed to alert vehicles in the drive-
through aisles.
      3.   Parking: The placement of drive-up windows, remote tellers, and
drive-through aisles shall not be considered as justification for reducing the
number of parking spaces that are otherwise required.
      4.   Noise: Drive-up windows and their order stations shall be located
such that impacts to sensitive receptors (neighbors) are minimized.
      5.   Drive-Through Service Windows: Drive-through windows shall be
visible from a public way to ensure that all activity can be viewed from an
adjacent street.
   FIGURE 9-4D-4-C-1
   DRIVE-THROUGH FACILITIES
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/08286aa2a408810754fa2332ce2e067d759ab116/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2257.jpg]
 
(Ord. 2013-05, 2-6-2014)
9-4D-5: HOME OCCUPATIONS:
   A.   Purpose And Applicability: The regulations contained in this section
shall apply to home occupations to ensure the compatibility of the home
occupations with the principal residential uses in order to protect the
integrity and character of neighborhoods.
   B.   Approval Process: Prior to the establishment of a home occupation, the
proprietor of a home occupation shall first obtain a home occupation permit and
a business license from the city. The procedures for submittal, review, and
approval of the home occupation permit shall be as described in chapter 2,
article B, "Planning Permits And Entitlements", of this title. No business
license shall be issued until a home occupation permit is first issued.
Business licenses shall be reviewed and issued consistent with the provisions
of title 3, "Business, License And Permit Regulations", of the municipal code.
   C.   Categories Of Home Occupations: As described in chapter 2, article B,
"Planning Permits And Entitlements", of this title, there are two (2) types of
home occupations permits - major and minor. Major permits are discretionary in
nature and are reserved for those activities that may generate vehicular and
pedestrian traffic and that may adversely impact residential neighborhoods.
Minor permits are ministerial and are for those activities that have little or
no impact on the neighborhood. Examples of each kind of activity are described
below. The planning director shall have the authority to determine if a
proposed activity is a major or minor activity, or is an activity prohibited as
a home occupation.
      1.   Minor Home Occupation: Minor home occupations are home occupations
that do not generate higher levels of traffic than that customarily found in a
residential neighborhood, do not have customers visiting the home, and which do
not have a noticeable appearance. Examples include, but are not limited to, the
following types of occupations:
         a.   Art and craft work such as ceramics, flower arranging, jewelry
making, painting, sculpting, and photography;
         b.   Electronic and other by mail commerce involving the storage and
shipping of goods and products from the home; and
         c.   Office uses such as an office for a tax preparer, contractor,
architect, attorney, consultant, counselor, engineer, insurance agent, planner,
tutor, data and/or word processing, and real estate agent where no customers
come to the home.
         d.   Cottage food operations that are established per California
Government Code section 51035.
      2.   Major Home Occupation: Major home occupations are more intensive
operations that may have a noticeable impact on surrounding residential land
uses as a result of increased traffic (vehicular and pedestrian), that may have
up to five (5) customers come to the home per day, and that send or receive
goods beyond those customary for a residential neighborhood. Examples include,
but are not limited to, the following types of occupations:
         a.   Furniture stripping and refurbishing;
         b.   Mobile clinics; and
         c.   Office uses such as an office for a contractor, architect,
attorney, consultant, counselor, engineer, insurance agent, planner, tutor,
data and/or word processing, and real estate agent where fewer than five (5)
customers come to the home per day.
   D.   Activities Prohibited As Home Occupations: The following activities are
specifically prohibited as home occupations:
      1.   Ambulance service;
      2.   Ammunition reloading, including custom reloading;
      3.   Boarding house, bed and breakfast, hotel, timeshare condominium;
      4.   Carpentry, cabinetmakers;
      5.   Ceramics (kiln of 6 cubic feet or more);
      6.   Firearms repair or sales;
      7.   Health salons, gyms, dance studios, aerobic exercise studios;
      8.   Massage therapy;
      9.   Medical, dental, chiropractic, or veterinary clinics (including
boarding);
      10.   Mortician, hearse service;
      11.   Palm reading and fortune telling;
      12.   Private clubs;
      13.   Repair or reconditioning of boats or recreation vehicles;
      14.   Restaurants or taverns;
      15.   Retail sales from site (except direct distribution of artist's
originals, food prepared at a cottage food operation, and electronic and mail
order commerce);
      16.   Storage, repair, or reconditioning of major household appliances;
      17.   Storage, repair, or reconditioning of motorized vehicles or large
equipment on site other than personal use;
      18.   Tattoo service;
      19.   Tow truck service; and
      20.   Welding service.
   E.   Performance Standards: The following standards shall apply to all minor
home occupation permit applications. The standards may be modified by the
approving authority for major home occupations.
      1.   Number Of Home Occupations: There is no limit on the number of home
occupations at a residence provided that the performance standards identified
in this section are met.
      2.   Employees: Off site employees or partners are not permitted. Only
occupants of the home may work on site.
      3.   Habitable Floor Area: The use of the dwelling for the home
occupation shall be clearly incidental and subordinate to its use for
residential purposes. Not more than one hundred fifty (150) square feet or
fifteen percent (15%) of the floor area of the dwelling, whichever is less,
shall be used in the home occupation.
      4.   Off Site Effects: There shall be no mechanical equipment or
operation used which creates or makes dust, odor, vibration, or other effects
detectable at the property line. No process shall be used which is hazardous to
public health, safety, morals, or welfare.
      5.   Sales:
         a.   On Site Sales: There shall be no products sold on the premises
except artist's originals or products individually made to order on the
premises.
         b.   Off Site Sales: Off site sales, including electronic and mail
order commerce, shall be permitted.
      6.   Display: There shall be no display of products produced by occupants
of the dwelling which are visible in any manner from the outside of the
dwelling unit.
      7.   Traffic: The use shall not generate pedestrian or vehicular traffic
beyond that which is normal in a residential district nor in any case require
the parking of more than two (2) additional vehicles at any one time.
      8.   Vehicles: One truck or van, not more than three-quarters (3/4) ton
capacity, may be kept on or adjacent to the premises associated with the home
occupation. No campers or semitrailers incidental to the home occupation shall
be kept on the premises.
      9.   Storage: There shall be no storage of material or supplies out of
doors.
      10.   Exterior Appearance: There shall be no remodeling or construction
of facilities especially for the home occupation which changes the external
appearance of the neighborhood from a residential to a more commercial look
when viewed from the front of the building.
      11.   Signs: Signs shall be allowed for the home occupation in accordance
with chapter 5, article F, "Signage", of this title. (Ord. 2013-05, 2-6-2014)
      12.   Visitors And Customers: For minor home occupation permits, no
visitors or customers shall be allowed. For major home occupation permits,
visitors and customers shall not exceed those normally and reasonably occurring
for a residence, including not more than five (5) a day, during the hours of
eight o'clock (8:00) A.M. in the morning to seven o'clock (7:00) P.M. in the
evening. (Ord. 2014-06, 10-21-2014)
      13.   Deliveries: Deliveries shall not exceed those normally and
reasonably occurring for a residence. Deliveries of materials for the home
occupation shall not involve the use of commercial vehicles except for FedEx,
UPS, or USPS type home pick ups and deliveries.
      14.   Hazardous Materials: Storage of hazardous materials is limited to
below those thresholds as established by the fire department to not require any
special permits or licenses.
      15.   Cottage Food Operation: Notwithstanding the foregoing standards, a
cottage food operation may have one employee who does not live at the site, and
may sell goods at the site.
   F.   Failure To Comply: Failure to comply with these standards may result in
revocation of the home occupation permit and/or business license. (Ord. 2013-
05, 2-6-2014)
9-4D-6: FUELING STATIONS:
   A.   Purpose And Intent: The purpose of this section is to establish
requirements for the location and construction of new fueling stations. The
intent of these provisions is to ensure that new fueling stations are
compatible with surrounding uses and activities by mitigating associated
problems with traffic, congestion, excessive pavement and lighting, litter, and
hazardous materials.
   B.   Applicability: The regulations contained in this section shall apply to
fueling stations as defined in section
9-4A-5, "Description Of Land Uses", of this chapter. The establishment of new
fueling stations shall be consistent with the allowed use provisions of article
B, "Allowed Uses And Required Entitlements", of this chapter and the standards
contained within this section, as well as other development standards as
required by this code.
   C.   Development And Design Standards: The following special standards apply
to all new fueling stations and qualifying expansions/improvements to existing
fueling stations:
      1.   Access Driveways: Driveways shall be no closer than one hundred
fifty feet (150') from the nearest intersecting point of street right of way
lines, or as otherwise determined by the public works director for traffic
safety.
      2.   Structure Height: Structures shall observe the height limits of the
underlying zoning district, except that canopies constructed over pump islands
located outside the buildable area of the lot shall not exceed a maximum height
of seventeen feet (17'). Deviations from these standards may be allowed in
conjunction with site plan and architectural review. (Ord. 2013-05, 2-6-2014)
9-4D-7: LARGE FAMILY DAYCARE HOMES:
The regulations contained in this section shall apply to large family daycare
homes as defined in article A, "Use Classification System", of this chapter.
The establishment of new large family daycare homes shall be consistent with
the allowed use provisions of article B, "Allowed Uses And Required
Entitlements", of this chapter and the standards contained within this section,
as well as other development standards as required in the underlying zoning
district. Where the standards of the underlying district conflict with the
standards herein, these standards shall apply.
   A.   Location: A large family daycare home facility shall not be located
within one thousand feet (1,000') of an existing like facility.
   B.   Loading And Unloading Area: A safe off street area, a minimum of ten
feet wide and twenty feet long (10' x 20'), shall be provided on the subject
property for loading and unloading children from vehicles.
   C.   Hours Of Operation: The daycare home operation shall be restricted to
the period of six o'clock (6:00) A.M. to seven o'clock (7:00) P.M.
   D.   Sound Levels: The applicant shall be responsible for maintaining low
sound levels on the property. The exterior noise level produced by the
operation, measured at the property line, shall not exceed sixty (60) dBA.
   E.   Parking: At least one off street parking space for employee(s) shall be
provided in addition to the two (2) parking spaces required for the dwelling
residents, if the employee is not a resident of the subject dwelling.
   F.   Occupancy Required: The proprietor of the daycare home shall be a
resident of the home. (Ord. 2013-05, 2-6-2014)
9-4D-8: LIVE-WORK FACILITIES:
   A.   Purpose And Applicability: The regulations contained in this section
shall apply to live-work facilities as defined in article A, "Use
Classification System", of this chapter. The establishment of new live-work
facilities shall be consistent with the allowed use provisions of article B,
"Allowed Uses And Required Entitlements", of this chapter and the standards
contained within this section, as well as other development standards as
required in the underlying zoning district. Where the standards of the
underlying district conflict with the standards herein, these standards shall
apply.
   B.   Limitations On Use: The nonresidential component of a live- work
facility shall be a use allowed within the applicable zoning district; however,
the uses and activities described below shall be prohibited:
      1.   Any automobile and vehicle uses as listed in article B, "Allowed
Uses And Required Entitlements", of this chapter.
      2.   Any industrial, manufacturing, and processing uses as listed in
article B, "Allowed Uses And Required Entitlements", of this chapter.
      3.   Any activity which involves:
         a.   Storage of flammable liquids or hazardous materials beyond those
normally associated with a residential use; or
         b.   Welding, machining, or any open flame work.
      4.   Any other activity or use, as determined by the city as incompatible
with residential activities or have the possibility of affecting the health or
safety of live-work unit residents, because of the potential for the use to
create dust, glare, heat, noise, noxious gases, odor, smoke, traffic,
vibration, or other impacts, or that would be hazardous because of materials,
processes, products, or wastes.
   C.   Density: Live-work units shall comply with the density regulations of
the applicable zoning district.
   D.   Design Standards:
      1.   Floor Area Requirements: No more than fifty percent (50%) of the
ground floor area shall be reserved for living space. Up to one hundred percent
(100%) of the ground floor area may be dedicated to working space.
      2.   Separation And Access: Each live-work unit shall be separated from
other units and other uses in the structure. Access to each unit shall be
provided from common access areas, corridors, or halls, and the access to each
unit shall be clearly separate from other live-work facilities or other uses
within the same structure.
      3.   Facilities To Accommodate Commercial Or Industrial Activities: A
live-work facility shall be designed to accommodate commercial or industrial
uses as evidenced by the provision of ventilation, interior storage, flooring,
and other physical improvements of the type commonly found in exclusively
commercial or industrial facilities used for the same work activity.
      4.   Integration Of Living And Working Space: Areas within a live- work
unit that are designated as living space shall be an integral part of the live-
work unit and not separated (or occupied and/or rented separately) from the
work space, except that mezzanines and lofts may be used as living space
subject to compliance with the other provisions of this section, and living and
working space may be separated by interior courtyards or similar private space.
Exceptions to this requirement may be allowed when the city adopted building
code requires specific occupancy separation.
      5.   Parking: Each live-work facility shall comply with the parking
standards of chapter 5, article E, "Off Street Parking And Loading", of this
title.
   E.   Nonresident Employees: Up to two (2) persons who do not reside in the
live-work unit may work in the unit at any one time. Additional employment may
be permitted through issuance of an administrative use permit based on findings
that the employment will not adversely affect traffic and parking conditions in
the vicinity of the site.
   F.   Changes In Use: After approval, a live-work facility shall not be
converted to entirely residential use, nor shall the ratio of living space to
working space be changed, unless authorized through administrative use permit
approval. As part of the approval of the administrative use permit, the
designated approving authority must find that the exclusive residential use
will not impair the ability of nonresidential uses on and adjacent to the site
to continue operating because of potential health or safety concerns or
nuisance complaints raised by the exclusively residential use and/or its
occupants. (Ord. 2013-05, 2-6-2014)
9-4D-9: MASSAGE THERAPY:
   A.   Purpose And Intent: The purpose of this section is to establish
regulations to allow massage therapy activity to occur. Regulations in this
section are intended to reduce impacts to the degree so as to minimize any
potential adverse effect such uses have on surrounding commercial or industrial
uses.
   B.   Applicability: The regulations and standards contained in this section
shall apply to the establishment of any "massage therapy" as defined by section
9-4A-5, "Description Of Land Uses", of this chapter in the city and shall be in
addition to any other development standards and regulations contained elsewhere
within this title. The establishment of any massage therapy use shall include
the opening of such a business as a new business, the relocation of such a
business, or the conversion of an existing business location to any massage
therapy use.
   C.   Permit Requirements: Massage therapy establishments regulated by this
section shall only be permitted in accordance with title 4, chapter 7, "Massage
Establishments And Therapists", of the municipal code. (Ord. 2013-05, 2-6-2014)
9-4D-10: MOBILEHOME PARKS:
   A.   Purpose And Applicability: This section applies to mobilehome parks
within the city. The purpose of this section is to regulate mobilehome parks in
residential zoning districts consistent with state law 1 . The establishment of
new mobilehome parks shall be consistent with the allowed use provisions of
article B, "Allowed Uses And Required Entitlements", of this chapter and the
standards contained within this section, as well as other development standards
as required in the underlying zoning district. Mobilehome parks are also
subject to major site plan and architectural review.
   B.   Development Standards: All mobilehome parks shall comply with the
development standards imposed by the state of California as provided in chapter
2 of title 25 of the California code of regulations. Additionally, all
mobilehome parks shall comply with the following to the extent consistent with
state law:
      1.   Park Area, Density, And Site Area:
         a.   The minimum area of a mobilehome park shall be five (5) acres.
The first phase of mobilehome park development shall be not less than five (5)
acres and shall include all required recreational and service amenities.
         b.   The maximum density shall be eight (8) mobilehome sites per gross
acre.
         c.   Each mobilehome site shall be not less than three thousand
(3,000) square feet in area, including pad, parking, private access,
landscaping and private storage areas.
         d.   No mobilehome site shall be less than thirty feet (30') in width.
      2.   Clearances, Setbacks, And Yard Spaces: Mobilehome parks and the
mobilehome sites within parks shall comply with the setback standards
identified in
table 9-4D-10-B-1 of this section. No mobilehome or incidental structure shall
be located in any required yard space, except that tow bars may extend into
such yard space.
      TABLE 9-4D-10-B-1
      CLEARANCES, SETBACKS, AND YARD SPACES FOR MOBILEHOME PARKS AND MOBILEHOME
SITES
Standard Measurement
Standard           Measurement
Mobilehome park:    
Front yard         20 feet
Interior side yard 10 feet
Street side yard   10 feet
Interior rear yard 10 feet
Street rear yard   20 feet
Mobilehome sites:   
Front yard         10 feet
Side yard          5 feet
Rear yard          10 feet
 
      3.   Patios And Pads:
         a.   Each mobilehome site shall have a hard surfaced patio area of not
less than two hundred (200) square feet. A permanent porch greater than twenty
(20) square feet in area may be counted as part of the required patio area.
         b.   Each mobilehome site shall have a support pad of concrete or
asphalt concrete laid over a compacted surface base which, in combination, will
be adequate to support the mobilehome on a level plane.
      4.   Parking:
         a.   Not less than one parking space shall be provided within each
mobilehome site.
         b.   Not less than one guest parking space shall be provided for each
mobilehome site at a location central to each four (4) contiguous mobilehome
sites, provided that guest parking shall not be required for mobilehome sites
along a collector street constructed to the width prescribed under subsection
B5 of this section.
         c.   Parking shall be provided for central recreation buildings, park
offices and other similar buildings at a ratio of one parking space for each
four hundred (400) square feet of gross floor space.
         d.   Supplemental parking for pleasure boats, recreation vehicles and
nonoccupied travel trailers shall be provided at a ratio of one parking space
for each ten (10) mobilehome sites and shall be used only by mobilehome
tenants. Said parking shall be clustered, easily accessible via interior drives
and shall be screened from view by means of solid ornamental fence or wall and
landscaping.
         e.   All parking areas and spaces shall be designed and constructed in
accordance with the provisions of chapter 5, article E, "Off Street Parking And
Loading", of this title.
      5.   Streets:
         a.   Entrance streets shall be located in alignment with or be offset
from public street intersections by at least one hundred fifty feet (150').
         b.   Minor streets within the mobilehome park shall be a minimum of
thirty feet (30') of paved width; collector streets shall be a minimum of
thirty six feet (36') of paved width. Paving shall be AC type.
         c.   Streets shall be constructed to effect positive drainage;
concrete curbs and gutters may be required by the city engineer; rolled
concrete curbs and gutters or their equivalent are required as a minimum.
         d.   Parallel parking shall be permitted on both sides of a collector
street and on only one side of a minor street. Such on street parking shall be
in addition to off street parking requirements of this section.
      6.   Driveways, Street Signs, Lighting, Storm Drainage, Water And Sewer
Systems: Driveways for individual mobilehome sites, street signs, interior
street lighting, storm drainage facilities, and water and sewer systems shall
be installed subject to approval of the city engineer.
      7.   Underground Utilities: All public utilities shall be installed
underground, including electrical, telephone, street lighting cable, community
television antenna connections, and ducts for cable television. A community
television antenna with underground ducts and connections to each mobilehome
site shall be provided.
      8.   Recreation Areas And Pedestrianways:
         a.   Common recreation area in an aggregate total equal to ten percent
(10%) of the gross area of the mobilehome park shall be provided at a location
or locations which are easily accessible and convenient to park residents.
         b.   Recreation areas shall be landscaped and maintained, with all
landscaped areas to be irrigated by an underground sprinkler system.
         c.   Pedestrianways shall be provided throughout the mobilehome park,
connecting all mobilehome sites with each other and with common recreation
areas. Such pedestrianways shall be provided where possible at locations away
from the interior street system to avoid conflict in pedestrian and vehicle
traffic.
         d.   Common recreation areas shall not include yard areas,
pedestrianways, management offices, laundry and tenant storage areas, and
parking areas shall not be included.
      9.   Signs: No more than one identification sign shall be erected
displaying the name of the mobilehome park. Such signs shall be located near
the park entrance drive and shall not exceed forty (40) square feet in total
readable surface area or ten feet (10') in height. Such sign shall be installed
within the front yard area of the mobilehome park, parallel to the abutting
street, with landscaping at its base. Additional directional and identification
signs may be installed within the mobilehome park subject to the approval of
the planning commission.
      10.   Landscaping And Screening: Mobilehome parks shall provide
permanently maintained landscaped areas and site screening as follows:
         a.   A landscaped border along the entire street frontage yard area
and along the rear yard if such yard is adjacent to a public street.
         b.   Ornamental screen wall or fencing, seven feet (7') in height,
along all interior side property lines and along all rear property lines which
do not abut a public street.
         c.   Ornamental screen wall or fencing seven feet (7') in height along
street side yard and street front yard setback lines.
      11.   Other Facilities Required: Each mobilehome park shall provide the
following additional facilities:
         a.   A laundry building for clothes washing and drying.
         b.   An outdoor drying yard for clothes drying screened from view from
other areas of the mobilehome park by an ornamental screen fence or wall and
landscaped area.
         c.   Trash enclosures at locales along the interior street system
which are convenient to all residents and to municipal refuse trucks,
integrated with guest parking areas.
      12.   Placement And Sales Of Mobilehomes:
         a.   At the time of placement on the site, all mobilehomes shall be
fitted with appropriate skirts to obscure stands, pads, and undercarriage
equipment.
         b.   Mobilehomes may be displayed and sold within a mobilehome park
similar to the sale of mobilehomes within a residential subdivision; provided
that such mobilehomes are not sold for delivery to any location other than
within the park in which sold; provided further that all mobilehomes are placed
on mobilehome sites and connected to all utility services. No more than four
(4) mobilehomes shall be offered for sale at any one time, and advertising for
such sale shall be limited to one nonilluminated sign not exceeding four (4)
square feet in area on the site of each mobilehome offered for sale. (Ord.
2013-05, 2-6-2014)
 
Notes
1 1. HSC § 18200 et seq.
9-4D-11: RECREATIONAL VEHICLE PARKS:
   A.   Purpose And Applicability: This section applies to recreational vehicle
parks within the city as defined in this chapter. The purpose of these
regulations is to provide appropriate space within recreational vehicle parks
to ensure the public health and safety of occupants and users.
The regulations contained in this section shall apply to recreational vehicle
parks as defined in section
9-4A-5, "Description Of Land Uses", of this chapter. The establishment of new
recreational vehicle parks shall be consistent with the allowed use provisions
of article B, "Allowed Uses And Required Entitlements", of this chapter and the
standards contained within this section, as well as other development standards
as required by this code.
   B.   Development Standards: New recreational vehicle parks shall comply with
the development standards for mobilehome parks provided in section
9-4D-10, "Mobilehome Parks", of this article subject to the following
exceptions:
      1.   The minimum area of a recreational vehicle park shall be two and
one-half (21/2) gross acres; except that the park may be reduced to one acre if
developed in conjunction with a motel or other permitted use within the RC
zoning district.
      2.   The maximum density shall be fifteen (15) recreational vehicle sites
per gross acre.
      3.   Each recreational vehicle site shall be not less than one thousand
(1,000) square feet in area, nor less than twenty five feet (25') in width.
      4.   Each recreational vehicle site shall have a minimum front, side, and
rear yard area of five feet (5') in width.
      5.   Each recreational vehicle site shall have a hard surfaced patio area
of not less than one hundred (100) square feet.
      6.   Not less than one (1) guest parking space shall be provided for each
ten (10) recreational vehicle sites.
      7.   No recreational vehicles shall be parked or displayed for the
purposes of sale or rent within a recreational vehicle park.
      8.   No mobilehome shall be permitted within a recreational vehicle park
except as required for occupancy by the park manager.
      9.   No recreational vehicle shall be allowed to be parked or stored on a
public street more than seventy two (72) hours in any thirty (30) day period
unless approval to do so has been first obtained from the Chief of Police
pursuant to subsection
6-4-4H of the Municipal Code. (Ord. 2013-05, 2-6-2014)
9-4D-12: ACCESSORY DWELLING UNITS AND JUNIOR ACCESSORY DWELLING UNITS:
   A.   Purpose and intent. This section is intended to meet the requirements
of State law in providing for accessory dwelling units (ADUs) and junior
accessory dwelling units (JADUs) as required by and in compliance with
Government Code Sections 65852.2 and 65852.22, as either may be amended from
time to time. The standards established by this section shall be interpreted
and applied consistent with the standards set forth in Government Code Sections
65852.2 and 65852.22. To the extent there is a conflict between the provisions
of this section and the provisions of either Government Code Section 65852.2 or
65852.22, including as either may be amended, the applicable provision(s) of
Government Code Sections 65852.2 and 65852.22 shall apply. The requirements and
exceptions specified in Government Code Sections 65852.2 and 65852.22 shall
apply to the construction of ADUs and JADUs pursuant to this section. This
section is not intended to regulate multigenerational dwelling units, which are
dwelling units that do not include a kitchen, contained entirely within the
walls of a proposed or existing single-family residence where access is not
restricted between areas of the residence.
   B.   Determinations. ADUs and JADUs are residential uses. ADUs and JADUs
that comply with this section are considered accessory uses and accessory
buildings and therefore do not exceed the allowable density for the lots upon
which ADUs and JADUs are located. ADUs and JADUs that comply with this section
are considered to be consistent with the general plan and zoning designations
for the lot. ADUs and JADUs, and the availability to construct ADUs and JADUs,
will be counted for purposes of identifying adequate sites for housing in the
City’s housing element, as provided in Government Code Section 65583.1(a), and
to reduce the City’s share of the regional housing need, as provided in
Government Code Section 65583.1(d).
   C.   Unless otherwise stated in this section, the requirements and standards
of this Title that apply to the lot and the primary dwelling shall apply to any
ADU and/or JADU, including height, setback, and landscaping. All Fire and
Building Code requirements that apply to detached dwellings and accessory
structures generally shall apply to ADUs and JADUs.
   D.   Development Standards. ADUs, JADUs, tiny homes, and multi-generational
housing units shall meet that applicable standards in
Table 9-4D-12-A.
TABLE 9-4D-12-A
DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS FOR ADUs, JADUs, TINY HOMES,
AND MULTI-GENERATIONAL HOUSING UNITS
            ADU (including                             Multi-generati onal
Requirement Cottage Home)  JADU Tiny Home (type of ADU housing unit (not an
                                                       ADU or JADU
                                                                Multi-generati
Requirement     ADU (including  JADU            Tiny Home (type onal housing
                Cottage Home)                   of ADU          unit (not an
                                                                ADU or JADU
Zone districts  All residential All residential All residential All residential
where allowed:  and mixed use   and mixed use   and mixed use   and mixed use
                zone districts  zone districts  zone districts  zone districts
                Lots with
                either single-  Lots with a     Lots with a     Lots with a
Lot types where family or       single-family   single-family   single-family
allowed:        multi-family    dwelling        dwelling        dwelling
                dwelling        (existing or    (existing or    (existing or
                (existing or    proposed)       proposed)       proposed)
                proposed)
Number allowed                  One (1) in
on a single-    One (1)         addition to one See ADU         One (1)
family lot:                     (1) ADU
                Either attached
Attached to or  or detached.    Attached. Must
detached from   Attached must   have separate   Detached        Attached
main dwelling:  have separate   exterior entry.
                exterior entry.
                Up to two (2)
                detached. If
Number allowed  attached, up to
on a multi-     25% of the      None            None            None
family lot:     existing multi-
                family dwelling
                units
                                Property must
Owner                           reside in
occupancy:      No requirements either the main No requirements No requirements
                                dwelling or the
                                JADU
                At least 220
                sq. ft. If
                detached, up to
                1,200 sq. ft.
                If attached, up At least 220    The first floor
Unit size:      to 50% of the   sq. ft. and not shall be at     No size
                existing        more than 500   least 100 sq.   requirement
                primary         sq. ft.         ft.
                dwelling, or
                1,200 sq. ft.,
                whichever is
                greater.
                For attached
                ADUs, following
                main dwelling                   15 feet minimum
                setbacks. For                   setback from
                detached ADUs,                  front property
                15 feet minimum Per main        line and four   Per main
Building        setback from    dwelling        (4) feet        dwelling
setbacks:       front property  setback         minimum setback setback
                line and four   requirements .  from side and   requirements
                (4) feet                        rear property
                minimum setback                 lines.
                from side and
                rear property
                lines.
                For detached
                ADUs, 16 feet.  Per main                        Per main
Maximum height: For attached    dwelling height 14 feet         dwelling height
                ADUs, per main  requirements                    requirements
                dwelling height
                requirements
Separate
kitchen         Yes             Yes             Yes             No
required:
                                No, but if no
Separate                        bathroom, there
bathroom        Yes             must be an      Yes             Yes
required:                       interior
                                entryway to the
                                main dwelling
                Yes. May be     Yes. May be     Yes, if
Connection to   shared with     shared with     occupancy is
water and sewer main dwelling,  main dwelling,  intended to be  Yes
required:       but not         but not         for more than
                required.       required.       72 hours
                One (1) space
                unless an
                exception is
                made per
                Government Code
                65852.2. The
Additional on-  additional
site parking    parking space   No              No              No
required:       may be tandem
                and within a
                building
                setback area if
                it is paved
                with a non-
                permeable
                surface.
                Yes, if         Yes, if                         Yes, if
Fire sprinklers required for    required for    No              required for
required:       the main        the main                        the main
                dwelling unit   dwelling unit                   dwelling unit
 
   E.   Building standards.
      1.   ADUs and JADUs must be architecturally compatible with the primary
dwelling, having similar materials, colors, and style of construction. The
design and size of ADUs and JADUs shall conform to all applicable standards of
the building, health, and other codes adopted by the City.
      2.   Attached ADUs and JADUs shall be compatible with and made
structurally a part of the primary dwelling (e.g., share a common wall with the
primary dwelling, rely partially on the primary dwelling for structural
support, or be attached to the primary dwelling).
      3.   Adequate provisions shall be made for the water and sewer service
and drainage generated by the occupancy of the accessory dwelling unit as
determined by the City Engineer. The ADU/JADU can either have shared or
separate services for electric, gas, sewer, and water.
   F.   Connection, impact, and other fees.
      1.   Except as provided in Government Code Sections 65852.2 and 65852.22,
ADUs and JADUs are subject to fees and assessments required by the Lemoore
Municipal Code for new residential construction, including connection fees, and
capacity charges. However, development impact fees shall not be assessed on
ADUs or JADUs.
      2.   An inspection fee shall be assessed for any inspection to determine
if an ADU or JADU complies with applicable building standards.
   G.   Permit approval. A permit must be obtained for the construction or
installation of an ADU or JADU. An application, together with the required fee
in compliance with the City’s fee schedule, shall be filed with the Department
and accompanied by detailed and fully dimensioned plans, architectural
drawings/sketches, elevations, floor plans, landscape plans, and/or any other
data/materials identified in the Department handout for ADU/JADU applications.
Following receipt of a completed application, the Director shall make an
investigation of the facts bearing on the case to determine compliance with
this section and ministerially approve a compliant application in accordance
with (Gov. Code, 35852.2 subd. (a)(3) and (b).
      If the permit application to create an ADU or a JADU is submitted with a
permit application to construct a new single-family dwelling on the lot, the
City may delay acting on the permit application for the ADU or the JADU until
the City acts on the permit application to create the new single-family
dwelling. The applicant may request a delay in the time available for the City
to act on the application, as provided by State law.
   H.   Cottage home program standards. This subsection provides locational and
general standards for the cottage home program which is allowed in the
applicable residential areas, subject to the following criteria and standards.
This subsection does not supplant the remainder of this section for ADU and
JADU construction.
      1.   Cottage home. A cottage home is a type of ADU where pre-approved
building plans are made available by the City and the ADU is constructed in
compliance with the provided plans and this subsection. A cottage home shall
count towards the limit on the number of ADUs permitted on a single lot.
      2.   Zone districts. A cottage home is allowed in zones that allow an
ADU.
      3.   Application procedures. Applications for the cottage home program
shall be filed with the Community Development Department.
      4.   Developmental standards. A cottage home shall be constructed in
compliance with the following developmental standards:
         a.   Only one cottage home unit shall be created on a single-family
parcel.
         b.   The cottage home shall be built using plans provided by the City.
         c.   Adequate provisions shall be made for the water and sewer service
and drainage generated by the occupancy of the cottage home unit as determined
by the City Engineer. The cottage home can have either shared or separate
services for electric, gas, sewer, and water.
   J.   Tiny house standards. A tiny house may be approved for use as an
accessory dwelling unit if the following requirements are met:
      1.   The tiny house meets all the requirements for an accessory dwelling
unit.
      2.   The tiny house has at least 100 square feet of first floor interior
living space and includes basic functional areas that support normal daily
routines such as cooking, sleeping, and toiletry.
      3.   The tiny house is designed and built to look like a conventional
building structure.
      4.   The tiny house is licensed and registered with the California
Department of Motor Vehicles and meets ANSI 119.2 or 119.5 requirements.
      5.   The tiny house Is towable by a bumper hitch, frame-towing hitch, or
fifth-wheel connection and cannot (nor is it designed to) move under its own
power.
      6.   The tiny house is no larger than allowed by California State Law for
movement on public highways.
      7.   No mechanical equipment is located on the roof of the movable tiny
house.
      8.   When sited on a lot for more than 72 hours at a location visible
from the public street, the tiny house shall have skirting that covers the
wheels and undercarriage and that extends to ground level.
      9.   When sited on a lot for more than 72 hours, water and sewer
connections shall be made permanent prior to occupancy. Shut-off valves,
meters, and regulators shall not be located beneath the tiny house. (Ord. 2023-
10, 9- 19-2023)
9-4D-13: SEMIPERMANENT MOBILE FOOD VENDORS:
   A.   Purpose: The City finds that the vending of produce, prepared or
prepackaged foods, goods, wares, and/or services at semipermanent locations on
public streets, sidewalks, or alleys and on private property may, under certain
circumstances, pose unsafe conditions and special dangers to the public health,
safety, and welfare of the residents of the City. It is a purpose of this
section to provide regulations and standards governing these types of vending
operations to prevent safety, traffic, and health hazards, as well as to
preserve the peace, safety, and welfare of the City and its residents and to
prevent the unregulated proliferation of too many vendors near one (1)
location, thus negatively impacting traffic and pedestrian safety.
   B.   Applicability: The provisions of this section shall apply to all
semipermanent mobile food vendors as described in this chapter. This includes
any vehicle as defined in section 670 of the California Vehicle Code, which is
equipped and used for retail sales of prepared, prepackaged, or unprepared,
unpackaged food or foodstuffs of any kind that parks for more than twenty (20)
minutes daily for more than fourteen (14) days in one calendar year at one or
more locations within the city.
The following are not subject to this section:
      1.   Any person engaged in vending conducted in connection with:
         a.   The operations of a state certified farmers' market;
         b.   An event authorized by a special event permit or other permit or
entitlement issued by the city of Lemoore, such as an authorized street fair;
         c.   An event at a sports complex, little league facility, school
facility, or recreational facility if the vendor is in partnership with the
organization conducting the event and is located on the site of the event.
      2.   Any person not exceeding the time thresholds established in the
description of a semipermanent mobile food vendor.
   C.   Development Standards: Semipermanent mobile food vendors shall comply
with all of the following development standards:
      1.   The vehicle must be located on a private "developed site" (as
defined in chapter 12 of this title) zoned neighborhood commercial (NC),
regional commercial (RC), mixed use (MU), or light industrial (ML), subject to
the following:
         a.   The owner(s) of the property shall give permission to use the
site and required restroom facilities for food service workers within two
hundred feet (200') of the vehicle and access to such must be available during
the mobile vehicle's business hours. Portable toilets shall not be allowed.
         b.   Vendor shall not use or permit use of parking spaces on the site
if doing so will adversely affect the on site parking available for the primary
use of the site as determined by the city.
         c.   Vendor cannot interfere with or create hazards for vehicular or
pedestrian access, aisles, circulation, driveways, or fire lanes and hydrants.
         d.   Tables, chairs, shade structures, and trash cans for patrons
shall be maintained in a safe and clean manner at all times and removed nightly
if used.
         e.   Hours of operation at an approved semipermanent location shall be
no earlier than seven o'clock (7:00) A.M. and no later than ten o'clock (10:00)
P.M., and the vehicle shall be moved each night to an area not open to public
view.
         f.   Food products must be stored at a commissary approved by the
Kings County health department.
         g.   Vendor shall have adequate lighting to ensure customer safety
either on the vehicle or at the location of the vehicle during business hours.
         h.   There shall be no more than one other semipermanent mobile food
vendor or permanently located vendor of produce, prepared, or prepackaged food
located within 500 feet of the site, unless a conditional use permit is
approved that allows two or more semipermanent mobile food vendors to operate
together at the same time and on the same site.
      2.   Vendor shall obtain, display, and keep a current city of Lemoore
business license and comply at all times with this section as well as title 3,
chapter 5, "Food Handling", and title 6, chapter 4, "Stopping, Standing Or
Parking", of the municipal code including section
6-4-10, "Peddlers And Vendors", of the municipal code, and all other applicable
federal, state, and local laws and regulations.
      3.   Mobile food vehicle shall be entirely self-sufficient in regard to
gas, water, and telecommunications. Should any utility hookups or connections
to on site utilities be required, the vendor shall be required to apply for
appropriate permits to ensure building and public safety and consistency with
applicable building and zoning regulations. Any cords or plugs used from the
vehicle to electrical sources shall be appropriately covered or tied down so as
to not cause trip hazards and may not be strung across parking lots.
      4.   All permits/licenses must be obtained, displayed, and kept current
at all times and submitted with the administrative review application.
      5.   Applicants and the subject mobile food vehicles shall comply with
all California retail food code provisions 1 , including more specifically, but
not limited to, chapter 10, mobile food facilities, of such code and Health And
Safety Code section 114250.1 regarding the availability of adequate toilet
facilities for use by food service personnel within two hundred feet (200') of
unit location.
      6.   Vendor shall display, in plain view and at all times, current
permits and licenses in or on the mobile food vehicle.
      7.   Daily cleanup and disposal of waste products shall be done at an
approved commissary with proof of such being provided when renewing the annual
business license.
      8.   The vendor shall not discharge or allow discharge of items from any
mobile food vehicle onto the sidewalk, gutter, storm inlets, or streets. The
vendor shall not dispose or allow the disposal of any trash or refuse in any
such public or private trash receptacle other than a trash receptacle owned,
operated, or otherwise provided by and under the control of such vendor. At
least two (2) such vendor provided trash containers shall be available on site.
Violation of this provision can lead to the suspension and/or revocation of the
permit to do business pursuant to section
3-5-11 of the municipal code.
      9.   The vendor shall install and maintain signage in a visible location
indicating that loitering is not permitted and that customers may only remain
on the site to pick up and, if applicable, consume their orders. The vendor
shall be responsible for ensuring that customers comply with this no loitering
provision.
      10.   In approving an application for a semipermanent mobile food
vehicle, the planning director shall impose on the vendor such conditions and
requirements as may be necessary to ensure compliance with the standards,
conditions, and requirements in this subsection and other provisions of this
title. The first permit approved for an applicant at a certain location shall
expire after one (1) year. Subsequent approvals by the same applicant at the
same site may be approved for up to two (2) years.
(Ord. 2013-05, 2-6-2014; amd. Ord. 2025-02, 4-1-2025)
 
Notes
1 1. HSC § 113700 et seq.
9-4D-14: SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESSES:
   A.   Purpose And Intent: It is the purpose and intent of this section to
regulate sexually oriented businesses, including the regulation of live nude
and live seminude entertainment, in order to promote the health, safety, and
general welfare of the citizens of the city and to establish reasonable and
uniform regulations to prevent any deleterious location and concentration of
sexually oriented businesses within the city, thereby reducing or eliminating
the adverse secondary effects from such sexually oriented businesses. The city
council finds that among these secondary effects are increased incidents of
unlawful conduct and disorderly behavior, generating a disproportionate demand
for police responses; depreciated property values; vacancy problems; blighted
conditions; and interference with neighbors' enjoyment of property due to
debris, noise, vandalism, and depreciated property values. The city council in
adopting this section takes legislative notice of the existence and content of
the following studies that substantiate the adverse secondary effects of
sexually oriented businesses: 1) Garden Grove, California, 1991; 2) city of
Austin, Texas, May 1986; 3) city of Los Angeles, California, June 1977; 4) city
of St. Paul, Minnesota, 1987, and supp., 1988; and 5) "Final Report Of The
Attorney General's Commission On Pornography", 1986. The provisions of this
section have neither the purpose nor the effect of imposing a limitation or
restriction on the content of any nonobscene communicative materials, including
nonobscene sexually oriented materials. Similarly, it is neither the intent nor
the effect of this section to restrict or deny access by adults to nonobscene
sexually oriented materials protected by the first amendment, or to deny access
by the distributors and exhibitors of nonobscene sexually oriented
entertainment to their intended market. Neither is it the intent nor is it the
effect of this section to condone or legitimize the distribution of obscene
material or material harmful to minors.
   B.   Applicability:
      1.   This section shall apply to those activities described as sexually
oriented businesses as described in section
9-4A-5, "Description Of Land Uses", of this chapter and further defined in this
section including adult arcades, adult bookstores, adult cabarets, adult
motels, adult theaters and motion picture theaters, adult novelty stores, and
adult video stores.
      2.   The following definitions shall apply to this chapter:
      EMPLOYEE: For purposes of a sexually oriented business, a person who
works or performs in and/or for a sexually oriented business, regardless of
whether or not said person is paid a salary, wage, or other compensation by the
operator of said business.
      ESTABLISHING: For purposes of a sexually oriented business, establishing
shall mean and includes any of the following:
         a.   The opening or commencement of any business as a new business
subsequent to the effective date hereof; or
         b.   The conversion of any existing business (whether or not a
sexually oriented business) to a sexually oriented business, as defined in this
chapter, subsequent to the effective date hereof; or
         c.   The addition of any sexually oriented business, as defined in
this chapter, to any other existing sexually oriented business; or
         d.   The relocation of any sexually oriented business.
      NUDE, NUDITY, OR STATE OF NUDITY: The appearance or showing of the human
bare buttock, anus, male genitals, female genitals, areola or nipple of the
female breast, pubic hair, or pubic region.
      SEXUALLY ORIENTED MATERIALS: Any physical object or visual image, however
stored, recorded, or manifested, that is offered for sale, rental, or viewing
and that simulates, depicts, or describes specified anatomical areas or that is
offered for sale or rental for use in specified sexual activities (other than
condoms sold in conformity with laws otherwise applicable).
      SIGNIFICANT OR SUBSTANTIAL PORTION: For purposes of a sexually oriented
business, significant or substantial portion shall mean that fifteen percent
(15%) or more of interior floor space or display space is devoted to depiction
of specified sexual activities or sexually oriented materials, or that fifteen
percent (15%) or more of actual stock in trade regularly displayed and
immediately available for use, rental, purchase, viewing or perusal is
comprised of "sexually oriented materials", as defined in this section.
      SPECIFIED ANATOMICAL AREA: Shall mean and includes any one or more of the
following:
         a.   Less than completely and opaquely covered human genitals, pubic
region, buttocks, anus, or female breast below the top of the areola; or
         b.   Human male genitals in a discernibly turgid state, even if
completely and opaquely covered.
      SPECIFIED SEXUAL ACTIVITY: Shall mean and includes, without limitation,
any of the following:
         a.   Fondling, including:
            (1)   The fondling or other intentional touching of one's own or
another's human genitals, pubic region, pubic hair, perineum, anus, or female
breast, whether the person so touched is nude, seminude, or clothed or covered;
or
            (2)   The fondling or other intentional touching of the buttock of
any nude or seminude person; or
         b.   Sex acts, normal or perverted, actual or simulated, whether the
actor or actors is or are nude, seminude, or clothed or covered, including
actual or simulated vaginal intercourse, anal intercourse, oral copulation,
sodomy, oral-anal copulation, bestiality, flagellation or masochism or torture
in the context of a sexual act, anilingus, buggery, coprophagy, coprophilia,
cunnilingus, fellatio, necrophilia, pederasty, pedophilia, or sapphism; or
         c.   Whether the actor is nude, seminude, or clothed or covered, acts
of human masturbation, actual or simulated; animal masturbation, actual or
simulated; erotic or lewd touching of an animal, actual or simulated; or human
or animal ejaculation, actual or simulated; or
         d.   Human genitals in a state of sexual stimulation, arousal or
tumescence discernible to any other person or male genitals in a discernibly
turgid state, even if completely and opaquely covered; or
         e.   The display or showing of excretory, urinary, or female menstrual
functions or vaginal or anal irrigation as part of or in connection with any of
the activities set forth in subsections a through d of this definition; or
         f.   Dancing by one or more live persons in a manner that exposes to
the view of any other person a specified anatomical area or that constitutes
the public simulation by a clothed person of any specified sexual activity.
      SUBSTANTIAL ENLARGEMENT OF A SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESS: An increase in
the floor areas occupied by the business by more than fifteen percent (15%) as
the floor areas existed on June 7, 1996.
      TRANSFER OF OWNERSHIP OR CONTROL OF A SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESS: Shall
mean and includes any of the following:
         a.   The sale, lease, or sublease of the business; or
         b.   The transfer of securities which constitute a controlling
interest in the business, whether by sale, exchange or similar means; or
         c.   The establishment of a trust, gift or other similar legal devise
which transfers ownership or control of the business, except for transfer by
request or other operation of law upon the death of a person possessing the
ownership or control.
   C.   Location Regulations:
      1.   Zoning: Sexually oriented uses shall only be established consistent
with the allowed use and permit requirements of article B, "Allowed Uses And
Required Entitlements", of this chapter.
      2.   Distance: Sexually oriented businesses are permitted subject to
compliance with all of the following conditions:
         a.   Such use is located more than five hundred feet (500') from
another sexually oriented business;
         b.   Such use is located more than five hundred feet (500') from any
religious institution, school, regularly established boys' club or girls' club,
or public building regularly frequented by children, public park, or public
building;
         c.   Such use is located more than three hundred feet (300') from any
residential zone.
         d.   No more than one sexually oriented business shall be located
within a single building, or portion thereof.
      3.   Nonconforming Use Based Upon Distance Requirements: A sexually
oriented business hereinafter lawfully established and operating as a
conforming use is not rendered a nonconforming use by the location, subsequent
to its establishment, of a religious institution, school, public park, or
public building regularly frequented by children within three hundred feet
(300') of the sexually oriented business.
   D.   Measurement Of Distance: For purposes of subsection C, "Location
Regulations", of this section, the distance between any two (2) sexually
oriented businesses or between a sexually oriented business and a religious
institution, school, regularly established boys' or girls' club, public
building regularly frequented by children, public park, public building, or
residential zone shall be measured in a straight line, without regard to
intervening structures or topography, from the nearest point on the property
line of the property on which the one sexually oriented business is located to
the nearest point on the property line of the property on which the other
sexually oriented business, or the religious institution, school, regularly
established boys' club or girls' club, public building regularly frequented by
children, public park, public building, or residential zone is located.
   E.   Development And Performance Standards: All sexually oriented businesses
shall comply with the following development and performance standards:
      1.   Entrances:
         a.   A permitted use shall have a separate business entrance adjacent
to the required parking area, and no other nonadult use shall be permitted in
the same building when a sexually oriented business is operated.
         b.   The building entrance to a sexually oriented business shall be
clearly and legibly posted by a notice indicating that minors (persons under 18
years of age) are excluded from entering the premises.
      2.   Exterior Improvements And Requirements:
         a.   Illumination: All off street parking areas and entrances to the
premises of a sexually oriented business shall be illuminated from dusk until
at least the closing hour of operation with a lighting system which provides an
average maintained horizontal illumination of one foot-candle of light on the
parking surface and/or walkways. This required lighting level is established in
order to provide sufficient illumination of the parking areas and walkways
serving the sexually oriented business for the personal safety of patrons and
employees and to reduce the incidence of vandalism and criminal conduct. The
lighting shall be shown on the required sketch or diagram of the premises.
         b.   Sound: No loudspeakers or sound equipment shall be used in a
sexually oriented business for the amplification of any sound to a level
discernible by the public beyond the walls of the building in which such use is
conducted.
      3.   Hours Of Operation:
         a.   It is unlawful and a person commits a misdemeanor if he, she, or
it operates, permits, or causes to be operated a sexually oriented business,
where that person operates or permits or causes such business to remain open
for business, or permits or causes any employee to engage in a performance, to
solicit a performance, to make a sale, to solicit a sale, to provide a service,
or to solicit a service, between the hours of one o'clock (1:00) A.M. and nine
o'clock (9:00) A.M. of any day.
         b.   It is unlawful and a person commits a misdemeanor if, working as
an employee of a sexually oriented business, said employee engages in a
performance, solicits a performance, makes a sale, solicits a sale, provides a
service, or solicits a service between the hours of one o'clock (1:00) A.M. and
nine o'clock (9:00) A.M. of any day.
      4.   Advertising Regulations:
         a.   It is unlawful and a person commits a misdemeanor if he, she, or
it operates or causes to be operated a sexually oriented business and
advertises the presentation of any activity prohibited by any applicable state
statute or local ordinance.
         b.   It is unlawful and a person commits a misdemeanor if he, she, or
it operates or causes to be operated a sexually oriented business and displays
or otherwise exhibits the materials or performances of such sexually oriented
business in any advertising. This prohibition shall not extend to advertising
of the existence or location of such sexually oriented business.
      5.   Display Of Goods: Goods and products of a sexually oriented nature,
regardless if the business meets the definition of a sexually oriented
business, shall not be displayed in the front of the store where visible to
passersby. Stores that are dedicated solely to the sale of sexually oriented
products shall be designed such that these products are not immediately visible
upon entering the store.
   F.   Regulations Pertaining To Exhibition Of Sexually Explicit Films Or
Videos In Video Booths: A person who operates or causes to be operated a
sexually oriented business, other than an adult motel which exhibits on the
premises in a viewing room of less than one hundred fifty (150) square feet of
floor space, a film, videocassette, digital video disk, or other video
reproduction which depicts specified sexual activities or specified anatomical
areas, shall comply with the following requirements:
      1.   Upon application for a sexually oriented conditional use permit, the
application shall be accompanied by a diagram of the premises showing a plan
thereof specifying the location of one or more manager's stations and the
location of all overhead lighting fixtures and designating any portion of the
premises in which patrons will not be permitted to enter. A manager's station
may not exceed thirty two (32) square feet of floor area, with no dimensions
greater than eight feet (8'). The diagram shall also designate the place at
which the conditional use permit, if granted, will be conspicuously posted. A
professionally prepared diagram in the nature of an engineer's or architect's
blueprint shall not be required; however, each diagram should be oriented to
the north or to some designated street or object and should be drawn to a
designated scale with marked dimensions sufficient to show the various internal
dimension of all areas of the interior of the premises to an accuracy of plus
or minus six inches (±6"). The city manager, or his or her designee, may waive
the foregoing diagram for renewal applications if the applicant adopts a
diagram that was previously submitted and certifies that the configuration of
the premises has not been altered since the previously submitted diagram was
prepared.
      2.   The application shall be sworn to be true and correct by the
applicant.
      3.   No alteration in the configuration or location of a manager's
station may be made without the prior approval of the city or its designee.
      4.   It is the duty of the owner or owners and the operator or operators
of the premises to ensure that at least one employee is on duty and situated at
each manager's station at all times that any patron is present inside the
premises.
      5.   The interior of the premises shall be configured in such a manner
that there is an unobstructed view from a manager's station of every area of
the premises to which any patron is permitted access for any purpose, excluding
restrooms. Restrooms may not contain video viewing capability. If the premises
has two (2) or more manager's stations designated, then the interior of the
premises shall be configured in such a manner that there is an unobstructed
view of each area of the premises to which any patron is permitted access for
any purpose from at least one of the manager's stations. The view required in
this subsection must be by direct line of sight from the manager's station.
      6.   It shall be the duty of the owner or owners and the operator or
operators, and it shall also be the duty of any agents and employees present on
the premises, to ensure that the view area specified in subsection F5 of this
section remains at all times unobstructed by any doors, walls, merchandise,
display racks, or other materials and to ensure that no patron is permitted
access to any area of the premises which has been designated in the application
filed pursuant to subsection F1 of this section as an area in which patrons
will not be permitted to enter.
      7.   No viewing room may be occupied by more than one person at any one
time.
      8.   The premises shall be equipped with overhead lighting fixtures of
sufficient intensity to illuminate every place to which patrons are permitted
access and an illumination of not less than two (2) foot-candles as measured at
the floor level.
      9.   It shall be the duty of the owner or owners and the operator or
operators and it shall also be the duty of any agents and employees present on
the premises to ensure that the illumination described above is maintained at
all times that any patron is present on the premises.
   G.   Inspection:
      1.   The operator shall permit representatives of the code enforcement
office, the county health department, and the fire department to inspect the
premises of a sexually oriented business for the purpose of ensuring compliance
with the law, at any time it is occupied or at any time it is open for
business.
      2.   It is unlawful and a person who operates a sexually oriented
business or his, her, or its agent or employee commits a misdemeanor if he,
she, or it refuses to permit such lawful inspection of the premises at any time
that it is occupied or at any time that it is open for business.
   H.   Violations And Defense To Prosecution:
      1.   Noncompliance With Section: A person commits a misdemeanor if he,
she, or it operates, allows to be operated, or causes to be operated a sexually
oriented business outside of the restrictions of this section.
      2.   Under Eighteen Years Of Age: It is unlawful and a person commits a
misdemeanor if he, she, or it operates or causes to be operated a sexually
oriented business, and knowingly or with reasonable cause to know, permits,
suffers, or allows any one or more of the following to occur:
         a.   Admittance of any person under eighteen (18) years of age to the
business premises; or
         b.   A person under eighteen (18) years of age to remain at the
business premises; or
         c.   A person under eighteen (18) years of age to purchase goods or
services at the business premises; or
         d.   A person who is under eighteen (18) years of age to work at the
business premises as an employee.
      3.   Injunction And Criminal Remedies For Violation: A person who
operates or causes to be operated a sexually oriented business in violation of
this section shall be subject to injunctive and other remedies as provided by
law. In addition, a violation may be prosecuted as a misdemeanor. Unless
otherwise specified by law, a misdemeanor offense shall be punishable pursuant
to section 19 of the California Penal Code.
      4.   Defense: It is a defense to prosecution under this section if a
person appearing in a state of nudity does so in a modeling class operated in
compliance with both of the following criteria:
         a.   That the class is operated either by a proprietary school,
licensed by the state of California; a college, junior college, or university
supported entirely or partly by taxation or by a private college or university
which maintains and operates educational programs in which credits are
transferable to a college, junior college, or university supported entirely or
partly by taxation; and
         b.   That the class is operated entirely within a structure:
            (1)   Which has no sign visible from the exterior of the structure
and no other advertising that indicates a nude person is available for viewing;
and
            (2)   Where, in order to participate in a class a student is
customarily required to enroll in advance of the class (though late
registrations may be allowable by the institution offering the class); and
            (3)   Where no more than one nude model is on the premises at any
one time.
   I.   Criminal Penalties And Additional Legal, Equitable And Injunctive
Relief: In addition to whatever penalties are applicable under the California
Penal Code, if any person fails or refuses to obey or comply with or violates
any of the criminal provisions of this section, such person, upon conviction of
such offense, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and shall be punished by a fine
established by resolution of the city council or by imprisonment not to exceed
sixty (60) days in the Kings County Jail, or both, in the discretion of the
court. Each violation or noncompliance shall be considered a separate and
distinct offense. Further, each day of continued violation or noncompliance
shall be considered a separate offense. Nothing herein contained shall prevent
or restrict the city from taking such other lawful action in any court of
competent jurisdiction as is necessary to prevent or remedy any violation or
noncompliance. Such other lawful actions shall include, but shall not be
limited to, an equitable action for injunctive relief or an action at law for
damages. All remedies and penalties provided for in this section shall be
cumulative and independently available to the city, and the city shall be
authorized to pursue any and all remedies set forth in this section to the full
extent allowed by law.
   J.   Immunity From Prosecution: The city and its designees, including the
police department and all other departments, agencies, and other city officers,
agents, and employees charged with enforcement of state and local laws and
codes, shall be immune from prosecution, civil or criminal, for reasonable,
good faith trespass upon a sexually oriented business while acting within the
scope of authority conferred by this section. (Ord. 2013-05, 2-6-2014)
9-4D-15: WIRELESS TELECOMMUNICATION FACILITIES:
   A.   Purpose And Intent: This section establishes standards for placement of
wireless telecommunications facilities within the city and regulates the
installation of antennas and other wireless communication facilities consistent
with federal law. This section is intended to promote and protect the public
safety and public welfare of residents as well as containing regulations to
minimize potential impacts of the installation of wireless communication
facilities.
   B.   Applicability: Wireless communication facilities shall be subject to
the following regulations in this section to the extent that such requirements:
1) do not unreasonably discriminate among providers of functionally equivalent
services, or 2) do not have the effect of prohibiting personal wireless
services, as defined by the telecommunications act of 1996.
   C.   Permit Requirements:
      1.   Wireless telecommunication facilities (major and minor, as defined
in section
9-4A-5, "Description Of Land Uses", of this chapter) shall be subject to the
permit requirements identified in article B, "Allowed Uses And Required
Entitlements", of this chapter for the underlying zoning district. Regardless
of any permit requirements listed in article B of this chapter, all wireless
telecommunication facilities shall comply with the applicable development
standards of this section and are subject to site plan and architectural
review.
      2.   The establishment of collocation facilities for major wireless
telecommunication facilities is not subject to conditional use permit approval,
provided the facility satisfies all requirements set forth in Government Code
section 65850.6. Such facilities are subject to zoning clearance.
   D.   Application Requirements: When a conditional use is required for a
wireless telecommunication facility, the application shall include the
following information, in addition to all other information required by the
city for a conditional use permit or site plan and architectural review
application:
      1.   Visual simulations showing what the proposed facility will look like
from the surrounding area as viewed from residential properties and public
rights of way.
      2.   Narrative description and map showing the coverage area and location
of the provider's existing wireless communication facilities and the proposed
coverage area of the specific site that is the subject of the application.
      3.   Description, site plan, and other illustrative materials showing the
probable future phasing (and full build-out) for the addition of subsequent
providers.
      4.   Technical information explaining the reasons that a permit is being
sought (e.g., whether a new antenna is necessary to accommodate increased
demand or to fill a "dead zone" in the provider's coverage area).
   E.   Development Standards:
      1.   Standards For Major Wireless Telecommunication Facilities: The
following general development standards shall apply to all major wireless
telecommunication facilities:
         a.   Major wireless telecommunication facilities shall be collocated
with existing facilities, with other planned new facilities, and with other
facilities such as water tanks, light standards, and other utility structures
to the extent feasible.
         b.   The height limit for towers shall be seventy five feet (75'),
except that a conditional use permit may be granted for additional height when
the designated approving authority finds that reasonable alternatives do not
exist to provide the necessary service.
         c.   Towers shall not be located in any required front or street side
yard in any zoning district.
         d.   The setback distance from any abutting street right of way,
residential property line, or public trail shall be equal to the height of the
facility (tower and related equipment).
         e.   The minimum setback distance from nonresidential property lines
shall be twenty percent (20%) of the height of the tower.
         f.   All wireless communication facilities shall comply with the noise
standards of section
9-5B-2, "Noise, Odor, And Vibration Performance Standards", of this title.
         g.   Facilities shall have subdued colors and comprise nonreflective
materials which blend with the materials and colors of the surrounding area or
building.
         h.   All facilities shall be designed so as to be resistant to and
minimize opportunities for unauthorized access, climbing, vandalism, graffiti,
and other conditions which would result in hazardous conditions, visual blight,
or attractive nuisances.
         i.   Towers and related equipment shall be unlit except as provided
below:
            (1)   A manually operated or motion detector controlled light above
the equipment shed door may be provided. Such light shall remain off except
when personnel are present on site at night.
            (2)   The minimum tower lighting required under federal aviation
administration regulation.
            (3)   Where tower lighting is required, such lighting shall be
shielded or directed downward to the greatest extent possible to ensure that
such light does not spill over onto abutting properties, especially residential
zoning districts or uses.
         j.   Where appropriate, wireless communication facilities shall be
installed in a manner that maintains and enhances existing landscaping on the
site, including trees, foliage, and shrubs, whether or not utilized for
screening. Additional landscaping shall be planted around the tower and related
equipment to buffer abutting residential zoning districts or uses, and to
buffer public trails.
         k.   The tower and related equipment shall not bear any signs or
advertising devices other than certification, warning, or other required seals
or signs.
      2.   Standards For Minor Wireless Telecommunication Facilities:
         a.   Ground mounted equipment shall be situated as close to the ground
as feasible to reduce visual impact without compromising their function and all
portions of the antenna shall be set back a minimum of five feet (5') from any
property line. Ground mounted minor wireless telecommunication facilities shall
be screened from view from the public right of way to a height of roughly seven
feet (7').
         b.   Wall mounted equipment shall be flush mounted and painted or
finished to match the building with concealed cables.
         c.   In commercial and office zoning districts, roof mounted equipment
shall be screened from view of public rights of way by locating the antenna
below the roofline, parapet wall, or other roof screen and by locating the
equipment as far away as physically feasible and aesthetically desirable from
the edge of the building.
         d.   Equipment shall have subdued colors and comprise nonreflective
materials which blend with the materials and colors of the surrounding area or
building.
         e.   The maximum height for ground mounted equipment shall be equal to
the horizontal distance between the equipment and the nearest property line, or
twenty five feet (25') above the maximum building height of the zone district,
whichever is less.
      3.   Development Standards For Amateur Radio Antennas:
         a.   Height Limits: Amateur radio antennas in any zone district may
extend to a maximum height of seventy five feet (75'), provided that the tower
is equipped with a lowering device (motorized and/or mechanical) capable of
lowering the antenna to the maximum height permitted in the zone district when
not in operation.
         b.   Location Parameters: All antenna structures shall be located
outside of required front and street side yard areas. Antenna structures shall
also be set back a minimum distance of five feet (5') from interior property
lines.
         c.   Tower Safety: All antennas shall be located within an enclosed
fenced area or have a minimum five foot (5') high tower shield at the tower
base to prevent climbing. All active elements of antennas shall have a minimum
vertical clearance of eight feet (8'). (Ord. 2013-05, 2-6-2014)
9-4D-16: THRIFT STORES:
   A.   Purpose And Applicability: The purpose of these regulations is to limit
the overconcentration of thrift stores within the city by applying minimum
distance standards between thrift stores and ensuring compatibility with
surrounding uses by requiring special standards for collection/receiving and
refuse areas and requiring additional property maintenance.
The regulations contained in this section shall apply to new and qualifying
expansion of existing thrift stores as defined in article A, "Use
Classification System", of this chapter. The establishment of new thrift stores
shall be consistent with the allowed use provisions of article B, "Allowed Uses
And Required Entitlements", of this chapter and the standards contained within
this section, as well as other development standards as required in the
underlying zoning district. Where the standards of the underlying district
conflict with the standards herein, these standards shall apply.
   B.   Location: Thrift stores shall not be located closer than five hundred
feet (500') from another thrift store.
   C.   Development Standards: All new thrift stores shall observe all
development standards of the underlying zoning district, except that they shall
also comply with the following additional standards:
      1.   Enclosed Activities: All activities shall be completely enclosed
within the building for the use.
      2.   Collection/Receiving Area: The collection area shall be located on
the side or rear of the building. Adequate directional signage shall be
provided from the main entrance to the use to direct individuals to the
collection area. The collection area shall be noticed to prohibit depositing
goods when the store is closed.
      3.   Property Maintenance: Management shall be responsible for the
removal of litter from the subject property, adjacent property, and streets
that results from the thrift store (with adjacent property owner consent).
(Ord. 2013-05, 2-6-2014)
9-4D-17: OUTDOOR DISPLAY, SALES, AND STORAGE:
   A.   Purpose: The purpose of this section is to regulate permanent and
temporary outdoor display, sales, and storage uses. The intent of these
regulations is to encourage outdoor displays and activities that are compatible
with associated and nearby uses and do not obstruct pedestrian or vehicle
circulation or create an unsightly appearance of unrestricted clutter.
   B.   Permit Requirements And Exemptions: The following outdoor activities
shall be subject to the permit requirements listed herein:
      1.   Permanent Outdoor Display And Sales: Permanent outdoor display and
sales (excluding vending machines) shall require administrative site plan and
architecture review approval prior to establishment. All related activities
shall be developed and operated consistent with the standards of this section.
      2.   Temporary Outdoor Display And Sales: Temporary outdoor display and
sales shall comply with the standards for temporary uses as provided in chapter
4, article C, "Temporary Uses", of this title and, if required, first obtain a
temporary use permit. Temporary outdoor display and sales shall comply with the
development standards listed in this section in addition to the requirements of
chapter 4, article C of this title.
      3.   Permanent Outdoor Storage: Permanent outdoor storage is permitted as
a specified land use (storage yards). If not part of the original development
permit for the principal use, permanent outdoor storage may be permitted in
mixed use, automotive and industrial, and public/quasi-public zoning districts
subject to site plan and architectural review approval. In all cases, permanent
outdoor storage shall be consistent with the development standards of this
chapter.
      4.   Temporary Outdoor Storage: Temporary outdoor storage shall comply
with the standards for temporary uses as provided in chapter 4, article C,
"Temporary Uses", of this title and, if required, first obtain a temporary use
permit. Temporary outdoor storage shall comply with the development standards
listed in this section in addition to the requirements of chapter 4, article C
of this title.
   C.   Development Standards: The following general development standards
apply to all outdoor display, sales, and storage activities.
      1.   Location: Outdoor activities shall not be located within any public
right of way (unless an encroachment permit has been issued), in required
parking spaces, within designed vehicle drive aisles, or within required
landscape planter areas. Outdoor activities shall also not disrupt or impede
required pedestrian circulation paths.
      2.   Hours Of Operation: Except as otherwise provided, hours of operation
for outdoor activities shall be consistent with those for the corresponding
primary use.
      3.   Noise: Any noise generated by the outdoor activity shall be
consistent with subsection
9-5B-2B, "Noise Standards", of this title.
   D.   Standards For Outdoor Display And Sales: The following development
standards shall apply to all permanent and temporary outdoor display and sales
activities and are in addition to those standards listed in subsection C,
"Development Standards", of this section:
      1.   Associated With The Primary Use: All outdoor display and sales
activities shall be associated with the primary use of the property. Only those
goods and services associated with the primary use may be stored, sold, or
displayed. All outdoor display and sales activities that are independent of the
primary use shall be considered their own primary use and regulated as such
(e.g., seasonal sales as a temporary use requiring a temporary use permit).
      2.   Maximum Area: Unless otherwise approved in conjunction with
development permits, the area used for permanent outdoor display and sales of
materials shall not exceed ten percent (10%) of the gross floor area of the
corresponding commercial building. When a permitted use, vehicle and equipment
sales and rentals (e.g., automobile, boat, RV, construction equipment) are
exempt from the ten percent (10%) limitation, provided storage and display is
limited to vehicles offered for sale or rental only.
      3.   Performance Standards: Vending machines and outdoor display and
sales shall meet the following requirements:
         a.   Placement shall be adjacent to a building wall and under a roof
overhang (if available).
         b.   Placement shall not reduce the width of a paved clear space for
the passage of pedestrians to less than four feet (4'). Clear space shall be
counted as that space exclusive of vehicle overhang as provided in subsection
9-5E-5B7 of this title.
         c.   Placement shall not be closer than five feet (5') to a fire
department or utility connection (e.g., fire door, gas meter, electric meter).
         d.   No more than twenty percent (20%) or forty feet (40'), whichever
is less, of the total facade may be occupied by all vending and display areas
combined. Placement shall not have exposed conduits, piping, or overhead
utility connections.
   E.   Standards For Outdoor Storage: The following development standards
shall apply to all permanent and temporary outdoor storage activities and are
in addition to those standards listed in subsection C, "Development Standards",
of this section:
      1.   Location: Outdoor storage may not be located within any required
front or street side yard for the underlying zoning district within which the
activity is located. No pedestrian paths shall be obstructed. A paved clear
space for the passage of pedestrians, no less than five feet (5') wide shall be
maintained.
      2.   Windows: Outdoor storage areas shall not block the view from any
windows.
      3.   Height Limitation: The height of stacked materials and goods shall
be no greater than that of any building, wall, fence, or gate enclosing the
storage area.
      4.   Screening Of Outdoor Storage: Outdoor storage (including all
dumpsters, commercial items, commercial construction, or industrial related
materials and equipment within commercial zones) shall be screened from any
abutting right of way, trail, or property. Methods to achieve screening may
include, but not be limited to, fences, walls, landscaping, or earthen berms.
(Ord. 2013-05, 2-6-2014)
9-4D-18: RESIDENTIAL ACCESSORY STRUCTURES:
   A.   Purpose: The purpose of this section is to regulate certain types of
residential accessory structures. These standards are intended to complement
the requirements and standards of the city adopted building code and fire code
with respect to accessory structures on residential property.
   B.   Permit Requirements And Exceptions: Generally, no special planning
permit or entitlement shall be required for accessory structures that are
consistent with the standards herein, except that zoning plan check shall be
conducted in the event that a building permit is required.
   C.   Development Standards:
      1.   Development Standards For All Accessory Structures: The development
standards in this section shall apply only to detached accessory structures.
Primary structures, and any other feature attached to the primary structure
(e.g., attached patio cover), are subject to the setback, height, and other
requirements for the zoning district in which they are located.
         a.   Easements: No accessory structure shall be placed within an
established easement.
         b.   Construction Phasing: Accessory structures may be constructed
only in conjunction with or after construction of the primary building(s) on
the site.
         c.   Ingress/Egress Into Back Yard: A minimum three foot (3') ingress/
egress pathway into a back yard shall be maintained for fire access.
      2.   Development Standards By Type Of Accessory Structure:
Table 9-4D-18-C1, "Development Standards For Residential Accessory Structures
In Residential Zones", of this section establishes development standards based
on the type of accessory structure as defined in this title.
TABLE 9-4D-18-C1
DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS FOR RESIDENTIAL ACCESSORY STRUCTURES IN RESIDENTIAL ZONES
          Development Standard
Accessory Minimum Setback Distance From
Structure Property Line
          Front Street Side Interior Side And Minimum Distance   Maximum Height
                            Rear              Between Structures
               Development Standard
               Minimum Setback Distance From Property
Accessory      Line
Structure                                              Minimum
               Front        Street Side  Interior Side Distance   Maximum
                                         And Rear      Between    Height
                                                       Structures
Building, 120
sq. ft. or                                                     
less:
               Same minimum
8' tall or     as for       10'          No minimum    No minimum 8'
less           primary
               structure
Greater than               15'          5'            10'        16'
8' tall
Building,
greater than                                                   
120 sq. ft.:
               Same minimum
Fully enclosed as for       15'          5'            10'        16'
               primary
               structure
Limited/no                 15'          5'            10'        16'
enclosure
Garden                                                         
structure:
<8' tall       12'          No minimum   No minimum    No minimum 8'
8' tall        12'          15'          5'            10'        16'
Carports:                                                      
               Set back     Not
Combustible    even with or permitted on                          Height of
and/or         behind the   the street   5'            10'        house primary
portable       front of the side of a                             structure
               house        corner lot
               4' behind    4' behind
               the sidewalk the sidewalk
               and outside  and outside                           Height of
Noncombustible of public    of public    No minimum    10'        house main
and permanent  right of way right of way                          structure
               and clear    and clear
               visibility   visibility
               area         area
Pool/spa       Same as for                                        Not
(built-in)     primary      5'           5'            3'         applicable
               structure
Deck           No minimum   No minimum   No minimum    No minimum 2'
               Same as                                            Same as for
Play equipment primary      15'          5'            No minimum primary
               structure                                          structure
 
(Ord. 2013-05, 2-6-2014)
9-4D-19: MANUFACTURED HOMES:
The provisions of this section shall apply to all mobilehomes and manufactured
homes not located in an approved mobilehome park:
   A.   No mobilehome or manufactured home shall be installed that was
manufactured more than ten (10) years from the date of application for a
building permit for installation.
   B.   All manufactured homes shall meet the following site or architectural
standards:
      1.   Garages And Carports: A minimum of a one-car garage or carport shall
be provided for every manufactured house. The parking requirements of chapter
5, article E of this Code shall also apply.
      2.   Minimum Width And Floor Area: The width and floor area of a
manufactured housing unit shall be at least eighty percent (80%) of the average
of other adjacent residences in the zone district in which it is located.
      3.   Roof Overhangs: All manufactured housing units and garages shall
have a pitched roof with a minimum sixteen inch (16") roof overhang on each of
the perimeter walls such that the overhang is architecturally integrated into
the design of the dwelling unit.
      4.   Roofing Materials: All manufactured housing units and garages and
carports located on the lot shall have a roof constituted of asphalt
composition, clay, tile, concrete or metal tile or panels, slate or built-up
asphaltic-gravel materials.
      5.   Siding Materials: All manufactured housing units and garages located
on the lot shall have similar exterior siding materials consisting of wood,
masonry, concrete, stucco, Masonite, or metal lap. The exterior siding material
shall extend to the ground level, except that when a solid concrete or masonry
perimeter foundation is used, the siding material need not extend below the top
of the foundation.
      6.   Foundations: All manufactured housing units and garages and carports
shall be placed on a permanent foundation which meets the applicable building
code requirements and/or the provisions of section 18551 of the State Health
and Safety Code such that the floor elevation of the dwelling is reasonably
compatible with the floor elevations of the surrounding dwelling units.
      7.   Utility Connections: The mobilehome electrical, gas, water and drain
connections shall be made permanent in a manner applicable to permanent
buildings. Gas shut-off valves, meters and regulators shall not be located
beneath the manufactured homes.
      8.   Deviations: The Community Development Department may approve
deviations from one (1) or more of the standards of this subsection B based on
a finding that the architectural style proposed provides compensating design
features and that the proposed dwelling will be compatible and harmonious with
existing structures in the vicinity.
   C.   Surrender Of Registration: Subsequent to applying for a building
permit, and prior to the occupancy of a mobilehome or manufactured home on a
permanent foundation, a certification of occupancy is to be issued by the
Building Official pursuant to section 18551 of the State Health and Safety
Code. Thereafter, any vehicle license plate, certificate of ownership, and
certificate of registration issued by a State agency shall be surrendered back
to the issuing State agency. Any mobile/manufactured home on a permanent
foundation shall bear a State insignia or Federal label pursuant to section
18550 of the State Health and Safety Code. (Ord. 2017-06, 5-16-2017)
9-4D-20: SHOPPING CARTS:
   A.   Retail uses established after April 1, 2017, that provide shopping
carts shall install and maintain disabling devices on all carts that prevent
the use of the carts off the premises. This requirement shall be applicable in
all zone districts, and shall be in addition to the requirements in title 4,
chapter 5 of the Municipal Code.
   B.   A shopping cart shall be defined per section
4-5-2 of the Municipal Code. (Ord. 2017-06, 5-16-2017)
9-4D-21: TATTOO PARLORS:
   A.   Purpose: The purpose of this Section is to regulate the establishment
and operation of tattoo parlors.
   B.   Applicability: The regulations contained in this section shall apply to
tattoo parlors as defined in section 9-4A-5, “Description Of Land Uses”, of
this chapter. The establishment of new tattoo parlors shall be consistent with
the allowed use provisions of article B, “Allowed Uses And Required
Entitlements”, of this chapter and the standards contained within this section,
as well as other development standards as required by this code.
   C.   Development And Design Standards for tattoo parlors:
      1.   Tattoo parlors shall operate only between the hours of seven (7:00)
a.m. and eleven (11:00) p.m.
      2.   Service of alcohol, marijuana based substances, or other controlled
substance shall not be permitted in conjunction with a tattoo parlor use.
      3.   No new tattoo parlor use shall be located within five hundred feet
(500') of another tattoo parlor, except that no separation is required in the
DMX-1 and DMX-2 zones.
      4.   The entrance door and storefront window glazing shall be 75 percent
(75%) clear and free of obstructions such as signs, window tinting, shelving,
or racks.
      5.   “Specified anatomical areas” as defined in
9-4D-14 shall not be exposed in the publicly accessible areas of the business
or viewable from the public right-of-way.
      6.   The operator of the approved use shall prevent loitering and loud
noises around the subject site during and after the hours of business
operation.
      7.   A sign stating, “No tattoo service will be provided for anyone under
the age of 18,” shall be visible at all times on the door of the front
entrance.
      8.   The applicant shall comply with all applicable State, County and
City Health and Human Services regulations including, but not limited to the
State Safe Body Art Act regarding the establishment and operation of businesses
engaged in tattooing, body piercing, and permanent cosmetic application. (Ord.
2024-01, 6-18-2024)
9-4D-22: PERSONAL STORAGE FACILITIES:
   A.   Purpose: The purpose of this section is to regulate the establishment
and operation of personal storage facilities, also known as mini-storages or
self-storage facilities.
   B.   Applicability: Development standards in this section shall apply to all
personal storage facilities. New personal storage facilities will be reviewed
in conjunction with the required conditional use permit and/or site plan and
architectural review application.
   C.   Maximum size: The maximum site area for personal storage facilities in
the Low Density Residential Zone and the Low Medium Density Residential Zone
shall be ten (10) acres. The maximum site area for personal storage facilities
in the Medium Density Residential Zone shall be three (3) acres.
   D.   The following Development And Design Standards shall apply to all
personal storage facilities:
      1.   Residential quarters for a manager or caretaker may be provided.
      2.   No business activity shall be conducted other than the rental of
storage spaces.
         a.   No public sale of any item from a rental space or within a self-
service storage facility.
         b.   The personal storage operator may conduct incidental retail sales
of storage-related items, including, but not limited to, boxes, locks, and
packing tape.
         c.   No construction, repair, servicing, renovating, painting or
resurfacing of any motor vehicle, boat, trailer or other machine or implement
including, but not limited to, furniture, toys, carpets, or similar equipment,
objects, or materials.
         d.   No on-site commercial, business, professional, industrial, or
recreational use or activity.
         e.   No use of rental units for human habitation.
      3.   All storage shall be located within fully enclosed structure(s)
except as provided for in this section.
      4.   The site shall be completely enclosed by building walls or a solid
masonry wall with landscaping, except for points of ingress and egress
(including emergency fire access) which shall be gated. The gate(s) shall be
maintained in good working order at all times and shall remain closed except
when in use.
      5.   Buildings may be placed with zero setback from interior lot lines if
the Planning Commission finds that the placement will not be detrimental to
adjacent properties.
      6.   All on-site lighting shall be energy efficient, stationary, and
directed away from adjoining properties and public rights-of-way in accordance
with section 9-5B-4 Outdoor Lighting.
      7.   The site shall be paved, except for structures and landscaping.
      8.   Personal storage facilities may provide space for the outdoor
storage of operable vehicles, boats, RV’s, and trailers, provided the following
standards are met:
         a.   The storage of vehicles shall occur only within a designated
area. The designated area shall be clearly delineated on the site.
         b.   The storage of vehicles shall not occur within building setbacks.
      9.   New personal storage facilities shall be landscaped in accordance
with section
9-5D1-2 and maintained in accordance with section
9-5D1-3.
      10.   The storage of inoperative vehicles is prohibited.
      11.   The storage of flammable or otherwise hazardous materials is
prohibited.
   E.   In addition to subsection D, the following Development And Design
Standards shall apply to personal storage facilities in residential zones:
      1.   New personal storage facilities in residential zones shall not be
located within one-half mile of an existing personal storage facility.
      2.   Storage facilities located within or adjacent to residential zones
shall locate outdoor vehicle, boat, RV, and trailer storage areas at least
thirty feet (30') from all property lines and shall be separated from all
property lines by enclosed storage structures.
      3.   Exterior walls within or adjacent to residential zones that are
visible from public rights of way shall be of a decorative design consistent
with the following:
         a.   Walls shall have vertical elements (e.g., pilasters,
indentations) of differing colors and/or materials at least every one-hundred
feet (100').
         b.   Walls shall include capstones (with limited overhang) of a
coordinating color, material, and style as the rest of the wall.
         c.   Walls shall be of neutral color and shall be textured with stone,
brick, stucco, or other similar surface finish.
         d.   Walls shall not be located inside of the required clear
visibility area at the intersections of streets.
      4.   Building walls that are visible from public rights of way shall be
articulated with one of the techniques illustrated in figure 9-5C-4-B2,
“Techniques To Break Up Long Building Walls”, of section 9-5C-4 a minimum of
every thirty feet (30').
      5.   New personal storage facilities proposed adjacent to existing
residential uses shall be limited to a maximum seven-foot-high solid masonry
wall or structure when constructed on property line.
      6.   Use of barbed wire for or on fencing is prohibited.
      7.   Personal storage facilities located within residential zones or
adjacent to residential zones shall maintain a landscaped 20-foot front yard
and a 15-foot street side yard in addition to areas described in section
9-5D1-2.
      8.   Personal storage facilities located within or adjacent to
residential zones shall have hours of operation limited to 7:00 a.m. to 9:00
p.m., Monday through Saturday, and 9:00 a.m. to 9:00 p.m. on Sundays. (Ord.
2024-01, 6-18-2024)
CHAPTER 5
DESIGN STANDARDS
ARTICLE A. AREA, SETBACK, HEIGHT AND COVERAGE STANDARDS
SECTION:
9-5A-1: Purpose And Applicability
9-5A-2: Height Limits Measurement And Exceptions
9-5A-3: Setback Determination And Requirements
9-5A-4: General Zoning District Development Standards
9-5A-1: PURPOSE AND APPLICABILITY:
The purpose of this article is to provide development standards related to all
properties within Lemoore regardless of underlying zoning designation or land
use. The purpose of this article is to establish development standards for lot
area, allowed density, building setbacks, height, and lot coverage as
appropriate for each of the city's base zoning districts. (Ord. 2013-05, 2-6-
2014)
9-5A-2: HEIGHT LIMITS MEASUREMENT AND EXCEPTIONS:
   A.   Height Measurement: The height of a structure shall be measured as the
vertical distance from the finish grade of the site to an imaginary plane
located the allowed number of feet above and parallel to the finish grade.
   FIGURE 9-5A-2-A1
   MEASUREMENT OF HEIGHT
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/08286aa2a408810754fa2332ce2e067d759ab116/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2259.jpg]
 
Exceptions to height regulations are as follows:
      1.   Towers, penthouses, and other roof structures for the purpose of
shelter for mechanical equipment, cupolas, water tanks, church steeples, and
similar structures and necessary mechanical appurtenances may be erected up to
twenty five feet (25') above the allowable height limit of the structure.
      2.   Wireless telecommunication facilities height limits are established
in section
9-4D-15, "Wireless Telecommunication Facilities", of this title.
      3.   Fire or parapet walls in nonresidential zoning districts may extend
up to four feet (4') above the allowable height limit of the structure. (Ord.
2013-05, 2-6-2014)
9-5A-3: SETBACK DETERMINATION AND REQUIREMENTS:
   A.   Purpose And Applicability:
      1.   Purpose: The purpose of this section is to establish requirements
for yard areas, setbacks, and encroachments. These requirements, in conjunction
with other applicable requirements, are intended to ensure open areas around
primary structures maintain clear visibility for traffic safety and pedestrian
access, buffer between various land uses, establish natural and visual light,
establish airspace privacy, and provide for landscaping and recreation areas.
      2.   Applicability: The rules for measurement of setbacks, yard areas,
and encroachments apply to all properties in the city and shall be in addition
to any other applicable development standards and measurement rules contained
elsewhere within this title.
   B.   General Yard And Setback Regulations:
      1.   Required Yard Area: Except as otherwise specified in this title,
required yard areas shall be kept free of buildings and structures.
      2.   Exclusivity Of Required Yard Area: No yard or other open space
provided around any building for the purpose of complying with this title shall
be considered as providing a yard or open space for any other building or
structure.
      3.   Vertical Clearance: Except as otherwise provided in this title,
every part of a required yard shall be open from its lowest point to the sky
unobstructed. Building overhangs, bay windows, and other such elements may
intrude as permitted, pursuant to subsection D, "Allowed Encroachments Or
Projections Into Required Yards", of this section.
      4.   Corner Lots: In the case of a lot abutting two (2) or more streets,
the main buildings and accessory buildings shall be erected so as not to
encroach upon the required front and street side yards.
      5.   Double Frontage Lots: Where a double frontage lot has a depth of one
hundred twenty five feet (125') or more, such lot may be treated as two (2)
lots for the purpose of determining yard setbacks.
      6.   Flag Lots: The front setback for a flag lot shall be measured from
the property line that abuts the access corridor, not from where the access
corridor meets the public street.
      7.   Lot Area, Depth, Width, And Setback Reduction: Where a lot area or a
lot width, depth, or setback has been reduced for an existing legally created
lot by not more than fifteen percent (15%) as a result of acquisition of
dedication for a highway, road, drain, or other public purpose, or as a result
of dedication pursuant to a condition of approval, the lot area or yard so
reduced may be included in determining compliance with lot area or yard
requirements in the same manner as if the acquisition or dedication has not
taken place.
      8.   Setback Measurement:
         a.   Generally: The setback of all buildings and structures shall be
measured at a right angle from the property line and determined by the exterior
boundaries of the streets and highways and their proposed widening and
extensions as indicated on the circulation plan, planned improvements map of
the city's general plan. Except as permitted in subsection D, "Allowed
Encroachments Or Projections Into Required Yards", of this section, or as
otherwise specified in this title for specific types of structures (e.g.,
accessory structures, signs) or through the issuance of a variance, structures
shall not extend beyond required setback lines.
         b.   Lots On Loop Out And Cul-De-Sac Streets: The minimum front
setback for lots on loop out and cul-de-sac streets shall be five feet (5')
less than the otherwise established minimum front setback.
   C.   Residential Yard And Setback Regulations: In addition to the setback
standards for single-family residential development listed in section
9-5A-4,
table 9-5A-4A, "Development Standards For Residential Zoning Districts", of
this article, the following standards shall apply:
      1.   Front Yard Variation: In any full block of lots established through
a planned unit development, the front yards may be varied so that the required
yard depth is not reduced more than five feet (5'), the average of all lots
equals the required yard depth, and the corner lot yards are not reduced.
      2.   Yard Exceptions For Infill Development: On a site situated between
sites improved with buildings where said buildings are set back less than the
minimum distance required by this subsection, the minimum front yard shall be
the average depth of the front yards on the improved sites immediately
adjoining the side lines of the site.
      3.   Deviations For Lots Recorded Prior To 1987: In case of irregular or
wedge shaped lots and lots in subdivisions recorded prior to 1987, the planning
director may grant setback deviations up to fifteen percent (15%) of the stated
requirements.
   D.   Allowed Encroachments Or Projections Into Required Yards: Bay windows,
cornices, canopies, attached decks and patios, eaves, fireplaces, roof
overhangs, and similar architectural features may encroach up to six feet (6')
into the required front yard and up to two feet (2') into all other required
yard areas. Patio covers attached to the main structure that are no taller than
16 feet may encroach up to five (5') into the required rear yard.
(Ord. 2013-05, 2-6-2014; amd. Ord. 2025-02, 4-1-2025)
9-5A-4: GENERAL ZONING DISTRICT DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS:
   A.   
Table 9-5A-4A, "Development Standards For Residential Zoning Districts" and
table 9-5A-4B "Development Standards For Office, Commercial, Industrial, And
Special Purpose Zoning Districts", of this section establish the lot area,
allowed density, building setbacks, height, and lot coverage requirements, as
defined in this title, for each of the city's base zoning districts, except the
mixed use zoning districts. Development standards and design provisions for the
downtown mixed use zones (DMX-1, DMX-2, and DMX-3) are addressed in chapter 6,
"Downtown Development Standards", of this title. Development standards and
design provisions for the mixed use zone (MU) are addressed in chapter 7,
"Mixed Use Development Standards", of this title. Zoning district names for the
zoning district symbols used in the table are the same as those used in section
9-4B-2 of this title.
TABLE 9-5A-4A
DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS FOR RESIDENTIAL ZONING DISTRICTS
 
Measurement/Zoning District Residential Zoning Districts
                            AR RVLD RLD RN RLMD RMD RHD
Measurement/Zoning District   Residential Zoning Districts
                              AR         RVLD   RLD   RN    RLMD  RMD   RHD
Site area per dwelling unit,  No minimum 15,000 5,000 3,000 3,000 2,500 1,700
minimum (square feet)
Lot dimensions:                                                    
 Lot size, minimum (square   40,000     10,000 5,000 3,000 3,000 2,000 2,000
  feet)
 Lot width, minimum10        150'       100'   50'   50'   60'   60'   60'
 Lot depth, minimum          200'       150'   100'  90'   90'   80'   80'
Setbacks, minimum:                                                 
 Front yard:                                                      
  Generally2,12             60'        25'    15'   15'   15'   15'   15'
  To garage, front facing   -          -      20'   20'   20'   20'   20'
  To garage, side load      -          -      15'   -     -     -     -
  To porch                  -          -      12'   12'   12'   12'   -
 Side yard:                                                       
  Interior side             15'        10'    5'    5'    5'    10'   10'
  Street side12             25'        15'    10'   10'   10'   15'   15'
  Combined both sides       -          -      10'   10'   10'   -     -
 Rear yard:                                                       
  Generally                 10' 4      10' 4  10' 4 10' 4 10'   10'   10'
  To detached alley loaded  5'         5'     5'    0'    0'    0'    0'
    garage
  Abutting a street11       20'        20'    20'   20'   20'   -     -
Separation between buildings, 10'        10'    10'   10'   10'   10'   10'
minimum7
Height, maximum               40'        40'    35'   35'   35'   45'   60'
 
TABLE 9-5A-4B
DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS FOR OFFICE, COMMERCIAL, INDUSTRIAL, AND SPECIAL PURPOSE
ZONING DISTRICTS
Measurement/Zoning Office, Commercial, And Industrial Special Purpose Zoning
District           Zoning Districts                   Districts
                   NC RC PO ML MH                     W AG PR CF
Measurement/    Office, Commercial, And Industrial Special Purpose Zoning
Zoning District Zoning Districts                   Districts
                NC   RC   PO      ML     MH        W   AG  PR  CF
Residential
density range
(du/acre,       -    -    17 - 25 -      -         -   -   -   -
minimum and
maximum)
Lot dimensions:                                         
Lot size,
minimum (square -    -    20,000  20,000 20,000    -   -   -   -
feet)
Lot depth,      -    -    100'    100'   100'      -   -   -   -
minimum
Setbacks,                                               
minimum:
Front yard:                                             
Generally 2,12  0'   0'   25'     25'    25' 3     0'  0'  0'  25'
To garage,      15'  0'   -       -      -         -   -   -   -
front facing
Side yard:                                              
Interior side   0' 5 0' 5 0' 5    0' 5   0' 6      0'  0'  0'  0'
Street side 12  10'  10'  10'     10'    10'       0'  0'  0'  10'
Rear yard       0' 5 0' 5 0' 5    25'    25'       0'  0'  0'  25'
Separation
between         10'  10'  10'     -      -         0'  0'  0'  10'
buildings,
minimum 7
Lot coverage,
maximum percent 80%  80%  65%     -      -         -   -   -   -
of lot area 8
Floor area                                              
ratio (FAR):
Minimum         0.10 0.10 0.10    0.10   0.10      -   -   -   -
Maximum         0.60 0.60 0.60    0.60   0.60      -   -   -   -
Height, maximum -    -    35'     60' 9  60' 9     30' 65' 30' 45'
  
Notes:
    1.    Accessory dwelling units and junior accessory dwelling units are not
counted when calculating site area per dwelling unit.
    2.    Reserved.
    3.    For every 1 foot in additional height, an additional 1 foot in
setback is required.
    4.    Additional 5 feet is required for each additional story.
    5.    Required setback is 10 feet when adjacent to any residential zoning
district.
    6.    Required setback is 15 feet when adjacent to any residential or mixed
use zoning district.
    7.    Separation requirements apply to buildings on the same site as well
as separation between buildings on adjacent parcels.
    8.    Also see subsection
9-5D1-2E, “Special Landscape Requirements”, of this chapter for corresponding
minimum landscaping and pervious surface requirements.
    9.    Additional building height may be allowed through site plan and
architectural review when additional height is necessary for mechanical
equipment as part of an industrial operation.
    10.    For flag lots, the minimum width for the access corridor shall be 10
feet. The lot width shall be measured from the front property line as described
in section
9-5A-3, “Setback Determination And Requirements”, of this article.
    11.    See section
9-5B-7, “Urban-Rural Edge”, of this chapter.
    12.    15 foot landscape buffer required along arterial and collector
streets in addition to minimum setback. These 2 standards are not cumulative
and may overlap. See subsection
9-5D1-2E2, “Landscape Buffers Required Along Arterial And Collector Streets”,
of this chapter.
(Ord. 2013-05, 2-6-2014; amd. Ord. 2015-08, 1-5-2016; Ord. 2023-10, 9-19-2023)
ARTICLE B. DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS BY ZONING DISTRICT
SECTION:
9-5B-1: Purpose
9-5B-2: Noise, Odor, And Vibration Performance Standards
9-5B-3: Property And Utility Improvements
9-5B-4: Outdoor Lighting
9-5B-5: Fences And Walls
9-5B-6: Screening
9-5B-7: Urban-Rural Edge
9-5B-1: PURPOSE:
The purpose of this article is to provide performance standards for all
permanent and temporary land uses within the city relative to noise, odor, and
vibration, property and utility improvement requirements, outdoor lighting,
fences and walls, and screening. The intent is to provide compatibility between
neighboring land uses by minimizing various potential impacts. (Ord. 2013-05,
2-6-2014)
9-5B-2: NOISE, ODOR, AND VIBRATION PERFORMANCE STANDARDS:
   A.   Purpose And Applicability:
      1.   Purpose: The purpose of this section is to provide performance
standards for all permanent and temporary land uses within the city relative to
noise, odor, and vibration. The intent is to provide compatibility between
neighboring land uses by minimizing various potential impacts.
      2.   Applicability: The standards of this chapter apply to all new and
existing land uses within the city, unless otherwise exempted. Existing uses
shall not be modified in conflict with the provisions of this chapter.
   B.   Noise Standards:
      1.   Applicability: In addition to the provision contained within this
section, all uses shall comply with the noise standards set forth in the city’s
general plan and in title 5, chapter 6, “Noise”, of the municipal code. Unless
otherwise specified in this section or the general plan, all noise measurements
shall be based upon the community noise equivalent level (CNEL).
      2.   Generally: No use, activity, or process shall exceed the maximum
allowable noise levels established by this section, except for the following
noise sources:
         a.   Public safety warning devices (e.g., ambulance, fire, and police
sirens), sound for alerting persons to the existence of an emergency, or the
performance of authorized emergency work;
         b.   Any activity whose noise levels are regulated by state or federal
law;
         c.   Construction, maintenance, and/or repair operations by public
agencies and/or utility companies or their contractors that are serving public
interests, and/or protecting the public health, safety, and general welfare;
         d.   Public agency sanctioned recreational activities and programs
conducted in public parks; and
         e.   The authorized collection of solid waste.
      3.   Maximum Allowable Noise Levels:
         a.   No use shall exceed the standard noise levels established in
table 9-5B-2-B1, “Land Use Noise Standards” of this section. Necessary measures
shall be incorporated into all development projects to attenuate exterior and/
or interior noise levels to these standards.
TABLE 9-5B-2-B1
LAND USE NOISE STANDARDS
Land Use Noise Standards (dB CNEL)
         Interior Noise Exterior Noise
Land Use                            Noise Standards (dB CNEL)
                                    Interior Noise Exterior Noise
Residential uses                    45             651
Residential uses in mixed use zones 45             70
Commercial                          -              70
Office                              50             70
Industrial                          55             75
Public facilities                   50             70
Parks                               -              70
Schools                             50             65
 
   Note:
       1.    In outdoor living areas, e.g., back yards.
         b.   Notwithstanding the above requirements, if the measured ambient
noise level exceeds the applicable noise level standard in any category, the
applicable standards shall be the ambient noise level.
         c.   Notwithstanding the above requirements, no person shall allow or
cause the generation of any noise of a type, volume, pitch, tone, repetition,
or duration that would be found to be a nuisance by a reasonable person beyond
the boundaries of the property where the noise is generated.
      4.   Acoustical Analysis Required: Where the City determines that a
proposed project may generate noise in excess of any limit established above,
and/or where the use may generate noise in outdoor areas in excess of sixty
decibels (60 dB CNEL), the land use permit application for the use shall
include an acoustical analysis by a qualified professional approved by the
City. The following measure shall be considered where feasible to reduce noise
level below acceptable standards:
         a.   Site layout, including setbacks, open space separation, and
shielding of noise sensitive uses with non-noise sensitive uses;
         b.   Acoustical treatment of buildings; or
         c.   Structural measures such as constructed of earth berms and/or
wood or concrete barriers or masonry walls. (Ord. 2013-05, 2-6-2014)
      5.   Limitation On Hours Of Construction: To ensure that nearby residents
as well as nonresidential activities are not disturbed by noise from early
morning or late night activities, the following limits on construction are
established:
         a.   Monday through Saturday, seven o’clock (7:00) A.M. to eight
o’clock (8:00) P.M. (Ord. 2018-03, 5-15-2018)
         b.   Extended construction hours may only be allowed by the review
authority through conditions of approval between eight o’clock (8:00) P.M. and
ten o’clock (10:00) P.M.
         c.   On Sundays and national holidays, construction activities may
only be allowed by the review authority through conditions of approval between
nine o’clock (9:00) A.M. and five o’clock (5:00) P.M.
      6.   Limitation On Truck Deliveries: Truck deliveries to a commercial or
industrial parcel adjacent to a conforming residential use shall be limited to
the hours between seven o’clock (7:00) A.M. and seven o’clock (7:00) P.M.,
unless the Planning Director authorizes other delivery times based on the
determination that there is either no feasible alternative, or there are
overriding transportation and traffic management benefits to scheduling
deliveries at night.
      7.   Locating A New Sensitive Land Use: Where noise sensitive land use is
proposed in an area exposed to existing or projected noise levels in excess of
sixty five decibels (65 dB CNEL), the City may require an acoustical analysis
so that noise reduction measures may be included in the project design. (Ord.
2013-05, 2-6-2014)
      8.   Noise Easement Required: All new subdivisions of land approved
through tentative subdivision map or parcel map as provided in title 8, chapter
7, article F, “Tentative Maps”, of the Municipal Code shall be required, as a
condition of approval, to record at time of final or parcel map an easement on
all lots created. Such easement shall identify that the property is near a
military installation subject to high aircraft noise, low level aircraft,
aircraft tests, and/or other military related issues. Such easement shall also
identify that the property is near a railroad line and near industrial uses
that produce periodic noise. (Ord. 2018-03, 5-15-2018)
   C.   Odors, Particulate Matter, And Air Contaminants Standards:
      1.   Odor: No obnoxious odors or fumes shall be emitted that are
perceptible without instruments by a reasonable person at the property line of
the site.
      2.   Particulate Matter And Air Contaminants: The operation of facilities
shall not directly or indirectly discharge air contaminants into the
atmosphere, including smoke, sulfur compounds, dust, soot, carbon, noxious
acids, gases, mist, odors, or particulate matter, or other air contaminants or
combinations which exceed any local, State, or Federal air quality standards.
Particulate matter shall not be discharged into the atmosphere in excess of the
standards of the Federal Environmental Protection Agency, the California Air
Resources Board, or the Regional Air Quality Management District. (Ord. 2013-
05, 2-6-2014)
      3.   Odor Easement Required: All new subdivisions of land approved
through tentative subdivision map or tentative parcel map as provided in title
8, chapter 7, article F, “Tentative Maps”, of the Municipal Code shall be
required as a condition of approval to record at time of final or parcel map an
odor easement on all lots created. Such easement shall identify the presence of
industrial uses in the vicinity of the lot and be in a form satisfactory to the
City. (Ord. 2018-03, 5-15-2018)
   D.   Vibration Standards: Uses that generate vibrations that may be
considered a nuisance or hazard on any adjacent property shall be cushioned or
isolated to prevent generation of vibrations. Uses shall be operated in
compliance with the following provisions:
      1.   Uses shall not generate ground vibration that is perceptible without
instruments by the average person at any point along or beyond the property
line of the parcel containing the activities;
      2.   Uses, activities, and processes shall not generate vibrations that
cause discomfort or annoyance to reasonable persons of normal sensitivity or
which endanger the comfort, repose, health, or peace of residents whose
properties abut the property lines of the subject parcel;
      3.   Uses shall not generate ground vibration that interferes with the
operations of equipment and facilities of adjoining parcels; and
      4.   Vibrations from temporary construction/demolition and vehicles that
leave the subject parcel (e.g., trucks, trains, and aircraft) are exempt from
the provisions of this section. (Ord. 2013-05, 2-6-2014)
9-5B-3: PROPERTY AND UTILITY IMPROVEMENTS:
   A.   Purpose: The purpose of this section is to establish rules and
regulations that govern the installation of curbs, gutters, and sidewalks and
the undergrounding of all utilities in the City. These requirements, in
conjunction with other applicable requirements of this Code, are intended to
establish the applicability of said requirements of development in all new
industrial, commercial, residential subdivisions, and infill projects. This
section addresses the applicability of public utility improvements and is not
intended to supersede the City’s construction improvement standards.
   B.   Curbs, Gutters, And Sidewalks: Installation of curbs, gutters, and
sidewalks shall be required for all new development projects except rural
subdivisions. Such improvements shall be provided at the location determined by
the Public Works Director.
   C.   Underground Utility Requirements And Applicability: The requirements
listed below govern the undergrounding of utility lines, including telephone
facilities, electrical (less than 70 kVA), fire alarm conduits, street lighting
wiring, cable television and other wiring conduits, and similar facilities.
      1.   New Developments: In new development areas of the City, all on site
utilities shall be installed underground, if feasible.
      2.   Existing Developments: In existing areas of the City where utility
lines have not been undergrounded, the requirements listed below shall apply:
         a.   For an existing development that is either: 1) being
comprehensively redeveloped or 2) undergoing an addition or renovation of more
than two hundred fifty thousand dollars ($250,000.00), all utilities on the
project site shall be placed underground. All existing overhead utilities that
cross or abut the subject property are also required to be placed underground.
“Comprehensively redeveloped” shall mean any instance where a demolition permit
has or would be issued for a minimum of fifty percent (50%) of the existing
building area.
         b.   For development with less than five hundred feet (500') of public
frontage or where utilities are located within a dedicated public utility
easement, the applicant may be permitted by the Public Works Director to pay an
in-lieu fee to be used by the City to underground utilities, provided the
project has been designed to the satisfaction of the Public Works Director and
the project is accessible and can be easily improved at such time as the
utilities are undergrounded.
         c.   Nothing in this section shall limit the ability of the City and
applicant to enter into a deferred improvement agreement for the conversion to
underground utilities at a later point in time.
         d.   When the city determines that undergrounding is impractical, an
in-lieu fee shall be paid. An in-lieu fee shall be based on the number and type
of utility lines and type of surface area being distributed and shall be paid
prior to the recordation of a final or parcel map for the subdivision, or the
issuance of any building permit, as applicable. The in-lieu fees shall be used
by the city to fund underground activities.
      3.   Waiver Of Undergrounding Requirement: Aboveground meters,
transformers, condensers, switches, and other related equipment may be allowed
above ground if approved by the public works director if it is determined that
the equipment is unobtrusive or is adequately screened from public view as part
of the site development review process. If the applicant demonstrates that the
city’s undergrounding requirement has the effect of prohibiting the requirement
of telecommunications facilities, the approving authority shall waive the
undergrounding requirement. Conditions for approval of aboveground equipment
include, but are not limited to: enclosure in a building other than the
principal building of the development, screening with the use of walls, partial
subsurface locations, screening with landscaping, and other architectural
treatment consistent with the design of the development. (Ord. 2013-05, 2-6-
2014)
9-5B-4: OUTDOOR LIGHTING:
The purpose of this section is to balance the safety and security needs for
lighting with the city’s desire to preserve dark skies and to ensure that light
trespass and glare have negligible impact on surrounding property (especially
residential uses) and roadways.
   A.   Exempt Lighting: The following items shall be exempt from the
requirements of this chapter:
      1.   All outdoor light fixtures producing light directly by the
combustion of fossil fuels, such as kerosene lanterns or gas fixtures.
      2.   Temporary lights used for holiday decorations.
      3.   Emergency lighting erected for official purposes by local, state, or
federal agencies.
      4.   Lighting for temporary uses and special events permitted consistent
with this title.
      5.   Streetlights in accordance with city standards.
   B.   Prohibited Lighting: The following types of lighting are prohibited:
      1.   Neon tubing or band lighting along buildings and/or structures as
articulation, except as approved through site plan and architectural review;
      2.   Searchlights, laser source lights, or any similar high intensity
light;
      3.   Lighting fixtures operated in such a manner as to constitute a
hazard or danger to persons or to safe vehicular travel;
      4.   Illumination of entire buildings; and
      5.   Moving, flashing, or animated lighting except as allowed for signs
as provided in article F, “Signage”, of this chapter.
   C.   General Lighting Requirements: The requirements listed below shall
apply to all outdoor lighting:
      1.   Nuisance Prevention: All outdoor lighting shall be designed,
located, installed, and maintained in order to prevent glare, light trespass,
and light pollution.
      2.   Lighting Study Required For Limited Land Uses: A lighting study or
plan (often referred to as a photometric study or plan) shall only be required
for those land uses that are most likely to have a negative impact on
surrounding sensitive receptors, such as residential dwellings. As such, a
lighting study or plan shall only be required for fueling stations, apartment
complexes, and uses with parking lots that contain more than one hundred (100)
spaces.
      3.   Shielding: Except as otherwise exempt, all outdoor lighting shall be
recessed and/or constructed with full downward shielding in order to reduce
light and glare impacts on trespass to adjoining properties and public rights
of way. Each fixture shall be directed downward and away from adjoining
properties and public rights of way, so that no light fixture directly
illuminates an area outside of the project site.
      4.   Level Of Illumination: Outdoor lighting shall be designed to
illuminate at the minimum level necessary for safety and security and to avoid
harsh contrasts in lighting levels between the project site and adjacent
properties.
      5.   Maximum Height Of Freestanding Outdoor Light Fixtures: The maximum
height of freestanding outdoor light fixtures less than ten feet (10') from a
property line abutting residential development shall be eighteen feet (18').
Otherwise, the maximum height for freestanding outdoor light structures shall
be twenty four feet (24'). Height shall be measured from the finish grade,
inclusive of the pedestal, to the top of the fixture. The designated approving
authority may allow greater heights upon finding that there are special
circumstances that affect the feasibility of meeting this standard.
      6.   Energy Efficient Fixtures Required: Outdoor lighting shall utilize
energy efficient fixtures and lamps, such as high pressure sodium, metal
halide, low pressure sodium, hardwired compact fluorescent, or other lighting
technology that is of equal or greater efficiency. All new outdoor lighting
fixtures shall be energy efficient with a rated average bulb life of not less
than ten thousand (10,000) hours.
      7.   Accent Lighting: Architectural features may be illuminated by
uplighting, provided that the lamps are low intensity to produce a subtle
lighting effect and no glare or light trespass is produced. Wherever feasible,
solar powered fixtures should be used. (Ord. 2013-05, 2-6-2014)
9-5B-5: FENCES AND WALLS:
   A.   Purpose: The purpose of this section is to establish development
standards and regulations for fences and walls. The intent of these regulations
is to provide for adequate air and light permeability onto lots, for adequate
buffering between and screening of uses and activities, and for the mitigation
of noise.
   B.   Applicability And Exemptions: Except as provided below, the
requirements of this chapter apply to all fences and walls.
      1.   Fences that are required by federal or state law or regulation, or
which are required by the city for public safety (e.g., temporary construction
site fencing) are exempt from this section.
      2.   Walls that are required by mitigation measure and designed and
approved through a tentative subdivision map, tentative parcel map, or site
plan and architecture review for noise attenuation are exempt from this
section. (Ord. 2013-05, 2-6-2014)
   C.   Permit Requirements: Except as provided below, no special planning
permit or entitlement shall be required for fences or walls, except that zoning
plan check shall be conducted in the event that a building permit is required.
      1.   Building Permit Required: A building permit is required for all
fences that exceed seven feet (7') in height. (Ord. 2016-04, 4-19-2016)
      2.   Encroachment Permit Required: An encroachment permit is required for
all fences located within a city maintained public utility easement as provided
in title 7, chapter 12, “Encroachments”, of the municipal code.
      3.   Retaining Walls: Retaining walls, as defined in this title, may only
be constructed as part of an approved grading permit for the site at the time
of initial development, as part of a roadway improvement project, or as part of
the necessary stabilization of soil for the primary intended use of the
property as determined by the public works director.
   D.   Measurement Of Fence And Wall Height: Fence and wall height shall be
measured as the vertical distance between the lowest finished grade at the base
of the fence and the top edge of the fence material. When a fence or wall is
placed atop a “landscape wall” (as defined in this title), the height of the
landscape wall shall be considered as part of the fence or wall for purposes of
determining the height of the fence or wall.
   E.   Fence And Wall Height Limits In Required Yard Areas:
      1.   General Standards: All fences and walls built within required yard
areas or within a clear visibility area shall comply with the height limits
shown in table 9-5B-5-E1, “Development Standards For Fences And Walls”, of this
section. Minimum permeability refers to the amount of surface area of the fence
or wall that shall be open to the passage of light and air. (Ord. 2013-05, 2-6-
2014)
TABLE 9-5B-5-E1
DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS FOR FENCES AND WALLS
TABLE 9-5B-5-E1
DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS FOR FENCES AND WALLS
Location Of Fence Or Wall                                 Maximum Minimum
                                                          Height  Permeability
Within required front yard setback                        4 feet  50%
Within required street side yard setback:                          
 Less than 3 feet from back of sidewalk                  4 feet  50%
 3 feet or greater from back of sidewalk and in front of 4 feet  50%
  the front face of the main building
 3 feet or greater from back of sidewalk and behind the  7 feet1 0%
  front face of the main building
Interior side yard and rear yard setback                  7 feet1 0%
Within the clear visibility area at the intersection of   3 feet  50%
streets, alleys, and driveways
 
Note:
   1.    Fences taller than 7 feet require a building permit.
      2.   Landscape Walls: Landscape walls within required yard areas shall be
constructed to a maximum height of three feet (3'). Landscape walls shall not
be used to alter the finish grade of the lot.
      3.   Fence Heights On Corner Lots: When a single-family dwelling has been
constructed on a corner lot with its front door facing the street side lot
line, a fence or wall up to seven feet (7') high may be constructed within the
required front yard setback up to five feet (5') from the front lot line
between the interior side lot line and the back of the dwelling when the
planning director finds that the fence would not negatively affect the
visibility of vehicles entering or exiting the adjacent lot.
   F.   Fence And Wall Design Standards:
      1.   Fencing Materials: Fences and walls shall be constructed of long
lasting materials. Unless approved as a condition of approval or in conjunction
with another planning permit or entitlement, fences or walls of sheet or
corrugated iron, steel, or aluminum are prohibited, with the exception of
ornamental fences.
      2.   Barbed Or Concertina Wire Fencing: Barbed or concertina wire fencing
shall not be constructed or placed on top of a fence except in agricultural,
open space, or industrial zones. The planning director may approve barbed or
concertina wire fencing in a commercial zone upon finding that there is a
special need for security and that the fencing will be unobtrusive or shielded
from public view.
      3.   Chainlink Fences: Chainlink fences taller than forty two inches
(42") are prohibited in the front and street side yards of residential
property.
   G.   Special Fence And Wall Requirements:
         1.   Perimeter Walls For Residential Subdivisions: Where provided,
perimeter walls for residential subdivisions shall comply with the following
standards:
         a.   The walls shall be of a decorative design consistent with the
following:
         (1)   Walls shall have vertical elements (e.g., pilasters,
indentations) of differing colors and/or materials at least every one hundred
feet (100');
         (2)   Walls shall include capstones (with limited overhang) of a
coordinating color, material, and style as the rest of the wall;
         (3)   Walls shall be of neutral color and shall be textured with
stone, brick, stucco, or other surface finish.
         b.   Periodic breaks shall be provided in the wall to provide
pedestrian and bicycle connectivity between the subdivision and the adjoining
collector or arterial street.
         c.   Walls shall be constructed along the property line between the
residential units and the required landscape easement along the collector or
arterial street.
         d.   The wall height shall be a minimum of six feet eight inches
(6'8") or as otherwise required to adequately attenuate noise of the abutting
collector or arterial street or state highway.
         e.   Walls shall not be located inside of the required clear
visibility area at the intersections of streets.
      2.   Special Fencing For Commercial, Industrial, And Multi-Family Zones
Abutting Residential And Agricultural-Residential Zones: Commercial, industrial
and multi-family zone districts shall be screened from abutting residential and
agricultural-residential zone districts by a masonry wall or similar solid wall
with a minimum height of six feet (6').
      3.   Temporary Fences: Nothing in this section shall be deemed to
prohibit the erection of a temporary fence around construction projects in
compliance with the California building code and other applicable provisions of
the city’s municipal code. (Ord. 2013-05, 2-6-2014; amd. Ord. 2015-08, 1-5-
2016; Ord. 2024-01, 6-18-2024)
9-5B-6: SCREENING:
   A.   Purpose: This section establishes screening standards for mechanical
equipment, refuse areas, and outdoor storage in all zoning districts and land
uses.
   B.   Screening Of Mechanical Equipment: All exterior roof and ground mounted
mechanical equipment, including, but not limited to, heating, air conditioning,
refrigeration equipment, plumbing lines, duct work, and transformers, shall be
screened from public view from abutting public streets and abutting area(s)
zoned for residential or open space uses. Screening of mechanical equipment
shall be compatible with other on site development in terms of colors,
materials, and/or architectural styles.
   C.   Screening Of Refuse Areas:
      1.   Refuse areas shall be screened from public view and adjoining public
streets and rights of way and residential zoned areas.
      2.   The method of screening shall be architecturally compatible with
other on site development in terms of colors, materials, and architectural
style. Exceptions may be permitted for sites with unique characteristics (e.g.,
shallow lot depth, adjacency to single-family residential). (Ord. 2013-05, 2-6-
2014)
9-5B-7: URBAN-RURAL EDGE:
   A.   Consistent with the policies of the general plan, development along the
urban edge of the city shall incorporate the following design requirements.
These standards shall specifically apply to development along Marsh Drive, the
Lemoore Canal, and portions north of Glendale Avenue, portions of Belle Haven
Drive, Industry Way, Idaho Avenue, Jackson Avenue, and other areas as depicted
in figure 3-1 of the general plan.
      1.   A minimum fifty foot (50') setback from the roads identified above;
      2.   Design and construction of a minimum thirty foot (30') wide
landscaped buffer within the public right of way or landscape easement (see
figure 9-5B-7-1 of this section);
      3.   Planting multiple layers of trees closely for visual impermeability,
and using drought resistant indigenous trees where appropriate;
      4.   Providing only minimal street lighting, at a rate that is fifty
percent (50%) of comparable city standard;
      5.   Prohibiting the use of solid walls along these edges (all fences
must be visually permeable); and
      6.   Ensuring the scale and character of development does not overwhelm
the surroundings by stepping down building heights at the edges.
   FIGURE 9-5B-7-1
   TYPICAL SETBACK AND LANDSCAPE BUFFER ALONG
   URBAN-RURAL EDGE
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/08286aa2a408810754fa2332ce2e067d759ab116/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2261.jpg]
 
(Ord. 2013-05, 2-6-2014)
ARTICLE C. ARCHITECTURAL AND SITE DESIGN STANDARDS
SECTION:
9-5C-1: Purpose And Applicability
9-5C-2: Design Concepts
9-5C-3: Design Standards For Residential Projects
9-5C-4: Design Standards For Commercial, Office, And Mixed Use Projects
9-5C-5: Design Standards For Industrial Projects
9-5C-6: Design Standards For Big Box Stores, Discount Clubs, And Discount
Superstores
9-5C-1: PURPOSE AND APPLICABILITY:
   A.   Purpose: This article establishes design standards to guide
discretionary review decisions related to various development types.
   B.   Applicability: The provisions within this article apply to all projects
subject to site plan and architectural review as described in sections
9-2B-12, "Minor Site Plan And Architectural Review", and
9-2B-15, "Major Site Plan And Architectural Review", of this Code that are not
located within a mixed use or a downtown mixed use zone. Development standards
and design provisions for the Downtown Mixed Use Zones (DMX-1, DMX-2, and DMX-
3) are addressed in chapter 6, "Downtown Development Standards", of this Code.
Development standards and design provisions for the Mixed Use Zone (MU) are
addressed in chapter 7, "Mixed Use Development Standards", of this Code. This
chapter does not apply to existing buildings and site legally established prior
to the adoption of this chapter. (Ord. 2013-05, 2-6-2014)
9-5C-2: DESIGN CONCEPTS:
   A.   General: All projects subject to site plan and architectural review are
expected to implement the following design concepts:
      1.   Provide high quality site planning, architecture, and landscape
design;
      2.   Enhance the character of the City and/or implement specific design
attributes identified in various subareas;
      3.   Ensure physical, visual, and functional compatibility between uses;
and
      4.   Protect land values by ensuring that proper attention is paid to
site and architectural design.
   B.   Neighborhood Design: The following design concepts apply to the
subdivision of land and to larger residential, commercial, and industrial
projects that create a private street network, with the overall intent of
visually and functionally interconnecting neighborhoods with commercial and
employment centers:
      1.   Provide a balanced mix of land uses including housing, schools,
parks, commercial, and employment areas.
      2.   Provide pedestrian friendly neighborhoods which are walkable and
provide easy access to destinations that residents will travel to on a daily
basis.
      3.   Organize new housing in identifiable neighborhoods and provide
diversity of housing types, sizes, and densities.
      4.   Provide multimodal connectivity throughout neighborhoods and between
neighborhoods and commercial and employment centers.
      5.   Incorporate landscaping to minimize urban runoff.
      6.   Create pedestrian friendly streets that include building orientation
to public streets and/or parks and open space.
   C.   Architectural Design:
      1.   Provide authentic architectural styles. Particular attention should
be paid to the design of all front elevations and side elevations facing a
street or open space.
      2.   Include a diversity of commercial building and housing types by size
and mass, elevation, orientation, and setback to avoid repetition. The intent
is to create visual variation and interest throughout the community.
      3.   Design buildings that have a variety in mass and scale to avoid
large featureless walls. (Ord. 2013-05, 2-6-2014)
9-5C-3: DESIGN STANDARDS FOR RESIDENTIAL PROJECTS:
The standards contained in this section shall apply to new residential
development, including single-family residential subdivisions, master home
plans, and multi-family residential developments. These standards are intended
to implement the design concepts described above.
   A.   Site Design:
      1.   Circulation: Create a circulation system that provides for the safe
and efficient movement of all transportation modes:
         a.   Provide internal streets, driveways, and sidewalks that allow
residents to park once and easily navigate the entire project site on foot.
         b.   Use special paving to identify unique pedestrian areas.
         c.   Provide connections between the public street and the front door
of single-family residential dwellings and multi-family buildings. Design
solutions may include, but are not limited to, dedicated pedestrian paths and
driveways.
         d.   Utilize maximum block lengths of five hundred feet (500'), except
for blocks with single-family residential uses, which may be up to six hundred
feet (600') long or seven hundred fifty feet (750') when developed with mid
block pedestrian connections.
         e.   All new streets and alleys must connect to other streets and
alleys to form a continuous vehicular and pedestrian network. Local, internal
streets should be narrow and designed with traffic calming features to control
speed.
         f.   Limit the use of cul-de-sacs to no more than ten percent (10%) of
the length of all streets in a subdivision map, where constrained by
surrounding land attributes.
         g.   Encourage loop out streets rather than cul-de-sacs.
         h.   Also see title 8, chapter 7, article J, "Subdivision Design
Standards", of the municipal code for additional subdivision design
requirements.
      2.   Building Placement And Orientation: Create diverse residential
streetscapes that facilitate interaction between residents and include homes
and residential structures that orient to the street.
         a.   Multi-unit residential buildings (e.g., townhomes, condominiums,
apartments) shall be designed with different building setbacks and facade
variations when multiple buildings are provided.
         b.   Orient home and building sites to take advantage of solar heating
and opportunities for solar energy generation.
         c.   Residential development adjacent to open space/parks and other
public spaces shall maintain visual access from residential units and common
buildings to provide “eyes on the street” surveillance opportunities.
         d.   Buildings shall be designed with structural and spatial variety
along the front facades to avoid monotonous appearance.
      3.   Public Space/Pedestrian Amenities: Create attractive and active
environments for the enjoyment of residents within residential projects.
         a.   Provide common open spaces within one thousand feet (1,000') of
each residential unit.
         b.   Multi-family project shall provide one or more amenities for
residents as listed below:
            (1)   Tot lot/play structure;
            (2)   Community garden;
            (3)   Picnic tables with barbecue area (with shade structure);
            (4)   Swimming pool; and
            (5)   Indoor recreation facility.
      4.   Garage Placement And Design: Create residential developments where
the garage is subordinate to the main home/building.
         a.   The garage shall not extend more than five feet (5') beyond the
front of the home on at least fifty percent (50%) of the master plan home
designs within a single-family residential subdivision.
         b.   All garages are required to minimize the negative visual impact
of the garage door. Options to achieving this requirement include, but are not
limited to, the following:
            (1)   Place the garage at the rear of lot away from public view
(e.g., alley load);
            (2)   Recess the garage behind the living area of the home;
            (3)   Utilize side-on garages where garage door is perpendicular to
the street (e.g., "swing garage");
            (4)   Cantilever the second story over the garage;
            (5)   Utilize a tandem garage;
            (6)   Articulate garage doors with windows, paneling, recesses, and
other details.
   FIGURE 9-5C-3-A2
   SINGLE-FAMILY GARAGE PLACEMENT OPTIONS
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/08286aa2a408810754fa2332ce2e067d759ab116/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2263.jpg]
 
         c.   Garages facing the street on single-family lots that are less
than fifty feet (50') wide shall not exceed sixty percent (60%) of the width of
the home.
   B.   Architectural Design:
      1.   Massing, Scale, And Form:
         a.   The structural mass of larger residential buildings shall be
broken down into smaller component parts representative of individual dwelling
units by:
            (1)   Using dormers, overhangs, balconies, wall projections, and/or
porches;
            (2)   Using varied roof forms as appropriate to the architectural
style;
            (3)   Utilizing changes in materials to create variations;
            (4)   For multi-unit buildings, staggering the facade of each unit
to create different widths along continuous facades, with no building facade
width exceeding one hundred twenty five feet (125').
         b.   Attached product (e.g., townhomes or multi-family buildings)
shall be designed to look like individual units through the use of clearly
identified entries, styles, and design details and a variety of roof forms.
         c.   Master home plans shall include "antimonotony" provisions, as
follows:
            (1)   Design rooflines with changes in ridgeline direction and
configuration;
            (2)   A minimum of one home plan within each master plan series
shall be one story (this only applies to single-family developments);
            (3)   All homes shall be oriented to the street with garages
deemphasized and living areas placed toward the front of homes;
            (4)   A minimum of twenty five percent (25%) of all home designs
shall include an option for an outdoor living area such as a porch or courtyard
that is at least five feet (5') in depth to allow for seating.
      2.   Style And Design Provisions:
         a.   For single-family residential subdivisions and master home plans,
no two (2) identical looking front facades/elevations shall be placed on lots
within a group of five (5) adjacent lots. For purposes of this section,
"adjacent lots" shall mean those lots on either side of a subject lot and those
three (3) lots directly across the street from the subject lot (referred to as
a "6-pack").
            (1)   The front facade designs of home plans in residential
subdivisions shall, by look and appearance, be substantially different from one
another. The planning director shall determine which master home plan facade
designs are substantially different from each other when they are submitted to
the building department.
            (2)   Notwithstanding subsection B2a of this section, up to one
additional home with the same front facade design may be placed on an adjacent
lot if the home has a different exterior color scheme and four (4) of the five
(5) following detail elements are distinctly different from the other home with
the same front facade design:
               (A)   Roofing material or color;
               (B)   Front door style;
               (C)   Carriage lights style;
               (D)   Garage door window style;
               (E)   Front walkway layout from front door to driveway or
sidewalk.
         b.   For multi-family projects, no two (2) identical elevations shall
be placed next to each other. Alternatives include, but are not limited to,
rotating the buildings so different elevations are next to each other or
utilizing a different building/elevation design. The intent is to limit the
monotony of design within multi-family complexes.
         c.   Elevations facing public streets or public open space areas,
shall:
            (1)   Wrap facade materials along the side yard elevations to the
fence line;
            (2)   Provide architectural features to articulate facades such as
trim around doors and windows with substantial depth and detail, window boxes,
brackets, overhangs, trellises, and/or lattice.
         d.   Entry features from a public or common sidewalk shall be
provided.
            (1)   When provided, porches shall provide functional seating areas
with a minimum depth of five feet (5');
            (2)   Front doors shall be visible from the street.
   FIGURE 9-5C-3-B1
   MINIMUM DEPTH OF A FUNCTIONAL FRONT PORCH
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/08286aa2a408810754fa2332ce2e067d759ab116/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2265.jpg]
 
         e.   Windows and doors shall use window molding, shaped frames, and
sills to provide architectural relief.
         f.   Upper story balconies shall have a minimum depth of six feet
(6').
         g.   Side facades facing public areas (public or internal streets and
sidewalks, open space areas, etc.) shall provide a similar level of design
detail as front facades when visible.
      3.   Entries: Primary residential entries shall create an inviting
transition between the public and private realm, as follows:
         a.   Separate private entries from the public sidewalk with a
semiprivate transition area, such as a porch, terrace, stoop, or similar
element; or
         b.   Provide weather protection over each primary entry extending a
minimum of four feet (4') from the building facade.
      4.   Single-Family And Mobilehome Development: New single-family and
mobilehome developments shall comply with the following specific design
criteria in addition to the other standards of this section:
         a.   Siding Material: All main buildings and all detached garages
shall consist of wood, masonry, concrete, stucco, masonite, brick, or metal
lap.
         b.   Roofs: The following roof design standards shall apply:
            (1)   Roof Overhang: All main buildings shall have a minimum twelve
inch (12") roof overhang on each of the dwelling's perimeter walls such that
the roof overhang is architecturally integrated into the design of the dwelling
unit.
            (2)   Roofing Material: All main buildings and all detached garages
and carports located on the front half of the lot shall have a roof constituted
of asphalt or composition shingles, clay, concrete or metal tiles, slate or
built up materials. All housing units shall have pitched roofs.
         c.   Foundations: All main buildings shall be placed on a permanent
foundation which meets applicable city adopted building code requirements and/
or section 18551 of the Health And Safety Code, such that the floor elevation
of the proposed unit is compatible with the floor elevation of the surrounding
dwelling units.
      5.   Multi-Family Development: New multi-family residential development
shall meet all of the following specific design criteria in addition to the
other standards of this section:
         a.   There shall be a minimum twenty foot (20') deep landscaped area
between a public street and parking areas.
         b.   Parking frontages limited to no more than twenty five percent
(25%) of street frontages.
         c.   Carport and garage designs that match building designs.
         d.   Carport locations restricted such that they are not highly
visible from public streets; portable carport covers shall be prohibited.
         e.   Open landscape area such that each dwelling unit has at least
four hundred (400) square feet of on site open space, which may be private open
space provided by balconies or patios, or common open space.
         f.   At least thirty two (32) square feet in floor area of private
storage space apart from interior closet space shall be provided for each unit.
         g.   Buffer landscaping, at least ten feet (10') deep shall be
provided along the project perimeter where adjacent to sensitive uses.
         h.   Architecturally interesting buildings that are not bulky and
"boxlike". This can be created by requiring variable roof forms in building
designs and limiting the dimension of any single building to one hundred twenty
five feet (125').
         i.   Building entries to have roofed projections or recessed entries.
         j.   Pedestrian access provided by walkways to link residential units
with other units and with recreational and other facilities within a project.
         k.   Multi-family project developments with twenty five (25) units or
more shall provide at least one on site recreational area of at least ten
thousand (10,000) square feet in size, or five percent (5%) of the overall
site, whichever is greater.
         l.   Except for senior housing developments, multi-family developments
shall provide one play area (e.g., tot lot) for every forty (40) dwelling units
in the project. Each play area size shall be a minimum of seven hundred fifty
(750) square feet and shall be equally spaced from each other. Each play area
shall be fenced and include play equipment.
   C.   Deviations: Deviations from one or more of the development/
architectural standards in this section is allowed through the site plan and
architectural review process on the basis of a finding that the architectural
style proposed provides compensating design features and that the proposed
dwelling will be compatible and harmonious with existing structures in the
vicinity. (Ord. 2013-05, 2-6-2014; amd. Ord. 2023-10, 9-19-2023)
9-5C-4: DESIGN STANDARDS FOR COMMERCIAL, OFFICE, AND MIXED USE PROJECTS:
   A.   Site Design:
      1.   Circulation: The design of access and circulation on project sites
should tie the development into the overall neighborhood. In some instances,
the internal circulation may extend the public street system into the project
site as private streets and drive aisles.
         a.   For auto dependent uses (e.g., car sales lots, gas stations,
drive-through restaurants), the building shall be designed to maximize
pedestrian safety and convenience.
            (1)   Place a portion of the building at the building setback line
with a building entrance facing the sidewalk; or
            (2)   Create a continuous pedestrian path between the primary
building entrance and the sidewalk along the street.
         b.   Commercial and employment areas shall be linked to adjacent
neighborhoods with continuous pedestrian pathways.
         c.   When transit stops are provided, they shall be fully integrated
into the project site and/or at the focal point of the development. The
following situations are strictly prohibited:
            (1)   Pedestrian crossings of vehicular driveways without clear
marking and protections;
            (2)   Street crossings between transit stops and activity centers
without a safe pedestrian crossing within five hundred feet (500').
   FIGURE 9-5C-4-A1
   INTEGRATING TRANSIT STOPS INTO PROJECT SITES
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/08286aa2a408810754fa2332ce2e067d759ab116/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2331.jpg]
 
      2.   Public Spaces And Pedestrian Amenities: All development shall be
pedestrian oriented with design components and amenities, as follows:
         a.   Sites over fifteen (15) acres in size include common areas, such
as plazas or gardens.
         b.   Uses such as restaurants may front onto plazas or a public
sidewalk and may incorporate outdoor seating and/or dining.
         c.   Seating areas that are hidden from view behind buildings or
landscaping are prohibited.
      3.   Building Placement And Orientation: Design and construct buildings
to create safe, pleasant, and active environments:
         a.   For project sites over fifteen (15) acres in size, buildings
shall be placed and oriented to create a "main street" environment.
         b.   All buildings shall be placed and oriented as follows:
            (1)   Front doors of commercial buildings shall orient to streets
or pedestrian oriented areas.
            (2)   Ground floor commercial shall have at least one building
entrance for each facade. For buildings facing two (2) streets, a corner entry
is acceptable.
            (3)   If a separation is provided between the public street and
building (e.g., for parking or a drive aisle), the area shall include
significant pedestrian features to create a strong connection between the
public sidewalk and primary building entry, such as:
               (A)   Landscaped plaza;
               (B)   Bicycle parking area;
               (C)   Landscaped promenade;
               (D)   Continuous trellis feature;
               (E)   Other amenities.
         c.   Loading and delivery areas shall not be located within a required
front or side setback area. When provided, they shall be screened with
architectural wing walls and landscaping.
   B.   Architectural Design:
      1.   Massing, Scale, And Form: Commercial and mixed use structures should
be designed to contribute to an active, human scaled environment and should
complement adjoining properties.
         a.   Multilevel buildings shall incorporate:
            (1)   Building designs that have a visually distinct "base" and
"cap".
            (2)   Upper story elements which overlook the street (windows,
balconies, terraces).
            (3)   Separate entrances for residential uses, when provided.
   FIGURE 9-5C-4-B1
   DESIGN OF MULTI-STORY BUILDINGS
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/08286aa2a408810754fa2332ce2e067d759ab116/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2267.jpg]
 
         b.   Building walls shall be articulated to break up the apparent mass
of large building with one of the following techniques a minimum of every
thirty feet (30'), as illustrated in
figure 9-5C-4-B2, "Techniques To Break Up Long Building Walls", of this
section:
            (1)   Offsets;
            (2)   Recesses;
            (3)   Changes in plane;
            (4)   Changes in height;
            (5)   Use of windows and doors;
            (6)   Projections such as balconies; and
            (7)   Use of trellis and similar features.
   FIGURE 9-5C-4-B2
   TECHNIQUES TO BREAK UP LONG BUILDING WALLS
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/08286aa2a408810754fa2332ce2e067d759ab116/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2269.jpg]
 
         c.   Buildings and building walls shall be articulated with the use of
engaged columns or other expressions of the structural system.
         d.   Horizontal and vertical divisions shall be provided through
changes in color, texture, and/or material.
         e.   Long commercial facades shall be divided into storefronts with
visually separate displays.
         f.   Roof design shall incorporate the following:
            (1)   Variations in rooflines shall be provided with the use of
dormers, windows, overhangs, arches, gables, or similar details.
            (2)   Sloped roofs shall include eaves that overhang a minimum of
one and one-half feet (11/2').
      2.   Style And Design Details: Commercial facades should appear open,
inviting, and engaging to the passerby.
         a.   Storefronts shall provide the following:
            (1)   Weather protection at building entries and extending along
the facade (e.g., overhangs, canopies, awnings, building recesses).
            (2)   Transparent surfaces to allow a view into and out of
buildings from the public sidewalk. A minimum of fifty percent (50%) of primary
storefront facades shall be open and transparent to the outside. If window
tinting is used, it shall permit a minimum of eighty percent (80%) light
transmission.
   FIGURE 9-5C-4-B3
   PRIMARY STOREFRONT DESIGN
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/08286aa2a408810754fa2332ce2e067d759ab116/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2333.jpg]
 
         b.   Primary entries shall be clearly visible from the street and
provide visual interest, with at least three (3) of the following:
            (1)   Differentiated roof, awning, or portico;
            (2)   Trim detail to accentuate the openings;
            (3)   Project or recess entries from their surrounding building
facades;
            (4)   Detailed doors and doorway with ornate hardware, transoms,
sidelights, trim details, and framing;
            (5)   Windows within entry doorways equivalent to fifty percent
(50%) of door surface area;
            (6)   Decorative lighting.
         c.   Secondary entries shall have minor detailing that adds
architectural distinction to the facade.
         d.   Use windows to create an open and inviting atmosphere, as
follows:
            (1)   Multiple windows shall be provided on the front facade above
the main floor in a uniform pattern for all buildings over one story in height.
            (2)   Frame openings with trim and/or recess windows in from the
building facade. The trim and/or recess shall be a minimum of four inches (4").
      3.   Architectural Detailing Cost: The city shall not require more than
twenty percent (20%) of the construction costs for the building to be toward
architectural detailing. It shall be the responsibility of the applicant to
provide documentation to the city showing the cost of the detailing relative to
the overall cost of the structure in order to seek relief from this code. Such
information shall be provided as part of the site plan and architectural design
review process.
   C.   Deviations: Deviations from one or more of the development/
architectural standards in this section through the site plan and architectural
review process on the basis of a finding that the architectural style proposed
provides compensating design features and that the proposed building will be
compatible and harmonious with existing structures in the vicinity. (Ord. 2013-
05, 2-6-2014)
9-5C-5: DESIGN STANDARDS FOR INDUSTRIAL PROJECTS:
   A.   Site Design: The intent of design standards within this section is to
provide for the appropriate functional and aesthetic arrangement of buildings
and site components for industrial developments.
      1.   Circulation: Develop a circulation system that minimizes conflicts
between automobiles, large trucks, and other modes of travel.
         a.   Primary entry drives for automobiles, particularly for visitors
arriving by car, shall be enhanced with at least two (2) of the following:
            (1)   Ornamental landscaping;
            (2)   Low decorative wall;
            (3)   Monument sign; and
            (4)   Decorative paving.
         b.   Separation shall be provided between vehicle parking/loading
areas and pedestrian areas (e.g., access paths to buildings from the public
sidewalk, pedestrian plazas, transit stops).
      2.   Building Placement And Orientation: Industrial projects should
present an attractive appearance to the public and minimize any adverse impacts
on adjacent properties.
         a.   At least one (1) building on each site should have a public
entrance that is a visual focus of the building and have a strong orientation
to the street.
         b.   A continuous pedestrian path shall be provided between the public
street and the primary building.
         c.   Outside storage areas that are visible from a public right-of-
way shall be screened by use of solid fences, solid masonry walls, berms,
landscaping, and/or a combination thereof. Screening shall be a minimum of six
feet (6') in height or at least as high as the stored materials.
         d.   Long expanses of fence or screen walls shall be architecturally
designed with offsets and other techniques to prevent monotony.
      3.   Landscaping: Provide for attractive and functional landscaping for
purposes of screening, buffering, and softening of various site elements.
   B.   Architectural Design: The intent of the following design provisions is
to encourage projects that contribute positively to the community:
      1.   Entries: Entries into industrial buildings shall convey a sense of
entry and architectural primacy along the facade while maintaining an
architectural relationship to the overall building composition.
      2.   Materials: Metal buildings shall only be used for primary site
buildings if exterior surfaces include some stucco, plaster, glass, stone,
brick, decorative masonry, or contrasting metal trim and columns. The facade
shall be broken up through the use of colors, textures, break lines, detail
metal, or other similar architectural treatments.
   C.   Architectural Detailing Cost: The City shall not require more than
twenty percent (20%) of the construction costs for the building to be toward
architectural detailing. It shall be the responsibility of the applicant to
provide documentation to the City showing the cost of the detailing relative to
the overall cost of the structure in order to seek relief from this Code. Such
information shall be provided as part of the site plan and architectural design
review process.
   D.   Deviations: Deviations from one (1) or more of the development/
architectural standards in this section through the site plan and architectural
review process on the basis of a finding that the architectural style proposed
provides compensating design features and that the proposed building will be
compatible and harmonious with existing structures in the vicinity. (Ord. 2013-
05, 2-6-2014)
9-5C-6: DESIGN STANDARDS FOR BIG BOX STORES, DISCOUNT CLUBS, AND DISCOUNT
SUPERSTORES:
The following standards shall apply to all general retail, warehouse club
retail, and other retail stores over fifty thousand (50,000) square feet in
size.
   A.   Allowed Treatments:
      1.   Architectural elements shall be incorporated into the facades of the
building creating visual interest and achieving compatibility within the design
of the surrounding commercial structures.
      2.   Building forms shall be designed to create visual interest on all
sides of the structure and the architectural concept shall be consistent on all
sides of the building.
      3.   Second and third story volumes shall be stepped, sloped or grouped
with one-story volumes to reduce the apparent mass to human scale.
      4.   Entries to individual building and public spaces between buildings,
shall be emphasized with highlighted massing and articulated roof forms.
      5.   Building facades shall be recessed or projected at a minimum of
every sixty feet (60').
      6.   The building height/roof pitch shall be varied.
      7.   Building facade colors shall be earth-toned, muted colors. Building
trim may be accented with brighter and contrasting colors.
      8.   Where appropriate, courtyards and/or outdoor seating areas shall be
incorporated into the site plan design.
   B.   Prohibited Treatments:
      1.   The following architectural elements and treatments are prohibited:
         a.   Large scale uninterrupted walls, not otherwise articulated by
form fenestration, or materials;
         b.   Massive building elements, such as timber beams and/or columns
that are out of scale with the architectural style;
         c.   False facades and other applied ornamentation unrelated to the
rest of the building or structure;
         d.   High contrast color, brightly colored glazed tile or highly
reflective surfaces; and
         e.   Bold application of colors such as stripes, accents, or super
graphics.
      2.   Use of the following materials is prohibited:
         a.   Heavy textured stucco, such as Spanish lace, swirl, or heavy
trowel;
         b.   Vinyl, corrugated metal or aluminum siding;
         c.   Common plywood or masonite siding;
         d.   Standard concrete block;
         e.   Rustic materials utilized as primary wall surfaces and dark earth
tone colors; and
         f.   Over application of bright accents or trim colors.
   C.   Building Entrance: Commercial structures subject to this section shall
provide customers with at least two (2) building entrances in order to
encourage greater distribution of parking activity. Additional entrances can be
located at one (1) of the two (2) sides of the building and/or the rear of the
building. If multiple entries are not practical the structure shall have the
appearance of having two (2) entries and in this regard the distinction between
the front and rear of the structure shall be blurred through the application of
similar architectural treatments.
   D.   Pedestrian Linkage: The site plan shall reflect and facilitate safe
pedestrian access linking the building to sidewalks adjacent to project street
(s).
      1.   At least five percent (5%) of the total interior area devoted to
parking shall be landscaped.
      2.   A landscaped area shall be provided at a minimum of every eight (8)
parking spaces.
      3.   Landscaping shall be provided at the building entrance between the
parking lot and the front of the building.
   E.   Property Maintenance: Commercial properties supporting a big box store
as defined by this section, whether occupied or vacant, shall be maintained so
that the structure and surrounding property are not allowed to fall into a
state of deferred maintenance and neglect. This includes the building exterior,
parking lot maintenance and landscaping on the property. (Ord. 2017-06, 5-16-
2016)
ARTICLE D1. LANDSCAPING STANDARDS
SECTION:
9-5D1-1: Purpose, Applicability, And Review
9-5D1-2: Landscape Standards
9-5D1-3: Landscape Care And Maintenance
9-5D1-4: Tree Preservation
9-5D1-5: Preferred Plant List
9-5D1-1: PURPOSE, APPLICABILITY, AND REVIEW:
   A.   Purpose: This article establishes minimum landscape requirements to
enhance the appearance of developments, reduce heat and glare, control soil
erosion, conserve water, improve air quality, ensure ongoing maintenance, and
ensure that landscape installations do not create hazards for motorists or
pedestrians.
   B.   Applicability Of Standards: The regulations of this article apply to
new and existing development, as follows. Deviations from the development
standards of this article may be allowed on a case by case basis by the
designated approving authority through site plan and architectural review.
      1.   New Projects: New commercial, industrial, mixed use, multi- family
residential, and single-family residential subdivisions shall be reviewed by
the designated approving authority to ensure landscaping is provided in
compliance with the requirements of this article.
      2.   Existing Development: Where an existing nonresidential, mixed use,
and/or multi-family residential project requests an amendment that increases
the building square footage by ten percent (10%) or more, the designated
approving authority shall evaluate the existing landscape to ensure compliance
with applicable requirements of this article.
   C.   Submittal Requirements: When this article is applicable to new projects
or existing development, preliminary and final landscape plans shall be
submitted as follows and review of such plans shall be conducted as part of the
site plan and architectural review process.
      1.   Preliminary Landscape Plan: A preliminary landscape plan shall be
submitted as part of the site plan and architectural design review application.
This plan must show conceptual locations for trees, shrubs, ground cover, and
other landscape components, quantity, and size. Plans for the retention and/or
removal of existing trees shall also be included.
      2.   Final Landscape Plan: A final landscape plan shall be submitted in
conjunction with site improvement plans. The final landscape plans shall be in
substantial compliance with the approved preliminary landscape plan. Final
plans shall show the exact location of and irrigation for trees, shrubs, and
ground cover and shall include, at a minimum, plant name, plant quantity, plant
size, location of impervious surfaces, utilities and lighting, and irrigation
system. Existing trees to be removed or retained shall also be included. The
final plan should include a water budget that includes the estimated water use
(in gallons), the irrigated area (in square feet), precipitation rate, and flow
rate in gallons per minute. If landscaping is not exempt from the water
efficient landscape requirements developed by the state, those items listed in
article D2, "Landscape Water Reporting Requirements", of this chapter will also
be required.
   D.   Review Process: When the requirements of this article are applicable,
the following landscape plan review process shall be conducted in conjunction
with site plan and architectural review for the proposed project, pursuant to
the requirements of section
9-2B-12, "Minor Site Plan And Architectural Review", of this title.
      1.   Approving Authority: The designated approving authority shall be the
same as the designated approving authority of the entitlement for new projects
or existing development.
      2.   Approval Of Plans: The designated approving authority shall review
the preliminary landscape plan. Upon approval of the preliminary landscape
plan, a final landscape plan shall be submitted and must be approved with
building permits or planning entitlements for new projects or applicable
expansions to existing development as established above.
      3.   Approval Required: The landscaping shall not be installed until the
applicant receives approval of the final landscape and irrigation plan by the
approving authority and any applicable permits have been issued.
      4.   Changes To Final Plans: Changes to the approved final landscape
plans that affect the character or quantity of the plant material or irrigation
system design are required to be resubmitted for review and approval prior to
installation. (Ord. 2013-05, 2-6-2014)
9-5D1-2: LANDSCAPE STANDARDS:
   A.   General Location For Landscape Improvements: Landscaping shall be
provided in the following locations, unless the designated approving authority
determines that the required landscape is not necessary to fulfill the purposes
of this article. Nothing in this article is intended to discourage landscape
areas outside and beyond the minimum requirements listed herein.
      1.   Setbacks/Buffers: All setback and buffer areas required by this
title shall be landscaped in compliance with this article except where a
required setback is occupied by a sidewalk or driveway, or is enclosed and
screened from abutting public rights of way. (Ord. 2013-05, 2-6-2014)
      2.   Unused Areas: All areas of a project site not intended for a
specific use or purpose in conjunction with a current application, including
pad sites being held for future development, shall be landscaped with low
growing ground cover, such as cotoneaster, and watered with a drip irrigation
system. (Ord. 2014-04, 9-16-2014)
      3.   Parking Areas: Within parking lots, landscaping shall be used for
shade and climate control, to enhance project design, and to screen the visual
impact of vehicles and large expanses of pavement consistent with the
requirements of this article.
      4.   Streetscape (Parkway) Landscaping: As part of new subdivisions or
nonindustrial projects, landscaping along public streets in the form of
parkways and medians shall be provided consistent with the requirements of the
general plan and this article.
   B.   Landscape Design: Landscaping shall be designed as an integral part of
the overall site plan with the purpose of enhancing building design and public
views and spaces, and providing buffers, transitions, and screening. At a
minimum, the following landscape design requirements shall apply:
      1.   Planting design shall have focal points at project entries, plaza
areas, and other areas of interest using distinct planting and/or landscape
features. (Ord. 2013-05, 2-6-2014)
      2.   (Rep. by Ord. 2014-04, 9-16-2014)
      3.   Landscaping shall be designed with pedestrian paths throughout the
landscape areas connecting designated on site pedestrian circulation.
      4.   Amenities such as seating areas shall be incorporated. Entry plazas,
bicycle parking, and transit shelters are allowed within landscape areas.
   C.   Plant Type: Landscape planting shall emphasize drought tolerant and
native species (especially along natural, open space areas), shall complement
the architectural design of structures on the site, and shall be suitable for
the soil and climatic conditions specific to the site. (Ord. 2013-05, 2-6-2014)
      1.   Planting Layout and Plant Diversity: (Rep. by Ord. 2014-04, 9-16-
2014)
      2.   Street And Parking Lot Trees: Street and parking lot trees shall be
selected from the city's adopted master list of street trees and parking lot
trees.
      3.   Tree Root Barriers: Trees planted within five feet (5') of a street,
sidewalk, paved trail, curb, or walkway shall be separated from hardscapes by a
root barrier to prevent physical damage to public improvements. (Ord. 2013-05,
2-6-2014)
      4.   Turf Limitations For Residential Uses: High water use turf grasses
shall not be planted or utilized in conjunction with construction of new
residential housing. Use or planting of drought tolerant turf grasses, such as
hybrid Bermuda, is allowed. (Ord. 2014-04, 9-16-2014)
      5.   Turf Limitations For Commercial, Industrial, And Mixed Uses: The use
of drought tolerant turf grass shall be required for all proposed turf areas.
   D.   Planting Size, Spacing, And Planter Widths: In order to achieve an
immediate effect of a landscape installation and to allow sustained growth of
planting materials, minimum plant material sizes, plant spacing, and minimum
planter widths (inside measurements) are as follows:
      1.   Trees: The minimum planting size for trees shall be fifteen (15)
gallon, with twenty five percent (25%) of all trees on a project site planted
at a minimum twenty four inch (24") box size. For commercial, office,
community/civic, and industrial development, tree spacing within perimeter
planters along streets and abutting residential property shall be planted no
farther apart on center than the mature diameter of the proposed species.
Minimum planter widths shall be five feet (5').
      2.   Shrubs: Shrub planting shall be a minimum five (5) gallon size, with
a fifteen (15) gallon minimum size required where an immediate landscape screen
is conditioned by the designated approving authority (e.g., screening of
headlights from drive- through aisles). The minimum planter width for planters
with only shrubs (no trees) is four feet (4').
      3.   Ground Cover: Plants used for mass planting may be grown in flats of
up to sixty four (64) plants or in individual one gallon containers. Rooted
cuttings from flats shall be planted no farther apart than one foot (1') on
center, and containerized woody, shrub ground cover plantings shall be planted
no farther apart than three feet (3') on center in order to achieve full
coverage within one year. Minimum planter width for ground cover is two feet
(2'), with the exception of sod, which requires a minimum planter width of
eight feet (8'). (Ord. 2013-05, 2-6-2014)
      4.   Vines: Vines are normally planted to provide landscaping screening
of a wall or as part of a trellis to screen other site improvements that
require screening. Where provided, vines shall be planted every fifteen feet
(15') on center in a planter with a minimum width of two feet (2'). (Ord. 2014-
04, 9-16-2014)
   E.   Special Landscape Requirements: In addition to the general requirements
above, the following requirements apply to the special types of landscaping:
      1.   Streetscape Landscaping: Consistent with the city's general plan and
improvement standards, landscaping shall be provided along all public streets
within city right of way maintained by the adjacent owner. Depending upon the
classification of the street, landscaping shall be required in a parkway
between the front of sidewalk and the back of curb and within a planted median
(where designated by the general plan). The form, width, and quantity of
landscaping shall be consistent with the following standards:
         a.   Landscape Design: Landscaping within parkways and medians shall
be consistent with the following: (Ord. 2013-05, 2-6-2014)
            (1)   Street Trees: Street trees shall be provided a minimum of
every thirty feet (30') on center on street adjacent to a side yard, and a
minimum one per lot when adjacent to a front yard. Tree species shall be
approved by the city as part of the improvement plan review process and shall
be selected from a city approved tree list. Trees shall be planted ten feet
(10') away from alleys, driveways, fire hydrants, water lines, and sewer lines
and five feet (5') from gas, electrical, telephone, cable television, and
adjoining property lines. They shall also be planted a minimum of twenty feet
(20') from city streetlights. Ultimate planting locations shall be subject to
city review and approval based upon field conditions. (Ord. 2014-04, 9-16-2014)
            (2)   Ground Cover: Ground cover shall be provided within all
parkways and medians as follows:
   (A) Parkways: Ground cover in parkways shall consist of a variety of low
growing, low maintenance plantings to withstand the local climate and potential
pedestrian traffic. Turf is not allowed if width available is less than eight
feet (8').
   (B) Medians: Landscaping in medians shall consist of low growing plantings
(e.g., shrubs, grasses). Turf is prohibited.
            (3)   Irrigation: Irrigation shall be provided for all street
landscape areas. The design of the irrigation system shall meet the
requirements of subsection
9-5D1-3A, "Irrigation", of this article.
         b.   Maintenance: Maintenance of street landscape areas shall be as
follows, unless otherwise encumbered by a city public facilities district:
            (1)   Median landscaping shall be the responsibility of the city or
other delegated agency.
            (2)   Parkway landscaping shall be the responsibility of the
adjacent property owner. Parkways shall be maintained consistent with the
requirements of section
9-5D1-3, "Landscape Care And Maintenance", of this article.
      2.   Landscape Buffers Required Along Arterial And Collector Streets:
         a.   Multi-family, commercial, office, and industrial developments
shall provide a landscape buffer between the parking lot and the public right
of way (behind the sidewalk) in addition to any parkway required by subsection
E1 of this section. The minimum depth of this buffer area shall be fifteen feet
(15') along arterial and collector streets (excluding drive approaches) and
along the property frontage to shield parking spaces or on site circulation.
The design of the landscaping shall be compatible with the other on site
landscaping and at a minimum include trees and ground cover.
         b.   Single-family residential subdivisions shall incorporate buffers
between the sidewalk and perimeter wall. Landscaping shall be provided such
that fifty percent (50%) of the wall shall be covered by landscape material
within five (5) years. The landscaping shall include trees, shrubs, and ground
cover that provide for a quality aesthetic condition.
      3.   Buffering Between Uses: A landscape buffer shall be provided between
residential and nonresidential uses and between single- family uses and multi-
family uses containing three (3) or more units. Buffer areas shall include a
minimum ten foot (10') wide perimeter planter strip with shrubs and both
deciduous and evergreen trees planted a maximum of thirty feet (30') on center.
(Ord. 2013-05, 2-6-2014)
      4.   Project Entry Landscaping: (Rep. by Ord. 2014-04, 9-16-2014)
      5.   Landscaping Of Parking Lots: Parking lots, except those specifically
exempted in subsection
9-5E-4B, "Not Considered Parking", of this chapter, shall be landscaped as
follows:
         a.   Landscape Planter Minimum Dimensions: Where provided, the width
of the planter area shall be five feet (5'). Where turf is provided, the
minimum width shall be eight feet (8').
         b.   Pedestrian Path: A pedestrian path leading from the parking field
to the main building(s) shall be provided for every two hundred (200) spaces.
The pedestrian path shall be a minimum of six feet (6') wide and it shall be
flanked on either side by a planter of at least five feet (5') in width.
         c.   Drive Aisles: Drive aisles shall be separated from parking spaces
with a landscape planter at the end of each aisle. The planter shall be a
minimum width of five feet (5').
         d.   Landscaping Within Parking Lots: Landscaping within parking lots
shall meet the following requirements:
            (1)   Landscape Materials: Landscaping shall be provided throughout
the parking lot as a combination of ground cover, shrubs, and trees.
            (2)   Protective Curbing: Planting areas shall be bordered by a
concrete curb at least six inches (6") high and six inches (6") wide. The
designated approving authority may approve an alternative barrier design to
protect landscaped areas from damage by vehicles and/or to provide for the
infiltration of water runoff from paved surfaces.
            (3)   Adjacent To Side Or Rear Property Lines: Parking areas for
nonresidential uses shall provide a perimeter landscape strip at least eight
feet (8') wide (inside dimension) where the parking area adjoins a side or rear
property line. The requirement for a landscape strip may be satisfied by a
setback or buffer area that is otherwise required. Trees shall be provided at
the rate of one for each twenty five (25) linear feet of landscaped area.
         e.   Landscaping Within Interior Of Parking Area: Landscaping within
the interior of each outdoor parking area as follows:
            (1)   Five percent (5%) of the gross surface area of the parking
lot, exclusive of the required perimeter landscaping, shall be landscaped.
(Ord. 2013-05, 2-6-2014)
            (2)   Trees shall be planted throughout the parking area at a
minimum ratio of one tree for each eight (8) double loaded parking spaces or
one tree for each four (4) single loaded or side loaded parking spaces. (Ord.
2014-04, 9-16-2014)
   FIGURE 9-5D1-2-E2
   EXAMPLE PARKING LOT LANDSCAPING
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/08286aa2a408810754fa2332ce2e067d759ab116/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2271.jpg]
 
      6.   On Site Pedestrian Pathways: Pedestrian pathway landscaping shall
include shade trees placed so as to cover sixty percent (60%) of the total
pathway area with tree canopies within fifteen (15) years of securing building
permit.
      7.   Canals: To the extent that landscaping or planting is required or
provided along canals, such landscaping shall be native plants.
      8.   Public Spaces: Pedestrian space landscaping shall include a
combination of shade trees and pedestrian shading devices (e.g., canopies,
awnings, and umbrellas) placed so as to cover sixty percent (60%) of the total
space with a shade canopy within fifteen (15) years of securing building
permit.
      9.   Signs: Landscaping shall be provided at the base of the supporting
structure of freestanding signs equal to twice the area of one face of the
sign. For example, fifty (50) square feet of sign area requires one hundred
(100) square feet of landscaped area.
      10.   Existing Trees: Existing mature trees on the site in good health
shall be preserved whenever possible.
   F.   Removal And Replacement Of Landscaping And Trees From Approved Plans:
All plant material removed from a project in which the city has approved the
landscape plan shall be replaced with the following replacement sizes:
      1.   Shrubs shall be replaced with five (5) gallon size plants.
      2.   Ground cover shall be replaced with flats.
      3.   Trees shall be replaced with fifteen inch (15") box tree. (Ord.
2013-05, 2-6-2014)
9-5D1-3: LANDSCAPE CARE AND MAINTENANCE:
   A.   Irrigation:
      1.   All new single-family and multi-family development, excluding
additions and infill development, shall comply with the following requirements:
         a.   Sprinklers and sprays shall not be used in areas less than eight
feet (8') wide. (Ord. 2013-05, 2-6-2014)
         b.   (Rep. by Ord. 2014-04, 9-16-2014)
         c.   Valves and circuits shall be separated based on water use.
         d.   Drip or bubbler irrigation systems are required for trees.
Bubblers shall be used that do not exceed one and one-half (11/2) gallons per
minute per device.
         e.   Sprinkler heads must have matched precipitation rates within each
control valve circuit. (Ord. 2013-05, 2-6-2014)
         f.   Check valves are required on all new sprinkler heads. (Ord. 2014-
04, 9-16-2014)
         g.   Sprinkler head spacing shall be designed for head to head
coverage. The system should be designed for minimum runoff and overspray onto
nonirrigated areas.
         h.   All irrigated areas shall be equipped with a controller capable
of dual or multiple programming. Controllers must have multiple cycle start
capacity and a flexible calendar program.
         i.   All irrigation systems shall be equipped with rain shutoff
devices.
      2.   All other development not addressed above, including, but not
limited to, new nonresidential development, mixed use development, infill
development, and additions to existing development, shall comply with the
following:
         a.   A low pressure irrigation system (e.g., drip or bubbler system)
shall be provided for all landscape areas other than turf.
         b.   Automatic programmable controllers with check valves shall be
installed in sloping areas with elevation differences of more than five feet
(5') as defined from the toe to the top of slope.
         c.   Landscape materials with the same watering needs shall be grouped
together and irrigated through separate control valves.
         d.   Irrigation systems shall be designed to avoid runoff, excessive
low head drainage, overspray, or other similar conditions where water flows or
drifts onto adjacent property, nonirrigated areas, walks, roadways, or
structures.
         e.   The annual maintenance program with seasonal watering schedule
shall be laminated and permanently posted in or near the control box on site.
   B.   Maintenance Of Required Planting Areas: Required planting areas shall
be permanently maintained by watering, clearing debris and litter, weeding,
pruning, insect control, and replacement of plant materials and irrigation
equipment as needed to preserve the health and appearance of plant materials.
All landscaping shall be maintained in such a manner as to not restrict
designated pedestrian access. All trees, shrubs, and plants which, due to
accident, damage, disease, or other cause, fail to show a healthy growth shall
be replaced, in kind, pursuant to the approved landscape plans within thirty
(30) days from the identified damage date. (Ord. 2013-05, 2-6-2014)
9-5D1-4: TREE PRESERVATION:
   A.   Purpose And Applicability: This section implements the general plan
policy protecting and preserving heritage trees within the community. This
section includes provisions that preserve existing heritage trees on private
property through the development review process and subsequent activities such
as work within the canopy or within the critical root zone of trees and provide
a process for replacement in instances where preservation is not reasonably
possible.
      The requirements of this section, and corresponding permit requirements
as described in section
9-2B-5, “Tree Permit For Trees On Private Property”, of this title shall only
apply to protected trees that are located on private property. It shall not
apply to trees on public property or within the public right of way, which are
covered in title 7, chapter 5, “Street Trees”, of the municipal code.
   B.   Protected Trees: The following trees shall not be removed without city
approval:
      1.   Heritage Tree: A Valley oak (Quercus lobata) tree with a diameter at
breast height of twelve inches (12") or greater, or multitrunked trees with a
combined diameter at breast height of twelve inches (12") or greater, are
considered heritage trees.
      2.   Habitat For Special Status Species: Trees that a biological study
identifies as habitat for special status species (e.g., Swainson’s hawk).
      3.   Mitigation Trees: Trees that were planted during the development
process as required mitigation for the removal of protected or special status
trees.
   C.   Work Requiring A Tree Permit For Trees On Private Property: No person
shall conduct work within the critical root zone, cut down, remove, top, or
relocate any protected tree unless a valid tree permit for protected trees on
private property has been approved. Exemptions to this requirement are provided
in subsection D of this section.
   D.   Exemptions From Tree Permit Requirement: The following types of work
are exempt from requiring a tree permit prior to initiation of the work:
      1.   Removal and pruning work by utility providers for all types of
trees; and
      2.   In case of emergency caused by the tree being in a hazardous or
dangerous condition requiring immediate action for the safety of human life or
buildings or structures, such tree may be removed by the property owner.
   E.   Tree Permit For Trees On Private Property Application Processing: Tree
permits for trees on private property shall be processed as provided in chapter
2, “Procedures And Entitlements”, of this title.
   F.   Mitigation Required For Removal Of Protected Trees On Private Property:
As part of the approval of a tree permit, or other entitlement request related
to the removal of a protected tree, mitigation is required.
      1.   Mitigation Standards: When tree removal is authorized as part of
issuance of a valid tree permit, mitigation for the loss shall be provided as
follows:
         a.   New trees of an equivalent species shall be provided at a ratio
of one new inch diameter at breast height (dbh) for each one inch (1") dbh lost
(1:1 ratio).
         b.   The applicant shall prepare a tree mitigation plan for review and
approval by the planning director.
      2.   Mitigation Options: The city allows all of the following mitigation
options, subject to review and approval by the planning director, as part of a
tree mitigation plan:
         a.   On Site Or Off Site Replacement: The plan shall specify where the
tree(s) shall be planted and how the tree(s) shall be monitored and maintained
for a minimum of five (5) years. The city may require the establishment of a
performance bond or other surety as a way to ensure that the replacement trees
survive for the minimum establishment period of five (5) years.
         b.   On Site Or Off Site Relocation: The tree mitigation plan may
include the relocation of trees, include specification regarding where the
trees will be moved to, and how the tree will be monitored and maintained for a
minimum of five (5) years. The city may require the establishment of a
performance bond or other surety to ensure that the tree becomes well
established.
         c.   Trees Planted Under Mitigation Plan: The city will allow the use
of on site trees planted under a mitigation plan as a way to meet any other on
site landscaping requirement, including parking lot shading, street
landscaping, and street trees on residential lots.
      3.   Mitigation Equivalents: As an alternative to actual measurement, the
following equivalent sizes shall be used to calculate mitigation ratios:
         a.   A one gallon container or seedling sized containerized tree
equals one inch (1") dbh.
         b.   A fifteen (15) gallon container equals one and one-half inch (11/
2") dbh.
         c.   A twenty four inch (24") box equals two inch (2") dbh.
         d.   A thirty six inch (36") box equals three inch (3") dbh.
         e.   A sixty inch (60") box equals three inch (3") dbh.
         f.   A seventy two inch (72") box equals four inch (4") dbh. (Ord.
2013-05, 2-6-2014; amd. Ord. 2024-01, 6-18-2024)
9-5D1-5: PREFERRED PLANT LIST:
   A.   Street Trees:
Table 9-5D1-5-A1, "Street Trees", of this section lists the city's approved
master list of trees 1 for use in parkways, medians, and other street
landscaping (between the sidewalk and a single-family home). The table lists
the botanical and common name of each species, the type of tree (evergreen or
deciduous), the size, and appropriate planting location (within the parkway
and/or between the sidewalk and a single-family home). Other trees may be used
with prior approval by the planning director.
TABLE 9-5D1-5-A1
STREET TREES
                           Type                    Planting Location
Botanical Name Common Name (Evergreen Or Tree Size         Located Minimum 5'
                           Deciduous)              Parkway From Sidewalk On
                                                           House Side
                                                          Planting Location
Botanical                    Type                                 Located
Name          Common Name    (Evergreen Or Tree Size      Parkway Minimum 5'
                             Deciduous)                           From Sidewalk
                                                                  On House Side
Geijera       Australian     Evergreen     20' - 30'      Yes     Yes
purviflora    willow
Pyrus         Bradford pear  Deciduous     30', 20'       No      Yes
calleryana                                 spread
Pinus                                      30' - 60', 25'
halepensis    Brutia pine 1  Evergreen     spread         No      Yes
"brutia"
Pinus         Canary Island  Evergreen     60' - 80'      No      Yes
canariensis   pine 1                       columnar
Pistacia      Chinese        Deciduous     60', 50'       Yes     Yes
chinesis      pistache 1                   spread
Quercus       Coast live oak Evergreen     30' - 70',     Yes     Yes
agrifolia                                  greater spread
Lagerstroemia Crape myrtle 1 Deciduous     6' - 30',      No      Yes
indica                                     equal spread
Pyrus         Evergreen pear Deciduous     15' - 25', 20' Yes     Yes
kawakamii                                  spread
Koelreuteria  Golden rain 1  Deciduous     20' - 30'      Yes     Yes
paniculata
Laurus        Grecian laurel Evergreen     20' - 25', 15' Yes     Yes
nobilis                                    spread
Quercus ilex  Holly oak 1    Evergreen     40' - 70',     Yes     Yes
                                           equal spread
Pinus pinea   Italian stone  Evergreen     40' - 80',     No      Yes
              pine                         equal spread
Ginkgo biloba Maidenhair     Deciduous     35' - 50',     Yes     Yes
              tree                         lesser spread
Nyssa         Pepperidge     Deciduous     30' - 50'      Yes     Yes
sylvatica     tupelo
Quercus       Pin oak        Deciduous     50'+           Yes     Yes
palustris
Quercus rubra Red oak        Deciduous     50'+           Yes     Yes
Zelkova       Sawleaf        Deciduous     60', equal     Yes     Yes
serrata       zelkova                      spread
Fraxinus
uhdei         Shamel ash     Deciduous     40' - 60',     No      Yes
"majestic                                  lesser spread
beauty"
Liquidamber   Sweet gum      Deciduous     To 60', 20' -  No      Yes
styraciflua                                25' spread
Quercus       Valley oak 1   Deciduous     60', 80'       No      Yes
lobata                                     spread
 
Note:
   1.   Drought tolerant.
(Ord. 2013-05, 2-6-2014)
 
Notes
1 1. See also subsection
  7-5-4B of the municipal code.
ARTICLE D2. LANDSCAPE WATER REPORTING REQUIREMENTS
SECTION:
9-5D2-1: Purpose
9-5D2-2: Applicability
9-5D2-3: Reporting Requirements
9-5D2-1: PURPOSE:
The purpose of this article is to adopt, by reference, the state of California
model water efficient landscape ordinance (hereinafter the "model ordinance").
This ordinance establishes specific reporting requirements for water usage of
landscape areas in public and private development. As provided in the water
conservation in landscaping act of 2006 (assembly bill 1881, Laird), all cities
and counties in California are required to adopt the model ordinance. (Ord.
2013-05, 2-6-2014)
9-5D2-2: APPLICABILITY:
   A.   As provided in the state model ordinance, the requirements of this
article and the model ordinance shall be imposed as follows:
      1.   After January 1, 2010, this article shall apply to all of the
following landscape projects:
         a.   New construction and rehabilitated landscapes for public agency
projects and private development projects with a landscape area equal to or
greater than two thousand five hundred (2,500) square feet requiring a building
or landscape permit, plan check, or site plan and architectural review.
         b.   New construction and rehabilitated landscapes which are developer
installed in single-family and multi-family projects with a landscape area
equal to or greater than two thousand five hundred (2,500) square feet
requiring a building or landscape permit, plan check, or site plan and
architectural review.
         c.   New construction landscapes which are homeowner provided and/or
homeowner hired in single-family and multi-family residential projects with a
total project landscape area equal to or greater than five thousand (5,000)
square feet requiring a building or landscape permit, plan check, or site plan
and architectural review.
         d.   Existing landscapes over one acre in size, with review limited to
an irrigation audit, irrigation survey, and irrigation water use analysis as
provided in subsection
9-5D2-3H of this article.
         e.   Cemeteries. Recognizing the special landscape management needs of
cemeteries, new and rehabilitated cemeteries are limited to review of a water
budget calculation as provided in subsection
9-5D2-3B of this article and a maintenance schedule as provided in subsection
9-5D2-3G of this article. Existing cemeteries have review limited to an
irrigation audit, irrigation survey, and irrigation water use analysis as
provided in subsection
9-5D2-3H of this article.
      2.   This article does not apply to:
         a.   Registered local, state, or federal historical sites.
         b.   Ecological restoration projects that do not require a permanent
irrigation system.
         c.   Mined land reclamation projects that do not require a permanent
irrigation system.
         d.   Plant collections as part of botanical gardens and arboretums
open to the public. (Ord. 2013-05, 2-6-2014)
9-5D2-3: REPORTING REQUIREMENTS:
Unless exempt from the requirements of this article and the model ordinance,
all landscape plans shall address the submittal requirements and standards
outlined below and provided in the model ordinance.
   A.   Landscape Documentation Package: The landscape documentation package
shall include, at a minimum, the following components:
      1.   Project information as described in the forms available from the
planning department.
      2.   Water efficient landscape worksheet, as provided by the planning
department, including hydrozone information table and water budget calculations
including the following information as further described in this article:
         a.   Maximum applied water allowance (MAWA);
         b.   Estimated total water use (ETWU);
         c.   Soil management report;
         d.   Landscape design plan;
         e.   Irrigation design plan; and
         f.   Grading design plan.
      3.   Certificate of completion, as provided by the planning department,
including scheduling parameters used to set the irrigation controller,
landscape and irrigation maintenance schedule, and irrigation audit report.
   B.   Water Budget Calculations: The water budget calculations included in
the landscape documentation package shall adhere to the following requirements:
      1.   Plant Factor: The plant factor used shall be from the "Water Use
Classification Of Landscape Species" (WUCOLS) published by the University Of
California Cooperative Extension, the department of water resources, and the
bureau of reclamation (2000). The plant factor ranges from zero (0.0) to three-
tenths (0.3) for low water use plants, from four-tenths (0.4) to six- tenths
(0.6) for moderate water use plants, and from seven-tenths (0.7) to one (1.0)
for high water use plants.
      2.   Water Features: All water features shall be included in the high
water use hydrozone and temporarily irrigated areas shall be included in the
low water use hydrozone.
      3.   Special Landscape Areas: All special landscape areas shall be
identified and their water use calculated as described below.
      4.   ETAF For Special Landscape Areas: ETAF for special landscape areas
shall not exceed one (1.0).
      5.   Maximum Applied Water Allowance: The maximum applied water allowance
shall be calculated using the equation MAWA = (ETo) (0.62) [(0.7 x LA) + (0.3 x
SLA)], where:
 
a. MAWA = Maximum applied water allowance (gallons per year)
          Reference evapotranspiration (inches per year) (see
b. ETo  = table 9-5D2-3-I1, "Reference Evapotranspiration (ETo) Table", of this
          section)
c. 0.62 = Conversion factor (to gallons)
d. 0.7  = ET adjustment factor (ETAF)
e. LA   = Landscape area including SLA (square feet)
f. 0.3  = Additional water allowance for SLA
g. SLA  = Special landscape area (square feet)
 
      6.   Estimated Total Water Use: The estimated total water use shall be
calculated using the equation below:
 
ETWU = ETo x 0.62 x  PF x HA + SLA
                     IE
 
The sum of the estimated total water use calculated for all hydrozones shall
not exceed MAWA. The symbols in the equation shall mean:
 
a. ETWU = Estimated total water use per year (gallons)
          Reference evapotranspiration (inches) (see
b. ETo  = table 9-5D2-3-I1, "Reference Evapotranspiration (ETo) Table", of this
          section)
c. PF   = Plant factor from WUCOLS
d. HA   = Hydrozone area (high, medium, and low water use areas) (square feet)
e. SLA  = Special landscape area (square feet)
f. 0.62 = Conversion factor
g. IE   = Irrigation efficiency (minimum 0.71)
 
   C.   Soil Management Report: In order to reduce runoff and encourage healthy
plant growth, a soil management report shall be completed by the project
applicant or his/her designee. The report shall contain the following
information:
      1.   Submit soil samples to the laboratory for analysis and
recommendations.
         a.   Soil sampling shall be conducted in accordance with laboratory
protocol, including protocols regarding adequate sampling depth for the
intended plants.
         b.   Soil analysis shall include:
            (1)   Soil texture;
            (2)   Infiltration rate determined by laboratory test or soil
infiltration rate table;
            (3)   pH;
            (4)   Total soluble salts;
            (5)   Sodium;
            (6)   Percent organic matter; and
            (7)   Recommendations.
      2.   The project applicant, or his/her designee, shall comply with one of
the following:
         a.   If significant mass grading is not planned, the soil analysis
report shall be submitted to the planning department as part of the landscape
documentation package; or
         b.   If significant mass grading is planned, the soil analysis report
shall be submitted to the city as part of the certificate of completion.
      3.   The soil analysis report shall be made available, in a timely
manner, to the professionals preparing the landscape design plans and
irrigation design plans to make any necessary adjustments to the design plans.
      4.   The project applicant, or his/her designee, shall submit
documentation verifying implementation of soil analysis report recommendations
to the city with certificate of completion.
   D.   Landscape Design Plan: The content and form of the landscape design
plan shall meet the landscape design requirements provided in article D1,
"Landscaping Standards", of this chapter and the following submittal
requirements as provided in the model ordinance:
      1.   Delineate and label each hydrozone by number, letter, or other
method.
      2.   Identify each hydrozone as low, moderate, high water, or mixed water
use. Temporarily irrigated areas of the landscape shall be included in the low
water use hydrozone for the water budget calculation.
      3.   Identify recreational areas.
      4.   Identify areas permanently and solely dedicated to edible plants.
      5.   Identify areas irrigated with recycled water.
      6.   Identify type of mulch and application depth.
      7.   Identify soil amendments, type, and quantity.
      8.   Identify type and surface area of water features.
      9.   Identify hardscapes (pervious and nonpervious).
      10.   Identify location and installation details of any applicable
stormwater best management practices that encourage on site retention and
infiltration of stormwater. Stormwater best management practices are encouraged
in the landscape design plan, and examples include, but are not limited to:
         a.   Infiltration beds, swales, and basins that allow water to collect
and soak into the ground;
         b.   Constructed wetlands and retention ponds that retain water,
handle excess flow, and filter pollutants; and
         c.   Pervious or porous surfaces (e.g., permeable pavers or blocks,
pervious or porous concrete) that minimize runoff.
      11.   Identify any applicable rain harvesting or catchment technologies
(e.g., rain gardens, cisterns).
      12.   Contain the following statement:
I have complied with the provisions of the city landscape water conservation
regulations and applied them for the efficient use of water in the landscape
design plan.
      13.   Bear the signature of a licensed landscape architect, licensed
landscape contractor, or any other person authorized to design a landscape.
   E.   Irrigation Design Plan: An irrigation design plan shall accompany the
landscape design plan. The irrigation design plan shall meet the landscape
design requirements provided in article D1, "Landscaping Standards", of this
chapter and the following submittal requirements as provided in the model
ordinance:
      1.   System Requirements: For the efficient use of water, an irrigation
system shall meet all the requirements listed in this section and the
manufacturer's recommendations. The irrigation system and its related
components shall be planned and designed to allow for proper installation,
management, and maintenance. An irrigation design plan meeting the following
design criteria shall be submitted as part of the landscape documentation
package:
         a.   Dedicated landscape water meters are highly recommended on
landscape areas smaller than five thousand (5,000) square feet to facilitate
water management.
         b.   Automatic irrigation controllers utilizing either
evapotranspiration or soil moisture sensor data shall be required for
irrigation scheduling in all irrigation systems.
         c.   The irrigation system shall be designed to ensure that the
dynamic pressure at each emission device is within the manufacturer's
recommended pressure range for optimal performance.
            (1)   If the static pressure is above or below the required dynamic
pressure of the irrigation system, pressure regulating devices such as in-line
pressure regulators, booster pumps, or other devices shall be installed to meet
the required dynamic pressure of the irrigation system.
            (2)   Static water pressure, dynamic or operating pressure, and
flow reading of the water supply shall be measured at the point of connection.
These pressure and flow measurements shall be conducted at the design stage. If
the measurements are not available at the design stage, the measurements shall
be conducted at installation.
         d.   Sensors (rain, freeze, wind, etc.), either integral or auxiliary,
that suspend or alter irrigation operation during unfavorable weather
conditions shall be required on all irrigation systems, as appropriate for
local climatic conditions. Irrigation should be avoided during windy or
freezing weather or during rain.
         e.   Manual shutoff valves (such as a gate valve, ball valve, or
butterfly valve) shall be required, as close as possible to the point of
connection of the water supply, to minimize water loss in case of an emergency
(such as a main line break) or routine repair.
         f.   Backflow prevention devices shall be required to protect the
water supply from contamination by the irrigation system. The project applicant
shall refer to the applicable local agency code (i.e., public health) for
additional backflow prevention requirements.
         g.   High flow sensors that detect and report high flow conditions
created by system damage or malfunction are recommended.
         h.   The irrigation system shall be designed to prevent runoff, low
head drainage, overspray, or other similar conditions where irrigation water
flows onto nontargeted areas, such as adjacent property, nonirrigated areas,
hardscapes, roadways, or structures.
         i.   Relevant information from the soil management plan, such as soil
type and infiltration rate, shall be utilized when designing irrigation
systems.
         j.   The design of the irrigation system shall conform to the
hydrozones of the landscape design plan.
         k.   The irrigation system must be designed and installed to meet, at
a minimum, the irrigation efficiency criteria regarding the maximum applied
water allowance.
         l.   It is highly recommended that the project applicant or local
agency inquire with the local water purveyor about peak water operating demands
(on the water supply system) or water restrictions that may impact the
effectiveness of the irrigation system.
         m.   In mulched planting areas, the use of low volume irrigation is
required to maximize water infiltration into the root zone.
         n.   Sprinkler heads and other emission devices shall have matched
precipitation rates, unless otherwise directed by the manufacturer's
recommendations.
         o.   Head to head coverage is recommended. However, sprinkler spacing
shall be designed to achieve the highest possible distribution uniformity using
the manufacturer's recommendations.
         p.   Swing joints or other riser protection components are required on
all risers subject to damage that are adjacent to high traffic areas.
         q.   Check valves or antidrain valves are required for all irrigation
systems.
         r.   Narrow or irregularly shaped areas, including turf, less than
eight feet (8') in width in any direction shall be irrigated with subsurface
irrigation or low volume irrigation system.
         s.   Overhead irrigation shall not be permitted within twenty four
inches (24") of any nonpermeable surface. Allowable irrigation within the
setback from nonpermeable surfaces may include drip, drip line, or other low
flow nonspray technology. The setback area may be planted or unplanted. The
surfacing of the setback may be mulch, gravel, or other porous material. These
restrictions may be modified if:
            (1)   The landscape area is adjacent to permeable surfacing and no
runoff occurs; or
            (2)   The adjacent nonpermeable surfaces are designed and
constructed to drain entirely to landscaping.
         t.   The irrigation designer specifies an alternative design or
technology, as part of the landscape documentation package and clearly
demonstrates strict adherence to irrigation system design criteria to prevent
overspray and runoff.
         u.   Slopes greater than twenty five percent (25%) shall not be
irrigated with an irrigation system with a precipitation rate exceeding three-
fourths (3/4) of an inch per hour. This restriction may be modified if the
landscape designer specifies an alternative design or technology, as part of
the landscape documentation package, and clearly demonstrates no runoff or
erosion will occur. Prevention of runoff and erosion must be confirmed during
the irrigation audit.
      2.   Hydrozone Requirements:
         a.   Each valve shall irrigate a hydrozone with similar site, slope,
sun exposure, soil conditions, and plant materials with similar water use.
         b.   Sprinkler heads and other emission devices shall be selected
based on what is appropriate for the plant type within that hydrozone.
         c.   Where feasible, trees shall be placed on separate valves from
shrubs, ground covers, and turf.
         d.   Individual hydrozones that mix plants of moderate and low water
use, or moderate and high water use, may be allowed if:
            (1)   Plant factor calculation is based on the proportions of the
respective plant water uses and their plant factor; or
            (2)   The plant factor of the higher water using plant is used for
calculations.
         e.   Individual hydrozones that mix high and low water use plants
shall not be permitted.
         f.   On the landscape design plan and irrigation design plan,
hydrozone areas shall be designated by number, letter, or other designation. On
the irrigation design plan, designate the areas irrigated by each valve, and
assign a number to each valve. Use this valve number in the hydrozone
information table. This table can also assist with the irrigation audit and
programming the controller.
      3.   Design Plan Contents: The irrigation design plan, at a minimum,
shall contain:
         a.   Location and size of separate water meters for landscape;
         b.   Location, type, and size of all components of the irrigation
system, including controllers, main and lateral lines, valves, sprinkler heads,
moisture sensing devices, rain switches, quick couplers, pressure regulators,
and backflow prevention devices;
         c.   Static water pressure at the point of connection to the public
water supply;
         d.   Flow rate (gallons per minute), application rate (inches per
hour), and design operating pressure (pressure per square inch) for each
station;
         e.   Recycled water irrigation systems;
         f.   The following statement: "I have complied with the provisions of
the city landscape water conservation regulations and applied them accordingly
for the efficient use of water in the irrigation design plan"; and
         g.   The signature of a licensed landscape architect, certified
irrigation designer, licensed landscape contractor, or any other person
authorized to design an irrigation system.
   F.   Grading Design Plan: For the efficient use of water, grading of a
project site shall be designed to minimize soil erosion, runoff, and water
waste. A grading plan shall be submitted as part of the landscape documentation
package. A comprehensive grading plan prepared by a civil engineer for other
local agency permits satisfies this requirement.
      1.   The project applicant shall submit a landscape grading plan that
indicates finished configurations and elevations of the landscape area
including:
         a.   Height of graded slopes;
         b.   Drainage patterns;
         c.   Pad elevations;
         d.   Finish grade; and
         e.   Stormwater retention improvements, if applicable.
      2.   To prevent excessive erosion and runoff, it is highly recommended
that project applicants:
         a.   Grade so that all irrigation and normal rainfall remains within
property lines and does not drain onto nonpermeable hardscapes;
         b.   Avoid disruption of natural drainage patterns and undisturbed
soil; and
         c.   Avoid soil compaction in landscape areas.
      3.   The grading design plan shall contain the following statement: "I
have complied with the provisions of the city landscape water conservation
regulations and applied them accordingly for the efficient use of water in the
grading design plan" and shall bear the signature of a licensed professional as
authorized by law.
   G.   Landscape And Irrigation Maintenance Schedule:
      1.   Landscapes shall be maintained to ensure water use efficiency. A
regular maintenance schedule shall be submitted with the certificate of
completion.
      2.   A regular maintenance schedule shall include, but not be limited to,
routine inspection; adjustment and repair of the irrigation system and its
components; aerating and dethatching turf areas; replenishing mulch;
fertilizing; pruning; weeding in all landscape areas, and removing any
obstruction to emission devices. Operation of the irrigation system outside the
normal watering window is allowed for auditing and system maintenance.
      3.   Repair of all irrigation equipment shall be done with the originally
installed components or their equivalents.
      4.   A project applicant is encouraged to implement sustainable or
environmentally friendly practices for overall landscape maintenance.
   H.   Irrigation Audit, Irrigation Survey, And Irrigation Water Use Analysis:
      1.   For new construction and rehabilitated landscape projects installed
after the effective date of this article:
         a.   The project applicant shall submit an irrigation audit report
with the certificate of completion to the planning director that may include,
but is not limited to, inspection, system tune up, system test with
distribution uniformity, reporting overspray or runoff that causes overland
flow, and preparation of an irrigation schedule;
         b.   The city shall administer programs that may include, but not be
limited to, irrigation water use analysis, irrigation audits, and irrigation
surveys for compliance with the maximum applied water allowance.
      2.   All landscape irrigation audits shall be conducted by a certified
landscape irrigation auditor.
   I.   Reference Evapotranspiration (ETo) Table:
Table 9-5D2-3-I1 of this section describes the adopted reference
evapotranspiration values for use in calculating water efficiency as required
by this article.
TABLE 9-5D2-3-I1
REFERENCE EVAPOTRANSPIRATION (ETo) TABLE
Month ETo Value
Month        ETo Value
   January0.9
   Februar1.5
   March  3.4
   April  5.0
   May    6.6
   June   7.7
   July   8.3
   August 7.3
   Septemb5.4
   October3.4
   Novembe1.4
   Decembe0.7
   Annual 51.7
 
(Ord. 2013-05, 2-6-2014)
ARTICLE E. OFF STREET PARKING AND LOADING
SECTION:
9-5E-1: Purpose
9-5E-2: Applicability And Permit Requirements
9-5E-3: General Parking Regulations
9-5E-4: Required Off Street Parking
9-5E-5: Design And Development Standards For Off Street Parking Areas
9-5E-6: Off Street Loading Requirements
9-5E-7: Bicycle Parking Requirements
9-5E-1: PURPOSE:
This article establishes standards for the development (including amount and
location) of motor vehicle parking, bicycle parking, and on site loading areas.
The purpose of the standards is to provide for safe vehicular parking,
vehicular circulation, and loading supportive of a variety of uses in an
increasingly pedestrian and bicycle friendly and transit oriented community.
(Ord. 2013-05, 2-6-2014)
9-5E-2: APPLICABILITY AND PERMIT REQUIREMENTS:
   A.   Applicability: The provisions of this article shall apply to new
development and reuse of existing development. Every use shall have
appropriately maintained off street parking and loading areas in compliance
with the standards and requirements of this article. However, existing uses
shall not be considered nonconforming if the only nonconformance is lack of
required parking.
   B.   Permit Requirements: New parking lots and modifications or expansions
to existing parking lots require the following permits:
      1.   Building Permit: New parking lot design and modifications to
existing parking lots in conjunction with a substantial change in use to an
existing structure shall be reviewed in conjunction with the building permit
and any other land use or development permit required for the project.
      2.   Zoning Clearance: Substantial modification or improvement to an
existing parking lot that impacts the parking space layout, configuration,
number of stalls, landscape planters, etc., shall require zoning clearance to
authorize the change as consistent with this zoning code, concurrent with any
required improvement plan approvals.
   C.   Exempt Activities: The parking lot improvements listed below are
considered minor in nature, meaning that they do not alter the number or
configuration of parking stalls. Such improvements shall be exempt from zoning
clearance requirements and the requirements of this title.
      1.   Repairing any defects in the surface of the parking area, including
holes and cracks;
      2.   Resurfacing, slurry coating, and restriping of a parking area with
identical delineation of parking spaces;
      3.   Repairing or replacing in the same location damaged planters and
curbs; and
      4.   Working in landscape areas, including sprinkler line repair,
replacement of landscape materials, or refurbishment. (Ord. 2013-05, 2-6-2014)
9-5E-3: GENERAL PARKING REGULATIONS:
   A.   Calculations:
      1.   If the calculation for parking needs results in the requirement for
a fraction of a parking space, the value shall be rounded to the nearest whole
number.
      2.   Seating capacity shall be based upon the actual number of seats or
one seat per eighteen inches (18") of bench or pew length and one seat per
twenty four inches (24") of booth length for dining.
   B.   General Requirements:
      1.   All vehicular parking areas shall be maintained by the owner of the
property.
      2.   Required off street parking spaces and parking areas shall be used
only for parking operable vehicles of residents, employers, employees,
customers, and visitors unless specifically allowed by a temporary or
conditional use permit.
      3.   Required off street parking space shall not be used for the storage
of vehicles or materials.
      4.   No sales, storage, repair work, dismantling, or servicing of any
kind shall be permitted in parking spaces without necessary permits for such
use.
      5.   All required off street parking shall be kept clear of temporary or
permanent obstructions.
      6.   Existing parking shall not be reduced below the minimum requirements
of this section.
      7.   Living, sleeping, or housekeeping in any vehicle, recreational
vehicle, trailer, or vessel is prohibited, with the following exceptions:
         a.   In residential districts, occupancy shall be permitted by right,
on private property with the property owner’s permission, for a maximum of 7
days. A longer period may be permitted upon approval by the Chief of Police.
         b.   In commercial districts, a maximum of seventy-two (72) hours is
permitted, provided on site security is provided.
      8.   For residential tenant and guest parking, the spaces must be marked
per the required minimum standards for tenant and guest parking.
   C.   Location Requirements For Parking Areas:
      1.   Parking may not occur within any required “clear visibility area” as
defined by this title.
      2.   Parking spaces shall not preclude direct and free access to
stairways, walkways, elevators, any pedestrian accessway, or fire safety
equipment. Such access shall be a clear minimum width of forty four inches
(44"), no part of which shall be within a parking space.
      3.   For single-family homes, duplexes, triplexes, and similar uses,
parking shall be provided on the same lot as the home and shall not be located
within the required yard area setbacks, except for approved driveways and
carports as allowed by section 9-4D-18, “Residential Accessory Structures”, of
this title.
      4.   For multi-family residential, parking shall be provided within two
hundred feet (200') of the unit(s) they intend to serve.
      5.   For nonresidential uses, parking shall be located outside of
required landscape areas as required by section 9-5D1-2, “Landscape Standards”,
of this chapter. Parking shall be located on the same parcel as the uses
served, except that parking may be located on a parcel adjacent to, or within
five hundred feet (500') of, the use served. In such cases, a permanent
covenant shall be recorded on the subject properties with the Kings County
recorder guaranteeing that the required parking would be maintained exclusively
for the use or activity served. The agreement shall be approved by the planning
director in a form approved by the city attorney, and a copy shall be filed
with the planning department.
      6.   Parking within the downtown and mixed use districts shall be located
as required in chapters 6, “Downtown Development Standards”, and 7, “Mixed Use
Development Standards”, of this title.
(Ord. 2013-05, 2-6-2014; amd. Ord. 2024-07, 12-3-2024)
9-5E-4: REQUIRED OFF STREET PARKING:
   A.   Minimum Requirements: Minimum vehicle parking space requirements are
listed in
table 9-5E-4-A1, "Required Minimum Parking Ratios", of this section. Where the
parking ratio is listed based upon square feet, it shall mean the gross square
feet of the building (including public and private areas).
   B.   Not Considered Parking: For the purpose of calculating parking ratios,
the following types of parking are considered outdoor storage and are not
considered parking:
      1.   Fleet vehicle and equipment parking; and
      2.   Parking for vehicles that are for sale, lease, or rent.
   C.   Provision Of Excessive Parking: Site plans including proposed new
parking areas that exceed minimum vehicle parking requirements by more than
twenty five percent (25%) shall demonstrate how the property can be developed
in the future to utilize the additional parking areas for structures,
landscaping, plazas, or other active use.
   D.   Similar Use: For a use not listed in
table 9-5E-4-A1, "Required Minimum Parking Ratios", of this section, the
required vehicle and bicycle parking shall be the same as for the most similar
use listed, as determined by the Planning Director.
   E.   Parking Requirements In Downtown Mixed Use Districts: In the Downtown
Mixed Use Zoning Districts (DMX-1, DMX-2, and DMX-3), parking shall be provided
as established in chapter 6, "Downtown Development Standards", of this Code,
rather than as provided in
table 9-5E-4-A1 of this section. Parking lot design and construction shall be
as provided in this article. (Ord. 2013-05, 2-6-2014)
TABLE 9-5E-4-A1
REQUIRED MINIMUM PARKING RATIOS
Land Use Minimum Required Parking Spaces
Land Use                                Minimum Required Parking Spaces
Residential and overnight stay uses:     
Caretaker housing                       1 per bedroom
Child daycare facility - family daycare 1 additional beyond dwelling
home, large
Child daycare facility - family daycare 0 additional beyond dwelling
home, small
Dwelling, accessory unit                No additional beyond primary dwelling
Dwelling, multi-family - studio and 1   1.5 per unit
bedroom units
Dwelling, multi-family - 2 or more      2 per unit
bedrooms
Dwelling, single-family                 2 per unit
Dwelling, single- or multi-family in    1 per unit
the DMX-1 or DMX-2 Zoning District
Group housing                           2 per unit
Home occupation                         No additional beyond dwelling
Hotel, motel, or bed and breakfast inn  1 per room
Live-work facility                      1.5 per unit
Mobilehome park or recreational vehicle 2 per unit
park
Residential care home or extended care  1 per 4 beds
facility
Senior housing                          1 per unit
Single room occupancy (SRO) facility    0.5 per unit
Supportive or transitional housing      1 per 4 beds
Education, public assembly, and          
recreation uses:
Assembly uses - theater, auditorium,
amphitheater, church, mosque, temple,   1 per 4 seats if seating is fixed; 25
synagogue, religious facility, club,    per 1,000 square feet of main assembly
hall, conference center, funeral home,  room if seating is not fixed
or similar assembly facility
Indoor amusement/entertainment facility 4 per 1,000 square feet
Library                                 3.5 per 1,000 square feet
Outdoor commercial recreation (not      4 per acre of active recreation area
including stadiums)
School, elementary or middle - public,  2 per classroom
private or charter
School, high - public or private        9 per classroom
School, colleges and universities -     Parking study required
public and private
School, specialized education and       5 per 1,000 square feet of classroom or
training                                teaching area
Utility, transportation, public          
facility, and communication uses:
Airport, heliport, transit station, or  Parking study required
transit terminal
Ambulance service                       3.5 per 1,000 square feet
Broadcasting and recording studio       3.5 per 1,000 square feet
Fuel storage and distribution           3.5 per 1,000 square feet
Public safety facility                  Parking study required
Wireless telecommunication or utility   0.5 per employee (minimum 1 space)
infrastructure facility
Retail, service, and office uses:        
Animal sales, grooming, kennel, or      3.5 per 1,000 square feet
veterinary facility
Bank, financial service, check cashing, 3.5 per 1,000 square feet
or business support service
Building materials yard, garden center, 1 per 1,000 square feet
or plant nursery
Call center                             6 per 1,000 square feet
Daycare facility, commercial - child or 3.5 per 1,000 square feet
adult
Equipment sales and rental              3.5 per 1,000 square feet
Furniture store, consignment store, or  2.5 per 1,000 square feet
similar store with bulky items
Healthcare facility, massage therapy,   4 per 1,000 square feet
medical office or clinic
Hospital                                Parking study required
Maintenance or repair shop - small      2.5 per 1,000 square feet
equipment
Office - business or professional       4 per 1,000 square feet
Personal service - barbershop, beauty
shop, health spa, indoor fitness, gym,  3.5 per 1,000 square feet
laundry, or tattoo parlor
Restaurant, fast food, bar, or          5 per 1,000 square feet
nightclub
Retail store - general retail,
alcoholic beverage sales, convenience
store, grocery store, supermarket,      3.5 per 1,000 square feet
antique store, pawnshop, thrift store,
stand alone big box store
Semipermanent mobile food vehicle       8 per vehicle
Shopping center with mix of retail,     4.25 per 1,000 square feet
restaurant, and/or office uses
Automobile and vehicle uses:             
Auto and vehicle sales or rental,       3.5 per 1,000 square feet of sales and
service, storage, or parts sales        office area
Car washing or detailing                2 per 1,000 square feet
Fueling station                         None additional beyond affiliated uses,
                                        i.e., auto service or convenience store
Industrial, manufacturing, and           
processing uses:
Agricultural products processing        2 per 1,000 square feet
Manufacturing facility                  1.5 per 1,000 square feet
Printing and publishing                 1.5 per 1,000 square feet
Recycling facility - collection,        1 per 2 employees
processing, etc.
Research and development facility       3.5 per 1,000 square feet
Storage, personal storage facility      2 per 1,000 square feet of office
                                        space, plus 1 per caretaker dwelling
Storage yard, freight yard, truck
terminal, warehouse, or wholesale       4 per 1,000 square feet of office space
distribution
Any nonresidential use in the DMX-1,
DMX-2, or DMX-3 Zoning District          
(notwithstanding other above ratios)
Existing building or use; change in or
remodel that adds less than 1,000       No additional parking required
square feet to building
New building or development of more     4 per 1,000 square feet; may be waived
than 1,000 square feet of building      by paying in lieu fee
space
 
(Ord. 2013-05, 2-6-2014; amd. Ord. 2017-06, 5-16-2017)
   F.   Reductions And Exceptions To Minimum Parking Requirements: The
following are exceptions or reductions to the minimum parking requirements
established in
table 9-5E-4-A1, "Required Minimum Parking Ratios", of this section that are
available:
      1.   Parking District Waiver: Minimum off street parking requirements may
be waived for properties that have access to public parking facilities. The
waiver may be granted by the Planning Director.
      2.   Parking Reduction: Parking may be reduced by the designated approval
authority according to the following provisions. A combination of the following
programs may be utilized; however, the total parking reduction shall not exceed
twenty percent (20%) of required parking:
         a.   Reduction For Special Motor Vehicles: Up to twenty percent (20%)
of the off street parking may be provided by smaller parking spaces for special
or alternative motor vehicles (e.g., golf carts, motorcycles, motorized
scooters).
         b.   Reduction For Secure Bicycle Parking: Developments which provide
additional secure bicycle parking facilities over and above the minimum
requirement of this article may reduce their parking requirement by one (1)
vehicle space for every two (2) additional bicycle spaces provided.
         c.   Reduction For Parking Near Major Transit Stops (e.g., Train
Stations, Significant Bus Facilities): Parking requirements may be reduced by
ten percent (10%) when within one-fourth (1/4) mile of a major transit stop.
         d.   Reduction For Existing Uses To Enable Property Enhancements:
Parking requirements for existing nonresidential development may be reduced by
up to ten percent (10%) if any of the following are completed:
            (1)   Landscaping;
            (2)   On site pedestrian plazas, seating areas, shelters, bicycle
racks, and/or walkways; and/or
            (3)   Comprehensive architectural update to existing structures.
         e.   Shower/Locker Facilities: Developments with one hundred (100) or
more employees may reduce their parking requirement by providing shower and
clothing locker facilities for bicycle commuting employees. The maximum
reduction allowed is five percent (5%) of required parking.
         f.   Preferred Car Pool/Vanpool Parking Spaces: Office or industrial
developments that guarantee preferred parking spaces (e.g., covered, shaded, or
near building entrance) to employees who participate regularly in a car pool or
vanpool may reduce their parking requirement by one (1) vehicle space for every
one (1) space that is marked and reserved for car pools/vanpools at a preferred
location. The maximum reduction allowed is five percent (5%) of required
parking.
         g.   Electric Vehicle Charging Station: Mixed use, commercial, office,
and industrial developments that provide parking spaces reserved for electric
vehicles and provide electric vehicle charging stations at those spaces may
reduce their parking requirement by one (1) vehicle space for every one (1)
space that is provided for electric vehicle charging. The maximum reduction
allowed is five percent (5%) of required parking.
      3.   Joint Vehicle Parking Lot Or Structure: Required parking for two (2)
or more freestanding uses on adjacent or nearby sites may be satisfied by the
use of a joint vehicle parking facility to the extent that it can be shown by
the owners or operators that the demand for parking in the joint facility does
not materially overlay (e.g., uses primarily of a daytime versus a nighttime or
weekday versus weekend nature) and provided that such right of joint use is
evidenced by a deed, parking easement, lease, contract, or similar written
instrument upholding such joint use. In this situation, the size of the joint
parking lot shall be at least as large as the number of vehicle parking spaces
required by the largest user. (Ord. 2013-05, 2-6-2014)
9-5E-5: DESIGN AND DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS FOR OFF STREET PARKING AREAS:
   A.   General: All vehicular parking spaces shall be on the same lot as the
main structure they serve, on an abutting lot, or within one thousand feet
(1,000') of the building, subject to the following requirements:
      1.   There is a safe, direct, attractive, lighted, and convenient
pedestrian route between the vehicle parking area and the use being served.
      2.   There is an assurance in the form of deed, parking easement, lease,
contract, or other similar document that the required spaces will continue to
be available for off street parking use according to the required standards.
   B.   Parking Lot Design:
      1.   Surfacing And Striping: Areas used for parking and maneuvering of
vehicles shall be paved with a minimum of two inch (2") asphalt, concrete, or
equivalent surface. All parking areas shall be appropriately striped, marked,
and signed.
      2.   Curb Cuts And Driveway Access Points/Locations: Street access points
shall be the minimum necessary to provide access while not inhibiting the safe
circulation and carrying capacity of the street. New and modified curb cuts and
driveway access points shall be designed as follows:
         a.   For multi-family, commercial, office, and industrial
developments:
         (1)   A minimum of one hundred fifty feet (150') from the curb return.
         (2)   A minimum of one hundred fifty feet (150') between driveways.
         (3)   Lesser distances may be permitted upon review and approval of
the city engineer.
         (4)   Proposed driveways across the street from each other that are
offset less than one hundred fifty feet (150') must be approved by the public
works director.
         b.   For single-family and duplex developments:
         (1)   A minimum of fifty feet (50') from the curb return.
         (2)   A minimum of five feet (5') between the driveway and property
line.
         c.   The public works director may approve exceptions to this section.
      3.   Back Out Parking: With the exception of duplexes and single-family
residences, all parking areas shall be designed so that vehicles can exit
without backing out of the parking area onto a public street.
      4.   Connect Parking Lots: Auto parking areas shall be encouraged to
connect with auto parking areas on adjacent sites to eliminate the necessity of
utilizing the public right of way for cross movements. Joint or shared access,
internal circulation, or parking is encouraged with adjacent uses.
      5.   Minimum Clearance: Driveways, aisles, turnaround areas, and ramps
shall have a minimum vertical clearance of twelve feet (12') for the entire
length and width, but such clearance may be reduced in parking structures.
      6.   Drainage: Adequate drainage shall be provided to dispose of the
runoff generated by the impervious surface area of the parking area. Provision
shall be made for the on site collection of drainage waters to eliminate sheet
flow of such waters onto sidewalks, public rights of way, and abutting private
property. Design solutions may include, but are not limited to, the use of
bioswales, low impact design (LID), and other designs that direct runoff into
landscape areas.
      7.   Pedestrian Circulation/Walkways: Pedestrian circulation/walkways
shall be designed to provide circulation through parking lots from public
sidewalks to primary building entryways. Sidewalks shall be designed to ensure
that vehicles that may overhang or intrude into the sidewalk system do not
reduce the minimum required sidewalk width of four feet (4').
      8.   Screening: The periphery of all parking lots shall be screened from
view from adjacent streets and adjacent residential areas with walls,
landscaping, and landscaped berms (or a combination) to a minimum height of
three feet (3'). Where provided, landscaping shall be consistent with the
standards of subsection 9-5D1-2E5, “Landscaping Of Parking Lots”, of this
chapter.
      9.   Landscaping: Landscaping of parking lots shall be provided as
required in subsection 9-5D1-2E5, “Landscaping Of Parking Lots”, of this
chapter.
      10.   Lighting: See outdoor lighting standards in section 9-5B-4,
“Outdoor Lighting”, of this chapter.
   C.   Space And Aisle Standards For Surface Parking Lots:
      1.   General Space And Aisle Standards: All surface parking lots shall be
designed in accordance with the minimum city standards for stalls and aisles as
set forth in table 9-5E-5-C1, “Parking Space And Drive Aisle Dimensions”, of
this section and illustrated in figure 9-5E-5-C1, “Parking Space And Drive
Aisle Dimensions”, of this section.
      2.   Compact Car Spaces: Up to fifteen percent (15%) of the required
number of parking spaces may be sized for compact cars. Compact car spaces
shall comply with the following standards:
         a.   Compact car parking spaces shall be clearly marked “compact cars
only”, “compact”, or “c”.
         b.   No more than five (5) compact spaces shall be placed next to each
other.
TABLE 9-5E-5-C1
PARKING SPACE AND DRIVE AISLE DIMENSIONS
           Minimum Space And Aisle Dimensions
Stall Type A           B            C               D
           Stall Width Stall Length Stall Depth     Drive Aisle Width
                                    (Aisle To Curb) One-Way Two-Way
            Minimum Space And Aisle Dimensions
Stall Type  A           B            C               D
            Stall Width Stall Length Stall Depth     Drive Aisle Width
                                     (Aisle To Curb) One-Way Two-Way
Parallel    9'          20'          Not applicable  12'     24'
45°        9'          20'          20'             14'     24'
60°        9'          20'          21.5'           18'     24'
90°        9'          20'          20'             20'     24'
Compact                                              Same as standard stalls
stalls, all 8'          16'          -               per stall type
angles
 
   FIGURE 9-5E-5-C1
   PARKING SPACE AND DRIVE AISLE DIMENSIONS
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/08286aa2a408810754fa2332ce2e067d759ab116/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2273.jpg]
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/08286aa2a408810754fa2332ce2e067d759ab116/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2275.jpg]
Parallel Parking Spaces
 
   D.   Standards For Off Street Parking For Private Residences: Off street
parking and driveways for detached dwellings, manufactured homes, single-family
attached dwellings, and two-unit attached dwellings shall meet the following
requirements:
      1.   In single-family and two-family dwellings, one (1) space of the
required parking per unit must be covered (e.g., garage, carport). (Ord. 2013-
05, 2-6-2014)
      2.   All mobile food vehicles and motor vehicles which are inoperable
and/or without current registration shall not be parked or stored in any
required front yard within a residential zoning district or neighborhood.
      3.   Each parking space shall be at least eight and one-half feet wide by
eighteen feet deep (81/2' x 18').
      4.   The minimum driveway width shall be ten feet (10').
      5.   Tandem (end to end) parking is allowed to meet the minimum off
street parking requirements.
      6.   Parking may be provided within the front and street side yard
setback, as follows:
         a.   Vehicle parking (including driveways) in residential areas shall
be provided on permanent paved surfaces. Unpaved areas between paved drive
lanes (California-style driveways) shall not be used for parking.
         b.   Permanent paved surfaces in the front yard area shall be limited
to a maximum five foot (5') wide walkway to the front door of the residence, a
driveway that is no wider than the width of the garage or carport, and an area
between the driveway and closest interior lot line that is no wider than twelve
feet (12') wide. Sites without a garage or carport are limited to a driveway-
type parking area in the front yard area that is a maximum twenty feet (20')
wide.
         c.   If an interior side yard area is more than ten feet (10') wide
from property line to residence, a driveway no more than twelve feet (12') wide
may be added for the purpose of accessing the side yard but shall not be used
for parking in the required front yard area. Zoning clearance shall be required
to ensure compliance.
      7.   All vehicles are required to be parked on a paved surface. Driveways
and driveway approaches shall be paved. (Ord. 2013-05, 2-6-2014; amd. Ord.
2015-08, 1-5-2016; Ord. 2017-06, 5-16-2017; Ord. 2024-01, 6-18-2024)
9-5E-6: OFF STREET LOADING REQUIREMENTS:
   A.   Purpose Of Loading Area Requirements: The purpose of these regulations
is to provide the number, size, location, and screening requirements for
loading areas in mixed use, commercial, and industrial uses. The intent of
these regulations is to minimize disruptions of traffic flow by freight
carrying vehicles blocking the public right-of-way and to minimize impacts to
vehicular and pedestrian conflicts.
   B.   When Loading Regulations Apply: This regulation applies to all
nonresidential development in mixed use, commercial and industrial districts,
whether or not a permit or other approval is required for the development.
Buildings smaller than twenty thousand (20,000) square feet in size are exempt
from the requirements of this section.
   C.   General Loading Area Requirements: The number of required loading
spaces is based on the use of the building and the building size, minus any
residential component square footage, as described in
table 9-5E-6-C1, "Required Minimum Loading Spaces", of this section. Where two
(2) or more uses are located on the same premises, the number of loading area
spaces required is the sum of the spaces required for each use.
      TABLE 9-5E-6-C1
      REQUIRED MINIMUM LOADING SPACES
 
Land Use                               Loading Spaces Required
Industrial uses                        1 per each 20,000 square feet or
                                       fraction thereof
Commercial, office, and all other uses 1 per each 35,000 square feet or
                                       fraction thereof
 
   D.   Off Street Loading Standards:
      1.   Dimensions: Loading spaces shall be not less than ten feet (10') in
width and twenty five feet (25') in length, with fourteen feet (14') of
vertical clearance.
      2.   Setback And Landscaping: Loading areas must comply with the setback
and perimeter landscaping and screening standards. When parking areas are
prohibited or not allowed between a building and a street, loading areas are
also not allowed.
      3.   Maintenance: The provision for maintenance of off street loading
facilities is a continuing obligation of the property owner.
      4.   Loading And Maneuvering Areas: Loading and maneuvering areas shall
be hard surfaced unless a permeable surface is required to reduce surface
runoff, as determined by the City.
      5.   Passenger Vehicle Parking: Parking of passenger vehicles may be
allowed in off street loading areas subject to specific time limits to prevent
conflicts with off street loading activities. If parking is allowed, the
parking time limits shall be clearly posted. These parking spaces shall not
count toward meeting the general parking requirements.
   FIGURE 9-5E-6-C1
   TYPICAL LOADING AREA - BACK IN AND SIDE LOAD
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/08286aa2a408810754fa2332ce2e067d759ab116/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2277.jpg]
 
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/08286aa2a408810754fa2332ce2e067d759ab116/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2335.jpg]
 
   E.   Location Of Required Loading Facilities:
      1.   The off street loading facilities, regardless of the development
type, shall be on the same lot or parcel of land as the structure they are
intended to serve.
      2.   The off street loading facilities shall be designed and located so
that loading vehicles are not parked in required setbacks, driveways, or
required parking spaces during loading activities.
      3.   No loading space shall be located so that a vehicle using such
loading space projects into any public street.
      4.   Loading spaces shall be provided with access to an alley when alley
access is available.
      5.   Bays and doors shall be located in a manner that would preclude any
possibility for trucks to back into bays from arterial streets. (Ord. 2013-05,
2-6-2014)
9-5E-7: BICYCLE PARKING REQUIREMENTS:
   A.   Applicability: Bicycle parking facilities in parking lots shall be
provided for nonresidential and multi-family uses as provided in this section.
Bicycle parking facilities shall comply with the California building code.
(Ord. 2013-05, 2-6-2014)
ARTICLE F. SIGNAGE
SECTION:
9-5F-1: Purpose And Sign Definitions
9-5F-2: Administrative Provisions
9-5F-3: General Sign Provisions
9-5F-4: Design Standards For Signs
9-5F-5: Standards For Permanent On Site Signs
9-5F-6: Standards For Temporary On Site Signs
9-5F-7: Standards For Off Site Signs
9-5F-8: Standards For Signs On City Property And Within Public Rights Of Way
9-5F-9: Electronic Billboards
9-5F-1: PURPOSE AND SIGN DEFINITIONS:
   A.   The purpose of this article is to establish regulations for signs.
These regulations are intended to protect the public health, safety, and
welfare and provide for the integrity of the community's aesthetics. The city
recognizes that signs and other graphics are an essential element of a
community's visual appearance, provide a means to identify and promote
businesses, provide useful information to the public, and should not become
visual distractions along public roadways. Consequently, the purpose of this
chapter is to provide sign regulations for signs on private property that are
consistent with the goals and objectives of the city's general plan and the
community's visual and aesthetic goals. In addition, these regulations are
intended to:
      1.   Promote an economically stable and visually attractive community;
      2.   Promote signs and graphics that are attractive, pleasing, and
harmonized with the physical character of the building and environment
surrounding properties;
      3.   Prevent an inadvertent favoring of commercial speech over
noncommercial speech, or favoring of any particular noncommercial message over
any other noncommercial message;
      4.   Encourage individuality among businesses through signage;
      5.   Improve traffic safety and the smooth and efficient flow of
pedestrians and vehicles to their destinations; and
      6.   Direct persons to various activities and enterprises, in order to
provide for maximum public convenience. (Ord. 2013-05, 2-6-2014)
   B.   The following definitions shall apply to this title:
    A-FRAME SIGN: See definition of Portable Sign.
   ABANDONED SIGN: Those signs left after the close of a business and which
have not been updated upon occupancy of a new business at the same location or
within twelve (12) months of business closure. See subsection
9-5F-2F, "Abandoned Signs", of this article.
   ANIMATED SIGN: Any sign which uses mechanical or electrical movement or
change of lighting, either natural or artificial, to depict action or to create
visual motion or the appearance thereof.
   AWNING: A rooflike cover that projects from the wall of a building for the
purpose of shielding a doorway or window from the elements.
   AWNING OR CANOPY SIGN: A sign that is part of or attached to an awning,
canopy, or other material, or structural protective cover over a door,
entrance, window, or outdoor service area.
   BALLOON SIGN: Any sign that uses blown air or a gas to remain inflated.
   BANNER: Any sign of lightweight fabric or similar material that is mounted
to a pole or a building at one or more edges. Flags shall not be considered
banners (see definition of Flag).
   BILLBOARD: A permanent structure sign which is used for the display of off
site commercial messages. The permanent structure of the sign constitutes a
principal, separate or secondary use, as opposed to an accessory use, of the
parcel on which it is located. It is a sign used as advertising for hire (e.g.,
on which display space is made available to parties, other than the owner or
operator of the sign or occupant of the parcel [not including those who rent
space from the sign owner, when such space is on the same parcel or is the same
development as the sign], in exchange for a rent, fee or other consideration).
Billboards are located off site of the location of topic being advertised or
identified.
   BUILDING ATTACHED SIGN: A sign placed on a wall, awning, canopy, parapet, or
a blade bracket. See also definitions of Wall Sign, Awning Or Canopy Sign,
Window Sign, or Projecting Sign.
   CAN SIGN: A sign which contains all the text and/or logo symbols within a
single enclosed box cabinet that is mounted to a wall or other surface. It
specifically does not include the sign cabinet that is part of a freestanding
sign.
   FIGURE 9-5F-1-1
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/08286aa2a408810754fa2332ce2e067d759ab116/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2279.jpg]
 
   CAN SIGN
    CHANNEL LETTER SIGN: A sign made up of individual letters that are
independently mounted to a wall or other surface. The "airspace" between the
letters is not part of the sign structure but rather the building facade. A
logo may also be considered a channel letter provided it is clearly
distinguishable from other sign elements.
   FIGURE 9-5F-1-2
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/08286aa2a408810754fa2332ce2e067d759ab116/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2281.jpg]
 
   CHANNEL LETTER SIGN
    CONSTRUCTION SIGN: See subsection
9-5F-2C2d of this article.
   DIRECTIONAL SIGN: An on site sign containing no commercial message,
directing pedestrians or vehicles into or out of driveways, parking areas or
other areas of the site on which the sign is located.
   ELECTION SIGN: See subsection
9-5F-2C2h of this article.
   FLAG: Any fabric or bunting containing distinctive colors, patterns, or
design that displays the symbol(s) of a nation, state, local government,
company, organization, belief system, idea, or other meaning.
   FREESTANDING SIGN: A permanent sign that is self-supporting in a fixed
location and not attached to a building. A freestanding sign can be connected
or attached to a sign structure or wall that is not an integral part of a
building. Freestanding signs include, but are not limited to, monument signs
and pylon signs.
   GAS PRICING SIGNS: Any sign identifying the brand, types, octane rating,
etc., of gasoline for sale, as required by state law.
   GATEWAY ENTRY SIGNS: A sign located at a major entrance into the city as
described in the general plan.
   GOVERNMENTAL SIGN: Any temporary or permanent sign erected and maintained by
or required by the city of Lemoore, the county of Kings, state of California,
or federal government for the purpose of providing official governmental
information to the general public, including, but not limited to, traffic
direction, city entrance, or for designation of direction to any school,
hospital, historical site, or public service, property, or facility.
   HIGHWAY ORIENTED SIGN: A freestanding sign structure with multi-tenant
identification located within one thousand feet (1,000') of a state highway and
which is not considered a "billboard".
   HIGHWAY ORIENTED SIGN PERMIT: That discretionary permit for the approval of
commercial signs that are oriented to the highway as defined in this title.
   HOME OCCUPATION SIGN: A sign located at a residence advertising a business
or profession legally conducted in the residence.
   INCIDENTAL SIGN: A sign, emblem, or decal informing the public of goods,
facilities, or services available on the premises, including, but not limited
to, restrooms, phones, credit cards, or hours of business.
   KIOSK SIGN: A freestanding sign structure that provides removable panel
inserts that each contain directional information. A kiosk is located off site
from the location it is providing information to.
   LOGO: A graphical mark or symbol used to identify a company, organization,
product or brand.
   MARQUEE OR CHANGEABLE COPY SIGN: A sign, or portion thereof, with
characters, letters, or illustrations that can be changed or rearranged
manually without altering the face or surface of the sign. A sign on which the
message or characters change more than twelve (12) times per day shall be
considered an animated sign and not a changeable copy sign for purposes of this
title.
   FIGURE 9-5F-1-3
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/08286aa2a408810754fa2332ce2e067d759ab116/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2283.jpg]
 
   MARQUEE OR CHANGEABLE COPY SIGN
    MENU/ORDER BOARD SIGN: A sign installed in a drive- through facility and
oriented so as to be visible primarily by drive-through customers.
   MONUMENT SIGN: A sign constructed upon a solid appearing base or pedestal
(typically stone, brick, or concrete), the total width of which is at least
fifty percent (50%) of the overall height of the sign.
   FIGURE 9-5F-1-4
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/08286aa2a408810754fa2332ce2e067d759ab116/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2285.jpg]
 
   MONUMENT SIGN
    MOVING SIGN: Any sign of which all or any part thereof revolves or moves in
any fashion whatsoever.
   PENNANT: Any lightweight plastic, fabric, or other material, whether or not
containing a message of any kind, attached to a rope, wire, or string, usually
in a series, designed to move in the wind and attract attention.
   PERMANENT SIGN: A sign that is entirely constructed out of durable
materials, is fixed in place, and is intended to exist for more than thirty
(30) days.
   POLE SIGN: An on site freestanding sign, supported by a sign structure from
the ground which identifies businesses located on the same parcel or in the
same development on which the sign is located. Pole signs are supported by one
or more metal or wood posts, pipes, or other vertical supports. When the
support structure is not integrated into the overall design of the sign, these
are prohibited in all districts.
   PORTABLE SIGN: Any sign that is not permanently attached to a building or to
the ground and may be easily moved. Portable signs are often configured with an
A-frame or T-frame.
   FIGURE 9-5F-1-5
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/08286aa2a408810754fa2332ce2e067d759ab116/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2287.jpg]
 
   PORTABLE SIGN
    PROJECTING SIGN: A sign that projects perpendicular from a structure
(bracket sign) or is hung beneath a canopy (blade sign).
   FIGURE 9-5F-1-6
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/08286aa2a408810754fa2332ce2e067d759ab116/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2289.jpg]
 
   PROJECTING SIGNS
    PUSHPIN LETTER SIGN: A sign comprising individual letters that are
independently mounted to a wall or other surface. Such sign may be illuminated
by an external light source, such as pendant lighting. The "airspace" between
the letters is not part of the sign structure but rather the building facade.
   FIGURE 9-5F-1-7
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/08286aa2a408810754fa2332ce2e067d759ab116/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2291.jpg]
 
   PUSHPIN LETTER SIGN
    PYLON SIGN: An on site freestanding sign, supported by a sign structure
from the ground which identifies businesses located on the same parcel or in
the same development on which the sign is located. Pylon signs are designed
such that the support structure and the sign face are designed as one
architecturally unified and proportional element. Also see definitions of
Monument Sign and Pole Sign.
   FIGUR E
9-5F-1-8
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/08286aa2a408810754fa2332ce2e067d759ab116/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2293.jpg]
 
   PYLON SIGN
    REAL ESTATE SIGN: See subsection
9-5F-2C2e of this article.
   REVERSE CHANNEL LETTER SIGN: A sign comprising individual letters that are
independently mounted to a wall or other surface, with lights mounted behind
the letters that face the wall behind. Lights illuminate the space around the
channel letters rather than the channel letters themselves, creating a
"reverse" lighting effect (e.g., halo effect). The "airspace" between the
letters is not part of the sign structure but rather the building facade.
   FIGURE 9-5F-1-9
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/08286aa2a408810754fa2332ce2e067d759ab116/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2295.jpg]
 
   REVERSE CHANNEL LETTER SIGN
    SIGN: Any device, structure, fixture, or placard displaying graphics,
symbols, and/or written copy for the primary purpose of communicating with the
public. Notwithstanding the foregoing, the following do not fall within the
definition of a sign:
      1.   Interior signs. Signs or other visual communicative devices that are
located entirely within a building or other enclosed structure or site which is
not visible from the exterior thereof, or located at least three feet (3') from
the window on the interior of the structure.
      2.   Architectural features. Decorative or architectural features of
buildings (not including lettering, trademarks or moving parts).
      3.   Symbols embedded in architecture. Symbols of noncommercial
organizations or concepts including, but not limited to, religious or political
symbols, when such are permanently integrated into the structure of a building;
the definition also includes foundation stones and cornerstones.
      4.   Personal appearance. Items or devices of personal apparel,
decoration or appearance, including, but not limited to, tattoos, makeup, wigs,
costumes, and masks (but not including commercial mascots).
      5.   Manufacturers' marks. Marks on tangible products that identify the
maker, seller, provider or product, and which customarily remain attached to
the product even after sale.
      6.   Fireworks, candles, and artificial lighting. The legal use of
fireworks, candles and artificial lighting not otherwise regulated by this
title.
      7.   Mass transit graphics. Graphic images mounted on trains or duly
licensed mass transit vehicles that legally pass through the city.
      8.   Vehicle and vessel insignia. As shown on street legal vehicles and
properly licensed watercraft: license plates, license plate frames,
registration insignia, noncommercial messages, messages relating to the
business of which the vehicle or vessel is an instrument or tool (not including
general advertising) and messages relating to the proposed sale, lease or
exchange of the vehicle or vessel.
      9.   Newsracks and newsstands.
      10.   Shopping carts and golf carts.
      11.   Vending machines that do not display off site commercial messages
or general advertising messages.
      12.   Graphic images that are visible only from above, such as those
visible only from airplanes or helicopters, but only if not visible from the
street surface or public right of way.
      13.   Holiday and cultural observance decorations that are on display for
not more than forty five (45) calendar days per year (per parcel or use) and
which do not include commercial advertising messages.
   SIGN FACE: That area or portion of a sign on which copy is intended to be
placed.
   SIGN PROGRAM: A written description of the signs for new multi-tenant
shopping centers, office parks, and other multi- tenant, mixed use, or
otherwise integrated developments of three (3) or more separate tenants/uses
that share buildings, public spaces, landscape, and/or parking facilities.
   SUBDIVISION DIRECTIONAL SIGN: A temporary or otherwise limited term sign for
the purpose of providing direction for vehicular and/or pedestrian traffic to
the initial home sales of multiple lots with a single builder within a master
planned community, including both single-family and multi-family for sale
products. All other home sales are included within the definition of "real
estate sign".
   SUBDIVISION PERMANENT IDENTIFICATION SIGN: A sign located at the entrance to
the subdivision for the purpose of a permanent identification of the
subdivision. Such signs are of a permanent nature, usually constructed of long
lasting, weather resistant materials such as stone or metal.
   SUBDIVISION SIGN: A sign identifying the initial home sale and location of
land and/or multiple lots with a single builder within an approved residential
subdivision/master planned community, including both single-family and multi-
family for sale products, or new/substantially renovated apartment complex of
more than twenty five (25) units.
   TEMPORARY SIGN: A sign not constructed or intended for long term use.
Typically, temporary signs are not physically suitable for display longer than
thirty (30) days. If a sign does not qualify as a "structure" under the
building code, it is presumably a temporary sign, but subject to the
interpretation of the planning director. Examples of temporary signs include
banners, vertical banners, stick signs, and A-frame signs.
   VINYL SIGN: A sign constructed of vinyl or plastic that is affixed to a
building with adhesive, bolts, screws, or other similar method.
   WALL SIGN: A sign attached directly to an exterior wall of a building or
dependent upon a building for support with the exposed face of the sign located
in such a way as to be substantially parallel to such exterior building wall to
which it is attached or supported by.
   WAYFINDING SIGN: An off site sign that directs pedestrians and vehicular
traffic to major destinations in the city.
   WINDOW SIGN: A sign attached to, suspended behind, placed, or painted upon
the window or glass door of a building and intended for viewing from the
exterior of such building. This definition does not include merchandise offered
for sale on site, when on display in a window. This definition does not include
window tinting, shading or coloring without graphics, symbols, or written copy.
(Ord. 2013-05, 2-6-2014; amd. Ord. 2015-08, 1-5-2016)
9-5F-2: ADMINISTRATIVE PROVISIONS:
This section describes the administrative provisions for signage regulation,
including permit requirements and review procedures, policies for review of
signs, signs exempt from permit requirements, and prohibited signs.
   A.   Permit Required: The following permits or entitlements shall be
required for signs:
      1.   Zoning Clearance Required: Zoning clearance shall be required for
all permanent signs (building-attached, freestanding, and highway oriented)
prior to erection, relocation, alteration, or replacement of a sign, unless
otherwise exempted by this article. Zoning clearance is conducted as part of
the review of the building permit as provided in section
9-2B-3, "Zoning Clearance", of this title. No planning approvals shall be
required for general maintenance of existing conforming signs or the
replacement of a conforming sign face (including message) when the area of the
sign is not being changed and a building permit is not required (e.g., the
replacement of a sign face on a legal conforming sign). A sign permit is also
not required for the establishment of temporary signs; however, such signs
shall be consistent with the development standards and time duration limits
established in this article.
      2.   Sign Program: A sign program shall be required for all new multi-
tenant shopping centers, office parks, and other multi- tenant, mixed use, or
otherwise integrated developments of three (3) or more separate tenants/uses
that share buildings, public spaces, landscape, and/or parking facilities. A
sign program provides a process for the city's review of, and decisions related
to, requests for signs for multi-tenant projects. The intent of a sign program
is to establish a shared sign design or theme that to which all future tenants
must adhere. The process for application, review, and decision regarding a sign
program shall be as established in section
9-2B-13, "Sign Program", of this title.
      3.   Highway Oriented Sign Permit: A highway oriented sign permit shall
be required for all highway oriented signs as provided in this article. The
process for application, review, and decision regarding a highway oriented sign
permit shall be as established in section
9-2B-18, "Highway Oriented Sign Permit", of this title.
      4.   Variances: Applications for a variance from the terms of this
article shall be reviewed according to the variance procedures set forth in
section
9-2B-16, "Variance", of this title.
   B.   Policies For Signage Regulations: The following policies regarding
signage in the city are established:
      1.   Regulatory Interpretations: The requirements of this article shall
not be interpreted to nullify any easements, covenants, or other private
agreements that provide for more restrictive sign regulations than are required
by this article.
      2.   Message Neutrality: It is the city's policy and intent to regulate
both commercial and noncommercial signs in a viewpoint neutral and/or content
neutral manner. The message of the sign shall not be reviewed except to the
minimum extent necessary to identify the type of sign.
      3.   Message Substitution: Subject to the property owner's consent, a
noncommercial message of any type may be substituted in whole or in part for
the message displayed on any sign for which the sign structure or mounting
device is authorized pursuant to this article, without consideration of message
content. Such substitution of message may be made without any additional
approval or permitting. The purpose of this requirement is to prevent any
inadvertent favoring of commercial speech over noncommercial speech, or
favoring of any particular noncommercial message over any other noncommercial
message. In addition, any on site commercial message may be substituted, in
whole or in part, for any other on site commercial message, provided that the
sign structure or mounting device is authorized pursuant to this article,
without consideration of message content. This requirement does not create a
right to increase the total amount of signage on a parcel, lot, or land; does
not affect the requirement that a sign structure or mounting device be properly
permitted; does not allow a change in the physical structure of a sign or its
mounting device; and does not allow for the substitution of an off site
commercial message in the place of an on site commercial or noncommercial
message.
      4.   On Site/Off Site Distinction: Within this article, the distinction
between on site and off site signs applies only to commercial messages.
      5.   General Prohibition: Permanent signs not expressly permitted by this
article are prohibited.
      6.   Exceptions To Limitations: Any exception to the limitations listed
herein shall require a variance pursuant to section
9-2B-16, "Variance", of this title. However, consideration of the variance
request shall not evaluate the message or graphic design of the sign.
      7.   Indecent Or Obscene Matter: To the extent allowed by law, signs with
any statements or words of an obscene, indecent, or immoral character, or any
picture or illustration of any human figure in such detail as to offend public
morals or decency, or any other matter or thing of an obscene, indecent, or
immoral character shall be prohibited.
   C.   Exemptions From Permit Requirements: The following sign types are
expressly exempted from the permit requirements of this article but still must
satisfy any and all other applicable permit requirements when necessary (e.g.,
building, electrical, plumbing, grading, encroachment):
      1.   Exempt Signs Without Limitations: The following signs are exempt
from sign permit and city review requirements:
         a.   Change of copy that does not alter the size, location, or
illumination of a conforming sign.
         b.   All devices which are excluded from the definition of a "sign" as
set forth in this title.
         c.   Official traffic signs or other municipal governmental signs,
legal notices, advertisements prescribed by law and placed by governmental
entities, and signs indicating the location of buried utility lines or any
notice posted by a governmental officer in the scope of his or her duties.
         d.   Direction, warning, or information signs or structures required
or authorized by law, or by federal, state, county, or city authority,
including, but not limited to, traffic control signs (e.g., stop, yield),
highway route number signs, and construction zone signs.
         e.   Noncommercial utility company signs identifying cables, conduits,
and dangerous situations.
         f.   Street address signs on buildings and building identification
signs consistent with the city adopted building code or relevant provisions of
the city municipal code. Notwithstanding anything in this section, street
address signs may be illuminated and may contain reflective paint or material.
         g.   Tablets and plaques, installed by the city or a historical
organization, including names of buildings and date of erection.
         h.   Signs and advertising for the California state lottery as
authorized by California Government Code section 8880 et seq.
         i.   Gas pricing signs, as required by State law, which identify the
brand, types, octane rating, etc., of gasoline for sale within the City 1 .
This does not limit the approval and design requirement for permanent or
temporary placement and approval provisions listed herein.
         j.   Signs on vehicles and vessels, including license plates, license
plate frames, registration insignia, noncommercial messages, messages relating
to the business for which the vehicle or vessel is an instrument or tool (not
including general advertising, such as mobile billboards), and messages
relating to the proposed sale, lease, or exchange of the vehicle or vessel.
(Ord. 2013-05, 2-6-2014)
      2.   Exempt Signs With Limitations: The following signs are exempt from
sign permit and City review, provided that they meet the size, height,
duration, and/or maximum number limitations listed:
         a.   Window signs in conformity with this article.
         b.   Temporary signs in conformity with this article.
         c.   Flags, provided they meet the requirements in subsection
9-5F-4B10 of this article. (Ord. 2017-06, 5-16-2017)
         d.   Signs on property undergoing construction or remodeling not
exceeding thirty two (32) square feet each in area and limited to one (1) sign
for each street frontage. Such signs shall not be illuminated. Such signs shall
be removed within thirty (30) days of the earliest of the following events:
final building inspection approval, issuance of a valid certificate of
occupancy, opening for business to the public, or expiration of the building
permit.
         e.   Signs on property for sale, lease, or rental as follows:
            (1)   On residential property, one (1) sign not exceeding eight (8)
square feet and not exceeding a height of five feet (5'). On weekends and
holidays, up to four (4) signs to direct traffic to the subject property are
allowed, provided each sign does not exceed eight (8) square feet in area and
three and one-half feet (31/2') in height. A sign shall not be placed on the
sidewalk or street or where it creates a safety hazard. The sign shall not be
illuminated.
            (2)   On nonresidential, downtown, and mixed use property, one (1)
sign per street frontage, not exceeding thirty (30) square feet in area or ten
feet (10') in height. The sign shall not be illuminated.
         f.   Signs on property where there is a garage, yard, or estate sale
taking place. Such signs may be posted for no more than forty eight (48) hours
and must be removed at the end of the sale. A maximum of six (6) square feet is
allowed per sign. For further information, see section
3-8-4, "Advertising Signs", of the Municipal Code.
         g.   On site directional signs, such as exit, entrance, or other on
site traffic directional signs. The maximum height of any directional sign
shall be forty two inches (42") and the maximum size shall be six (6) square
feet. No advertising or message other than for traffic direction shall be
displayed.
         h.   Noncommercial signs, as defined in this Code, consistent with the
following requirements:
            (1)   Six (6) square feet of signage, set back at least five feet
(5') from the public right-of-way and not projecting above the roofline of any
structure.
            (2)   During the time period beginning ninety (90) days before a
special, general, or primary election and ending three (3) weeks after such
election, the total allowed sign area for noncommercial signs may be increased
by an additional thirty (30) square feet in area (for a total of 36 square
feet). The same setback and height restrictions listed above shall apply to
this additional area. (Ord. 2013-05, 2-6-2014)
   D.   Prohibited Signs: The signs listed in this subsection are inconsistent
with the purposes and requirements of this chapter as described below and as
such are prohibited in all zoning districts, unless specifically authorized by
another requirement of this article.
      1.   Any sign not specifically in accordance with the requirements of
this chapter.
      2.   Billboards (off site signs with commercial message), as defined in
this article. The city prohibits the construction, erection, or use of any
billboards other than those that legally exist in the city, or for which a
valid permit has been issued and has not expired, as of the date on which this
provision is first adopted. No permit shall be issued for any billboard which
violates this policy, and the city will take immediate enforcement or abatement
action against any billboard constructed or maintained in violation of this
policy.
      3.   Roof signs or signs placed above the roofline.
      4.   Animated, flashing, scrolling, or video screen signs (e.g.,
electronic reader board sign) where the message changes more frequently than
once every seven (7) seconds. Other types of signs such as barber poles or
electronic reader board signs that change message less frequently than once
every seven (7) seconds may be permitted consistent with the requirements of
this article.
      5.   Pennants, pinwheels, and other signs that utilize two (2) or more
light bulbs in a wire string; paraphernalia composed of paper unless displayed
inside a window; or signs displayed outdoors that are composed of paper or
other lightweight material that could not be securely anchored, would easily
degrade, or could not withstand limited exposure to the elements (e.g., a paper
sign whose writing would become illegible if exposed to water, or a cardboard
sign taped to a building exterior that could easily blow away).
      6.   Pole signs, as defined in this article. Note that freestanding signs
constructed with poles as the substructure where the poles are encased to
incorporate design features are not considered pole signs.
      7.   Signs which are mobile, rotate, or move.
      8.   Signs placed on the public right of way or affixed to an element or
structure on the public right of way, or located on a publicly owned tree,
fence, or utility pole or otherwise posted on public property, except where
required by a governmental agency; and signs on private property affixed to a
fence; or signs affixed to a tree, shrub, rock, or other natural object on
private property.
      9.   Inflatable balloon signs, including, but not limited to, individual
balloons, balloon strings, and other inflatable objects made of a flexible
material and inflated so as to be lighter than air.
      10.   Signs painted upon a fence.
      11.   Signs affixed to vehicles or trailers that advertise or promote a
business. This prohibition does not apply to signs permanently affixed to the
side of a business or commercial vehicle or to signs required by state or
federal law (e.g., contractor's license number) as exempted in the definition
of a sign.
      12.   Signs attached to light standards (poles) unless part of a sign
program or street banner program.
      13.   Signs affixed to a structure or property not owned by the person
installing the signs without the written consent of an owner. (Ord. 2015-08, 1-
5-2016)
   E.   Nonconforming Signs: Except as otherwise provided by this section, all
existing signs which do not meet the requirements of this article shall be
deemed nonconforming signs and shall either be removed or brought into
compliance with the city's municipal code when a substantial alteration to the
sign is made. Change of copy shall not be deemed a substantial alteration. For
purposes of this section, a "substantial alteration" shall be defined as repair
or refurbishing of any sign that alters its physical dimensions or height, or
replaces any integral component of the sign including, but not limited to,
alterations to exterior cabinets, bases, or poles. Customary maintenance, such
as repainting the sign text, cabinet, or other component of the sign, or
routine replacement of border and trim with substantially the same colors and
materials, in its existing approved physical configuration and size dimensions
at the specific location approved by the city shall not constitute substantial
alteration.
   F.   Abandoned Signs: "Abandoned signs" shall be those signs left after the
close of a business and which have not been updated upon occupancy of a new
business at the same location. The following standards shall apply to
conforming and nonconforming abandoned signs:
      1.   If a sign is maintained, the sign copy shall be replaced with blank
sign copy within ninety (90) days of the close of the business (e.g., no
utility service, not open for more than 2 weeks).
      2.   A sign that is maintained with blank copy shall only be allowed to
remain for nine (9) months (for a total of 12 months from business closure). At
the conclusion of this time period, the planning director shall send a notice
stating that the sign shall be removed.
      3.   Abandoned signs that are not maintained or removed consistent with
the requirements of this section may be abated by the city and reimbursed by
the property owner. (Ord. 2013-05, 2-6-2014)
 
Notes
1 1. BPC §§13530-13540.
9-5F-3: GENERAL SIGN PROVISIONS:
This section describes the procedures for measurement of signs (including area
and height) and construction and maintenance requirements.
   A.   Sign Area Measurement Procedures: Generally, the area of a sign shall
be measured as the overall length of the sign multiplied by the overall height
of each segment of copy or logo. See
figure 9-5F-3-A1, "Sign Area", of this section.
   FIGURE 9-5F-3-A1
   SIGN AREA
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/08286aa2a408810754fa2332ce2e067d759ab116/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2297.jpg]
 
      1.   Awning Or Canopy Signs: Sign copy which is applied to an awning or
canopy shall be computed at one hundred percent (100%) of the area within a
single rectangle enveloping the sign copy.
      2.   Freestanding Signs: Freestanding signs are to be computed as total
height by the total length of the sign for one side regardless if it is single
or double face, excluding framework of separate single wood post or masonry
column and single wood or masonry beam. The base of a monument sign is not part
of the sign. See
figure 9-5F-3-A2, "Freestanding Sign Area", of this section.
   FIGURE 9-5F-3-A2
   FREESTANDING SIGN AREA
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/08286aa2a408810754fa2332ce2e067d759ab116/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2339.jpg]
 
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/08286aa2a408810754fa2332ce2e067d759ab116/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2337.jpg]
 
      3.   Three-Dimensional Objects: Where a sign consists of one or more
three-dimensional objects (e.g., balls, cubes, clusters of objects, sculptures,
or statuelike trademarks), the sign area shall be measured as their maximum
visible surface area from any vantage point. See
figure 9-5F-3-A3, "Area Of Three-Dimensional Objects", of this section.
   FIGURE 9-5F-3-A3
   AREA OF THREE-DIMENSIONAL OBJECTS
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/08286aa2a408810754fa2332ce2e067d759ab116/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2299.jpg]
 
   B.   Sign Height Measurement: Sign height shall be measured from the
uppermost part of the sign used in determining the area of the sign to the
lowest elevation at the base of the sign.
   C.   Construction Requirements: Every sign and all parts, portions, and
materials thereof shall be manufactured, assembled, and erected in compliance
with all applicable state, federal, and city laws and regulations, including
the locally adopted building code. All signs shall comply with the following
criteria:
      1.   All transformers, equipment, programmers, and other related items
shall be screened and/or painted to match the building or shall be concealed
within the sign.
      2.   All permanent signs shall be constructed of quality, low maintenance
materials such as metal, concrete, natural stone, glass, and acrylics.
Techniques shall be incorporated during construction to reduce fading and
damage caused by exposure to sunlight or degradation due to other elements.
      3.   All freestanding signs that incorporate lighting shall have
underground utility service.
      4.   All temporary signs and banners shall be made of a material designed
to maintain an attractive appearance for as long as the sign is displayed.
   D.   Clearance From Public Utility Facilities: The person erecting a sign
and the owner of the premises shall maintain any legally required clearance
from communications and electric facilities. A sign may not be constructed,
erected, installed, maintained, or repaired in any manner that conflicts with a
rule, regulation, or order of the California public utilities commission
pertaining to the construction, operation, and maintenance of public utilities
facilities.
   E.   Interference With Motorist Field Of Vision:
      1.   No sign shall be located in a manner which may obstruct or interfere
with the view of a traffic signal or other traffic regulatory signs. No sign
shall, as determined by the public works director, be so located as to create a
hazard to the life or property of any person using the public right of way.
      2.   Any required on site landscaping may be trimmed as needed to provide
maximum visibility of the sign or signs.
      3.   Signs shall not be located within the clear visibility area.
   F.   Sign Siting:
      1.   Location Of Building-Attached Signs: Building signs may be located
along any frontage of a building that faces directly onto a public right of way
or an internal circulation path of the site. Orientation of signs such that
they face directly onto residential property is to be avoided and is allowed
only when there is no practical alternative and the visibility of the sign from
the residence is minimized and not illuminated.
      2.   Setback And Spacing Of Freestanding Signs:
         a.   The minimum setback distance for freestanding signs shall be
measured from the back of the public right of way or side of a driveway. Unless
an encroachment permit is granted, all freestanding signs shall be located
outside of the public right of way and any required clear visibility area.
         b.   The minimum spacing distance between permanent freestanding
signs, excluding on site directory and menu/order board signs, shall be two
hundred fifty feet (250'), except that highway oriented signs shall be
separated a greater distance as described in subsection
9-5F-5D, "Highway Oriented Signs", of this article. This section shall not be
used to deny a site the placement of a freestanding sign.
   G.   Maintenance Requirements: Every sign and all parts, portions, and
materials thereof shall be maintained and kept in proper repair. The display
surface of all signs shall be kept clean, neatly painted, and free from rust
and corrosion. Any cracked, broken surfaces, malfunctioning lights, missing
sign copy, or other nonmaintained or damaged portions of a sign shall be
repaired or replaced within thirty (30) days following notification by the
city. Noncompliance with such a request will constitute a nuisance condition
and zoning violation and will be enforced as such.
   H.   Sign Removal Or Replacement: When a sign is removed or replaced, all
brackets, poles, and other structural elements that support the sign shall also
be removed. Affected building surfaces shall be restored to match the adjacent
portion of the structure. This requirement does not apply to routine
maintenance. (Ord. 2013-05, 2-6-2014)
9-5F-4: DESIGN STANDARDS FOR SIGNS:
   A.   General Sign Design Requirements: The following criteria shall be
utilized for permanent on site signs. Signs shall comply with general design
standards as provided here in addition to design standards applicable only to
unique sign types as provided in subsection B, "Design Standards For Specific
Sign Types", of this section.
      1.   Sign Illumination: The artificial illumination of signs, either from
an internal or external source, shall be designed so as not to cast stray light
on surrounding rights of way and properties. The following requirements shall
apply to all illuminated signs:
         a.   External light sources shall be directed and shielded to limit
direct illumination of an object other than the sign;
         b.   The light from an illuminated sign shall not be of an intensity
or brightness that will create glare or other negative impacts on residential
properties in direct line of sight to the sign;
         c.   Unless otherwise permitted by another requirement of this
article, signs shall not have blinking, flashing, or fluttering lights, or
other illumination devices that have a changing light intensity, brightness, or
color;
         d.   Colored lights shall not be used at a location or in a manner so
as to be confused or constructed as traffic control devices; and
         e.   Light sources shall utilize energy efficient fixtures to the
greatest extent possible and shall comply with title 24 of the California code
of regulations.
   B.   Design Standards For Specific Sign Types: In addition to the general
sign design requirements in subsection A, "General Sign Design Requirements",
of this section, the following requirements shall apply to the specific sign
types:
      1.   A-Frame Signs: A-frame signs, where permitted under section
9-5F-6, "Standards For Temporary On Site Signs", of this article, shall be
placed at least fifteen feet (15') behind the face of curb and outside the city
right of way; except that in the downtown they may be located on the sidewalk
in front of the business. No A-frame signs may be placed where they may
obstruct vision or create other public safety hazards or ADA obstruction. A-
frame signs shall be removed during all times when the business is closed.
      2.   Awning And Canopy Signs: Awning and canopy signs may be permitted
only as an integral part of the awning or canopy to which they are attached or
applied and shall be considered wall signs for signage area calculation
purposes. The following requirements shall apply:
         a.   Lettering shall be located within the middle seventy percent
(70%) of the awning area.
         b.   Only permanent signs that are an integral part of the awning or
architectural projection shall be allowed. Temporary signs shall not be placed
on awnings.
         c.   Awning signs shall only be allowed for first and second story
occupancies.
         d.   Awnings shall not be lighted from under the awning (backlit) so
that the awning appears internally illuminated. Lighting directed downward that
does not illuminate the awning is allowed.
      3.   Marquee Or Changeable Copy Sign: These types of signs shall be
considered to be the same as any other type of sign and shall be regulated
based on their location; i.e., if located on a wall, they shall be deemed wall
signs. There shall be at least seven feet (7') of clearance between the bottom
of the sign and the sidewalk immediately below the sign. No such sign shall
project over the public right of way closer than five feet (5') to the curb
line of a street or have a sign area exceeding one hundred (100) square feet.
Electric (digital) changeable copy signs shall not change message more than one
time every seven (7) seconds and intensity shall be adjusted between day and
night hours to not be a safety hazard.
      4.   Freestanding Signs: Freestanding signs, including monument and pylon
signs, shall only be permitted as follows:
         a.   In an effort to promote full architectural integration of signs,
voids between the sign face and the sign structure are prohibited. Either the
sign face shall utilize the full width of the sign structure or coverings that
are architecturally consistent with the rest of the sign shall be used to fill
any voids. Monument and pylon signs, as defined in this title, are the
preferred sign type for freestanding signs.
   FIGURE 9-5F-4-B1
   FREESTANDING SIGN WITH VOIDS
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/08286aa2a408810754fa2332ce2e067d759ab116/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2301.jpg]
 
         b.   Freestanding signs may only be constructed as follows:
            (1)   For sites with less than three hundred feet (300') of street
frontage, a monument sign is permitted consistent with the requirements of this
article.
            (2)   For sites with three hundred feet (300') or more of street
frontage, a monument or pylon sign is permitted. Multiple adjoining properties
that individually do not have at least three hundred feet (300') for frontage
may establish a joint use easement to allow sharing of one sign. Such
combination shall first require the approval of a sign program for all
properties.
      5.   Projecting Signs: Projecting signs, including, but not limited to,
blade signs, bracket signs, and marquee signs, shall be considered wall signs
for the purposes of sign area calculations. Projecting signs shall only be
permitted as follows:
         a.   Location: Projecting signs shall be placed only on ground floor
facades, except for businesses located above the ground level with direct
exterior pedestrian access.
         b.   Angle Of Projection: Projecting signs shall either be located at
right angles to the building front along the building facade, or, when located
on the corner of a building, at a forty five degree (45°) angle to the corner
of the building.
         c.   Height: The lowest point of a blade or bracket sign shall be a
minimum of six feet eight inches (6'8") above grade.
         d.   Projection: The sign may project a maximum of five and one- half
feet (51/2') from the building.
         e.   Sign Structure: Sign supports and brackets shall be compatible
with the design and scale of the sign.
      6.   Wall Signs:
         a.   Wall signs shall be compatible with the predominant visual
architectural elements of the building facade.
         b.   Wall signs shall not project more than fourteen inches (14") from
the building facade.
         c.   Wall sign raceways shall be concealed from public view (e.g.,
within the building wall or otherwise integrated with the design of the sign
and building) so as to not detract from the architectural character of the
building. (Ord. 2013-05, 2-6-2014)
         d.   Channel letters, reverse channel letters, and pushpin letters are
preferred. (Ord. 2015-08, 1-5-2016)
         e.   Signage containing multiple elements (e.g., logo and text) on one
facade shall be designed so that the multiple elements are located and scaled
with relationship to each other and the building they are attached to.
      7.   Temporary Sign: In addition to the standards of section
9-5F-6, "Standards For Temporary On Site Signs", of this article, no temporary
sign shall be day-glo or fluorescent in color.
      8.   Window Sign:
         a.   Window signs shall not take up more than twenty five percent
(25%) of the total window area of the establishment.
         b.   Window signs shall not count toward the overall allowed permanent
signage allowed for an establishment but the message may be changed out on a
regular basis similar to a temporary sign. (Ord. 2013-05, 2-6-2014)
      9.   Can Sign: A can sign shall at all times have a sign face installed
so that the inside of the can sign's box is not visible. To meet this
requirement, the sign face may be blank. (Ord. 2015-08, 1-5-2016)
      10.   Flags And Flagpoles: Flagpoles may be mounted on the ground, a
roof, or a building wall. Ground-mounted flagpoles shall not be located within
any required side or rear yard setback areas. Flags and flagpoles shall also
meet the following size standards:
         a.   Ground-mounted flagpoles located in the RC, ML, or MH Zones shall
have a maximum height of fifty feet (50') or a maximum height equal to twice
the distance from the base of the pole to the closest lot line, to a maximum of
one hundred feet (100'), whichever is greater.
         b.   Ground-mounted flagpoles located in the AR, RVLD, RLD, RN, RLMD,
RHD, W, AG, PR, or DMX-3 Zones shall have a maximum height of thirty feet
(30'), mounted on the ground.
         c.   Ground-mounted flagpoles located in the DMX-1, DMX-2, MU, CN, PO,
or CF Zones shall have a maximum height of fifty feet (50').
         d.   Roof-mounted flagpoles shall have a maximum height equal to the
height of the building plus thirty feet (30').
         e.   The maximum width (hoist) of an individual flag on a ground-
mounted or roof-mounted flagpole shall be equal to twenty percent (20%) of the
height of the flagpole upon which it is located. The maximum length (fly) of an
individual shall be twice the allowed width (hoist). (Ord. 2017-06, 5-16-2017)
   C.   Design Standards For Specific Sign Types In The Downtown Mixed Use Zone
Districts: In addition to the general sign design requirements in subsection A,
"General Sign Design Requirements", of this section, the following requirements
shall apply to the specific sign types located in the Downtown Mixed Use Zone
Districts:
      1.   Awning Sign:
         a.   Lettering shall only be allowed on valance flaps and shall not
exceed ten inches (10") in height; it shall also be located within the middle
seventy percent (70%) of the valance area.
         b.   Logos, symbols, and graphics are allowed on the shed (slope)
portion of an awning, not exceeding nine (9) square feet.
         c.   Awning signs are only permitted on first and second story
occupancies.
         d.   Awnings may be illuminated through spotlighting (e.g., pendants)
directed at the face of the awning.
      2.   Bracket Sign, Marquee Sign, And Projecting Sign:
         a.   These signs shall not be longer than eight feet (8') and shall
not be taller than four feet (4').
         b.   These signs shall maintain a minimum vertical clear space to
sidewalk of eight feet (8').
         c.   An encroachment agreement is required when this sign is placed
over the public sidewalk. These signs shall maintain a minimum two foot (2')
clear space to curb.
         d.   These signs may be internally or externally illuminated; however,
internally illuminated signs shall be designed so that only the letters, logos,
numbers, or symbols appear illuminated. The background of the sign shall not be
illuminated, such as with a can sign.
         e.   Marquee and projecting signs shall not be attached to the sloping
face of mansard overhangs or other architectural devices intended to resemble
or imitate roof structures.
      3.   Channel Letter, Pushpin, Reverse Channel Letter, And Wall Sign:
         a.   These signs shall not extend above an eave or parapet. When
located along a fascia, they shall not extend beyond the vertical distance of
the fascia.
         b.   These signs shall be placed flat against the wall and shall not
project from the wall more than required for normal construction purposes and
in no case more than twelve inches (12"). The designated approving authority
may modify this requirement in special circumstances where a projection greater
than twelve inches (12") may be desirable to allow the creation of an
especially creative and unique sign design.
         c.   These signs shall be located within the middle seventy percent
(70%) of the building or occupancy frontage.
         d.   These signs shall not cover or obstruct any portion of a window
or architectural element.
         e.   These signs may be internally or externally illuminated; however,
internally illuminated signs shall have opaque face panels so that only the
letters, logos, numbers, or symbols appear illuminated.
      4.   Portable Sign:
         a.   One (1) portable sign shall be permitted per establishment. In
the case of multiple establishments having a common entrance, only one (1)
portable sign shall be permitted per entrance. Examples include, but are not
limited to, mall buildings.
         b.   The maximum size for portable signs shall be eight (8) square
feet. The maximum height allowed shall be four feet (4').
         c.   Portable signs shall be made of long lasting, durable materials
such as wood and metal. Portable signs shall not be made of cardboard or poster
board.
      5.   Window Sign: A window sign shall not make up more than twenty five
percent (25%) of the window area.
      6.   Signs Using Neon Light: Neon light may be used, provided the sign is
compatible with the design character of the building. (Ord. 2013-05, 2-6-2014)
9-5F-5: STANDARDS FOR PERMANENT ON SITE SIGNS:
The standards of this section provide the regulations for on site signs on
private property, including height, size, placement, and illumination.
Regulations are listed based upon zoning district and sign type.
   A.   Format And Organization Of Standards: The signage standards listed
below are summarized, where applicable, in table format for ease of use and
organization. Concepts described in these tables are as follows:
      1.   Collective Sign Area: The total sign area allowed herein for each
sign type may be distributed among the maximum number of signs permitted for
that sign type.
      2.   Cumulative Sign Area Allowance: Allowable sign area is either a set
square footage per establishment or is based on a ratio of allowable sign area
to primary building frontage (i.e., 1 square foot of sign per 1 linear foot of
primary building frontage, or 1 sf/1 lf). Where a ratio is described, it
applies to the maximum sign area listed in
table 9-5F-5-B1, "Signage Standards For Permanent On Site Signs By Zoning
District", of this section. The sign area allowed for permanent on site signs
shall be independent of the area allowed for temporary signs as provided in
section
9-5F-6, "Standards For Temporary On Site Signs", of this article.
   B.   General Standards: Except as provided in subsections C, "Menu/Order
Board Signs For Drive-In And Drive-Through Uses", and D, "Highway Oriented
Signs", of this section, permanent on site signs shall be consistent with the
standards listed in
table 9-5F-5-B1 of this section as listed by base zoning district. The types of
signs permitted in each district are specified in
table 9-5F-5-B2, "Allowed Types Of Permanent On Site Signs By Zoning District",
of this section. Only those signs specified in the tables shall be permitted.
TABLE 9-5F-5-B1
SIGNAGE STANDARDS FOR PERMANENT ON SITE SIGNS BY ZONING DISTRICT
Sign Type Development Standards
          Maximum Number Permitted Maximum Area Maximum Height
                    Development Standards
Sign Type           Maximum Number      Maximum Area         Maximum Height
                    Permitted
Residential and
Special Purpose
Districts (AR,                                              
RVLD, RLD, RN,
RLMD, RMD, RHD, W,
AG, PR, CF):
Home occupations:                                           
Building-attached   1 sign per          2 square feet        Roofline
sign                residence
Permanent
subdivision                                                 
identification
signs:
Freestanding sign
(monument or        1 per subdivision   30 square feet each, 10 feet
attached to a       entrance            60 square feet total
masonry wall)
Other
nonresidential                                              
uses:
Building-attached   1 per establishment 40 square feet       Roofline
sign
Freestanding sign   1 per site          40 square feet       6 feet
Downtown Mixed Use
Districts (DMX-1,                                           
DMX-2, DMX-3):
                                        2 square feet/
                                        1 linear foot on
                                        primary frontage and
                                        1.5 square feet/
Building attached                       1 linear foot on
signs               No maximum          secondary frontage;  Roofline
                                        maximum 100 square
                                        feet per sign and
                                        200 cumulative
                                        square feet per
                                        establishment
                    Non-residential
Freestanding signs  uses only: 1 per    20 square feet       4 feet
                    site
Mixed Use District                                          
(MU):
                                        1.5 square feet/
Building-attached                       1 linear foot
signs               No maximum          collectively,        Roofline
                                        maximum 150 square
                                        feet
Freestanding signs:                                         
A-frame sign        1 per establishment 8 square feet        5 feet
                                        maximum
Freestanding sign   1 per project       50 square feet per   12 feet
                    entrance            sign
Neighborhood
Commercial District                                         
(NC):
                                        2 square feet/
Building-attached                       1 linear foot
signs               No maximum          collectively,        Roofline
                                        maximum 200 square
                                        feet
Freestanding signs  1 per site          50 square feet per   12 feet
                                        sign
Regional Commercial                                         
District (RC):
                                        2.5 square feet/
Building-attached                       1 linear foot
signs               No maximum          collectively,        Roofline
                                        maximum 400 square
                                        feet
                                                             See standards by
Freestanding signs  1 per street        100 square feet per  sign type in
                    frontage            sign                 table 9-5F-5-B2 of
                                                             this section
Professional Office                                         
District (PO):
Building-attached   1 per establishment 40 square feet per   Roofline
signs                                   sign
Freestanding signs  1 per street        40 square feet per   10 feet
                    frontage            sign
Industrial                                                  
Districts (ML, MH):
                                        1.5 square feet/
Building-attached   1 per street        1 linear foot
signs               frontage per        collectively,        Roofline
                    establishment       maximum 400 square
                                        feet
                                                             See standards by
Freestanding signs  1 per site          100 square feet per  sign type in
                                        sign                 table 9-5F-5-B2 of
                                                             this section
 
(Ord. 2013-05, 2-6-2014; amd. Ord. 2017-06, 5-16-2016; Ord. 2023-01, 6-18-2024)
TABLE 9-5F-5-B2
ALLOWED TYPES OF PERMANENT ON SITE SIGNS BY ZONING DISTRICT1
          Zoning District
          Nonresidential Uses
Sign Type In AR, RVLD, RLD,   DMX-1 DMX-2 DMX-3 MU NC RC PO MLMH Maximum Height
          RN, RLMD, RMD, RHD,
          W, AG, PR, CF
              Zoning District
              Nonresidential
              Uses                                                 Maximum
Sign Type     In AR, RVLD,   DMX-1 DMX-2 DMX-3 MU  NC  RC  PO MLMH Height
              RLD, RN, RLMD,
              RMD, RHD, W,
              AG, PR, CF
Building-                                                           
attached:
Awning        A              A     A     A     A   A   A   N  N    Roofline
Can           N              N     N     N     A   A   A   A  A    Roofline
Channel       A              A     A     A     A   A   A   A  A    Roofline
letter
Marquee/
changeable    N              A     N     N     N   A   A   N  N    Roofline
copy sign
(electric)
Marquee/
changeable    A              A     N     N     A   A   A   N  N    Roofline
copy sign
(nonelectric)
Projecting    A              A     A     A     A   A   A   N  N    Roofline
Pushpin       A              A     A     A     A   A   A   A  A    Roofline
Reverse
channel       A              A     A     A     A   A   A   A  A    Roofline
letter
Vinyl         A              N     N     N     A   A   A   A  A    Roofline
Window        A              A     A     A     A   A   A   A  A    Roofline
Freestanding:                                                       
Monument      A              A     A     A     A   A   A   A  A    See next row
Max. height   6'             4'    4'    4'    12' 12' 16' 6' 12'   
(feet)
Pole          N              N     N     N     N   N   N   N  N    -
                                                                   Height of
                                                                   tallest
Pylon         N              N     N     N     N   A   A   N  A    building on
                                                                   site or 40',
                                                                   whichever is
                                                                   less
With marquee/                                                      Height of
changeable    N              N     N     N     A   A   A   N  N    monument or
copy sign                                                          pylon sign
(nonelectric)
 
Note:
   1.   An "A" means the sign type is allowed; an "N" means the sign type is
not allowed.
(Ord. 2015-08, 1-5-2016)
   C.   Menu/Order Board Signs For Drive-In And Drive-Through Uses: Each drive-
in or drive-through use is permitted a maximum of sixty (60) square feet of
menu/order board signage. The sign(s) shall not count as a sign for purposes of
table
9-5F-5-B1, “Signage Standards For Permanent On Site Signs By Zoning District”,
of this section, either in terms of number or cumulative area. The maximum
height for a menu/order board sign shall be six feet (6').
   D.   Highway Oriented Signs: Properties in the mixed use, neighborhood
commercial, regional commercial, professional office, and industrial zoning
districts and within five hundred feet (500') of the centerline of State
Highways 41 or 198 may, upon issuance of a highway oriented sign permit,
establish a highway oriented sign consistent with the following provisions, in
addition to other provisions of this article:
      1.   Permit Requirements: All highway oriented signs require the approval
of a highway oriented sign permit prior to issuance of a building permit. The
procedures for application, review, and decision of a highway oriented sign
permit are as provided in section
9-2B-18, “Highway Oriented Sign Permit”, of this title.
      2.   Number: One highway oriented sign shall be permitted per either:
         a.   Integrated developments, as defined in this title, consisting of
three (3) or more tenants; or
         b.   Sites with a single tenant.
      3.   Height: The maximum height of highway oriented signs shall be as
follows:
         a.   For single-tenant signs, a maximum of sixty feet (60');
         b.   For multi-tenant signs, a maximum of eighty feet (80');
      4.   Location:
         a.   Spacing Between Signs: No highway oriented sign shall be located
closer than eight hundred feet (800') from any other highway oriented sign. A
lesser spacing distance may be allowed through approval of the highway oriented
sign permit, provided the designated approving authority makes the following
findings:
         (1)   The reduced distance between highway oriented signs will not
cause a safety impact or create sign clutter contrary to a small town
atmosphere.
         b.   Setbacks: All portions of signs must be set back a minimum of ten
feet (10') from the highway right-of-way or other distance as determined by
Caltrans. All highway oriented signs must be distanced from any residential
district by a minimum of two hundred feet (200').
         c.   Visibility: Highway oriented signs shall not be located to
inhibit pedestrian or vehicular visibility and more specifically shall not be
located within the “clear visibility area” as defined in this title.
Illuminated signs shall be directed away from any residentially designed land.
         d.   Additional Restrictions: See title 7, chapter 4, “Advertising
Displays Adjacent To Freeways”, of the Municipal Code for additional citing
restrictions along landscaped freeways.
      5.   Area: Highway oriented signs shall comply with the following
limitations on sign area:
         a.   In neighborhood commercial and regional commercial zoning
districts: The maximum allowed sign area for single tenant highway oriented
signs shall be three hundred (300) square feet per side. For multi-tenant
signs, the total maximum sign area shall be twelve hundred (1,200) square feet
per side with each tenant space limited to three hundred (300) square feet. The
maximum tenant space may exceed 300 square feet for the main tenant if the sum
of all square footage does not exceed 300 square feet per tenant sign.
Ancillary components of the sign, such as shopping center identification, shall
not exceed twenty five percent (25%) of the total sign area and shall be
excluded from the calculation of the total maximum sign area.
         b.   In mixed use, professional office, and industrial zoning
districts: The maximum allowed sign area for single tenant highway oriented
signs shall be one hundred (100) square feet per side. For multi-tenant signs,
the total maximum sign area shall be six hundred (600) square feet per side
with each tenant space limited to one hundred (100) square feet.
         c.   Cumulative Sign Area: The area of a highway oriented sign shall
not be counted toward the cumulative maximum sign area of the underlying
property.
         d.   Accommodation for 19th Avenue Off-ramp: Due to the length of the
19th Avenue off-ramp, the maximum allowed sign area for properties within 1,000
feet of the crossing of 19th Avenue over Highway 198 may increase their maximum
allowed sign areas by thirty percent (30%).
      6.   Architecture: Highway oriented signs shall be designed as pylon
signs or pole signs. Pole signs shall include either a structural or
architectural base from which the pole extends. The base shall be a minimum 50%
wider than the diameter of the pole and a minimum twelve feet (12') high as
measured from the ground unless an alternate design is approved by the
Director. Highway oriented signs shall be composed of materials and design that
are aligned with the purpose of this chapter and the community design element
of the general plan. Examples of exterior sign materials include, but are not
limited to, stucco, brick, wood panels, marble, aluminum, and roof structures.
The community development director may modify or waive these architectural
design standards upon finding that the proposed sign provides an alternative
architectural design that is aesthetically equivalent to or greater than these
standards.
      7.   Illumination: All highway oriented signs must be internally lit.
Signs shall not have blinking, flashing, or fluttering lights or other
illuminating devices that have a changing light, brightness, or color.
Changeable copy LED lights are allowed to be incorporated into the structure so
long as they change no more than every seven (7) seconds and shall adjust
intensity between day and night so as to not be a safety hazard. Sign lighting
shall meet the sign lighting standards found in the latest version of the
California Energy Commission’s Nonresidential Compliance Manual.
   E.   Murals:
      1.   The City encourages murals as a way to add visual interest to a
building or area. As such, murals of a noncommercial nature shall be excluded
from the allowed sign area for a property.
      2.   Murals are allowed on facades of buildings other than the side with
the main entrance. The mural may encompass the entire surface area of the wall
but shall not project onto the roof.
      3.   No person shall paint a mural on the exterior of any structure or
change any existing mural on the exterior of any structure prior to the
issuance of a mural permit issued by the City Council. An application for a
mural permit shall be submitted on the form prescribed by the Community
Development Director. (Ord. 2013-05, 2-6-2014; amd. Ord. 2018-03, 5-15-2018;
Ord. 2024-01, 6-18-2024)
9-5F-6: STANDARDS FOR TEMPORARY ON SITE SIGNS:
This section describes standards for temporary on site signs. Temporary signs
may include, but are not limited to, commercial signs for grand openings or for
special product, sale, or event advertising. All temporary signs must comply
with the standards listed in
table 9-5F-6-D1, "Temporary On Site Sign Allowances And Design Standards", of
this section and are subject to the following:
   A.   Time Duration:
      1.   Generally: Display periods for temporary on site signs shall be
limited to a maximum of thirty (30) days, provided that the same type of
temporary sign was not located on the site for a minimum of thirty (30) days
prior to display and the same type of temporary sign will not be displayed for
a minimum of thirty (30) days after unless described otherwise in this section.
      2.   Subdivision Signs: All temporary signs for subdivisions shall be
removed within ten (10) days after all lots in the subdivision are sold.
Subdivision signs at new or substantially renovated apartments shall be removed
six (6) months from opening.
      3.   A-Frame Signs: A-frame signs shall be removed each night at close of
business.
   B.   Illumination: Temporary signs shall not be illuminated.
   C.   Message: Temporary signs displaying a commercial message shall be
limited to on site signage only.
      TABLE 9-5F-6-D1
      TEMPORARY ON SITE SIGN ALLOWANCES AND DESIGN STANDARDS
          Standards
Sign Type Maximum Temporary Maximum Area Maximum Height Minimum Setback From
          Number Permitted                              ROW
                Standards
                Maximum
Sign Type       Temporary       Maximum Area   Maximum Height Minimum Setback
                Number                                        From ROW
                Permitted
On site subdivision signs or new/substantially renovated apartment complexes:
Banner          3               30 sf each     Roofline       10'
                1 per
                subdivision
                entrance or 1
Entrance signs  per 50 lots,    80 sf each     15'            10'
                whichever is
                greater,
                maximum 5
Model home sign 1 per model     15 sf          5'             5'
                home
                5 per street
Flags           frontage,       20 sf          25'            10'
                maximum 15 per
                subdivision
Commercial uses:
                                1 sf/1 lf of
Banner                          frontage to a  Roofline
                1 sign per      maximum of 100
                establishment   sf
                per street      1 sf/1 lf of                  15' behind face
Vertical banner frontage        frontage to a  10'            of curb, outside
                                maximum of 20                 of right of way
                                sf
Stick sign      No more than 1  5 sf           5'
A-frame         type per street 10 sf          5'
                frontage
 
(Ord. 2013-05, 2-6-2014)
9-5F-7: STANDARDS FOR OFF SITE SIGNS:
   A.   General Prohibition: Except as outlined below, all new off site
commercial signage is prohibited within the city. Existing off site commercial
signs (e.g., billboards) that are not electronic are considered nonconforming
signs as regulated by subsection
9-5F-2E, “Nonconforming Signs”, of this article. A limited number of electronic
billboards (billboards with electronically changeable copy) within the city
limits may be permitted as regulated by Section
9-5F-9 “Electronic Billboards”, of this article. Additionally, consistent with
state law, the city does permit off site subdivision directional signs
(subdivision kiosk signs) as provided in this section.
   B.   Subdivision Kiosk Sign: The purpose of subdivision kiosk signs is to
direct the traffic related to new residential subdivisions in a manner that
minimizes visual clutter, reduces unnecessary traffic through established
neighborhoods, and provides an orderly, attractive, high quality image of the
city. When originally placed, kiosk signs will require a sign permit as
required by this title and their locations approved within or outside of the
city's right of way.
      1.   Kiosks shall include removable sign panels with no more than one
panel per residential subdivision.
      2.   Kiosks shall not exceed sixty (60) square feet in sign area, twelve
feet (12') in height, and five feet (5') in width with signage at least thirty
six inches (36") off the ground. Proposed kiosks exceeding these dimensions
require approval through the conditional use permit process.
      3.   No directional kiosk may be located within one thousand five hundred
feet (1,500') of another directional kiosk except in the case of signs on
different corners of an intersection, unless an unusual situation causes the
need for a deviation as determined by the city.
      4.   All directional kiosk signs placed on private property shall have
the written consent of the property owner. All directional kiosk signs placed
on city right of way/lighting landscape maintenance district area/public
facility maintenance district area shall obtain an encroachment permit.
      5.   The review of a proposed directional kiosk will include size,
height, design, materials, and colors.
      6.   The directional kiosk sign may only be located in a manner that does
not obstruct the view of traffic or safety signs, encroach within the clear
visibility area, or otherwise pose a traffic or safety hazard.
      7.   There shall be no additions, tag signs, streamers, balloons, flags,
devices, display boards, or appurtenances added to the subdivision kiosk signs
as originally approved.
      8.   The city may deny an application for a directional kiosk or revoke
an existing permit where an applicant, permittee, or developer with a panel on
a kiosk fails to comply with these provisions.
      9.   Panels on directional kiosk signs may not be displayed after a
subdivision developer has completed the sale of all units in the development.
Each developer shall be responsible for their removal. (Ord. 2013-05, 2-6-2014)
   C.   Temporary Off Site Signs Advertising A Nonprofit Event: Up to a maximum
of five (5) temporary off site signs that advertise a nonprofit event to be
held at a specific time, date, and place may be displayed up to twenty one (21)
days prior to the date of the event. The sign face shall be no greater than
thirty two (32) square feet, and the maximum height of the sign shall be six
feet (6'). The sign's material and composition shall have a professionally made
appearance, and shall be either a wooden sign with two (2) posts or attached to
a wall, or a vinyl or vinyl like banner attached to a wall or fence. Signs
shall be placed at least five feet (5') behind the public right of way, and
shall not be placed without the property owner's permission. Signs shall be
removed within three (3) days of the end of the event.
(Ord. 2015-08, 1-5-2016; amd. Ord. 2025-02, 4-1-2025)
9-5F-8: STANDARDS FOR SIGNS ON CITY PROPERTY AND WITHIN PUBLIC RIGHTS OF WAY:
   A.   Purpose And Intent: The purpose of this section is to provide the
process and standards for establishing signage on city property and public
rights of way. In adopting this section, the city council acts in its
proprietary capacity as to "city property", as defined in this title, within
the city. This section is adopted pursuant to the city's general powers,
property rights, Government Code sections 65850(b), 38774, and 38775, Business
And Professions Code section 5200 et seq., and Penal Code section 556 et seq.
   B.   Intent As To Public Forum: The city declares its intent that not all
city property and public rights of way shall function as a designated public
forum, unless some specific portion of city property or public rights of way is
designated herein as a public forum of one particular type. In such case, the
declaration as to public forum type shall apply strictly and only to the
specified area and for the specified time period.
   C.   General Prohibition: Unless specifically authorized by this chapter, no
signs may be displayed on city property or within public rights of way by
private parties. Any sign posted on city property or within public rights of
way in violation of this section may be summarily removed by the city as a
trespass and a public nuisance.
   D.   Governmental Signs: Unless specifically authorized by this chapter,
only the city, or other local or state governmental agencies, may display signs
on city property or within public rights of way.
   E.   Temporary Signs Displaying Noncommercial Message: In areas qualifying
as traditional public forums, private persons may display noncommercial message
signs thereon, provided that such signs conform to all of the following:
      1.   The signs must be personally held by a person or personally attended
by one or more persons. "Personally attended" means that a person is physically
present within five feet (5') of the sign at all times.
      2.   The maximum aggregate size of all signs held or personally attended
by a single person is six (6) square feet. For purposes of this rule, apparel
and other aspects of personal appearance do not count toward the maximum
aggregate sign area. (Ord. 2016-04, 4-19-2016)
      3.   The maximum size of any one sign which is held or personally
attended by two (2) or more persons is fifty (50) square feet, measured on one
side only.
      4.   The sign must have no more than two (2) display faces and may not be
inflatable or air activated.
      5.   In order to serve the city's interests in traffic flow and safety,
persons displaying signs under this section may not stand in any vehicular
traffic lane when a roadway is open for use by vehicles, and persons displaying
signs on public sidewalks must give at least five feet (5') width clearance for
pedestrians to pass by. Persons holding signs may not obstruct the "clear
visibility area", as defined in this title.
      6.   The message substitution policy of this chapter applies only to
traditional public forum areas. (Ord. 2013-05, 2-6-2014)
   F.   Street Banner/Sign Program:
      1.   The street banner/sign program is limited to signs, banners, or
other displays placed by the city over or on city streets, relating to any
civic or public events or activities.
      2.   For purposes of this section, "civic event or activity" shall mean
the following: Any event or activity organized or sponsored by the city,
including, but not limited to:
         a.   Any public program or educational activity; and
         b.   The commemoration or celebration of any historical date, event or
person, holiday, or persons or events of local, state, or national
significance.
      3.   For purposes of this section, "sponsored by" shall mean the city is:
         a.   Participating in an official capacity in the planning,
preparation or promotion of the event or activity; or
         b.   Contributing twenty five percent (25%) of the total estimated
costs of the civic event or activity, or at least one thousand dollars
($1,000.00), whichever is less. This contribution may take the form of funds,
labor, staff time, materials, fee subsidies, or any combination of the
foregoing.
      4.   Street banners shall be allowed to be displayed up to thirty (30)
days prior to the event and shall be removed within nine (9) days after the
event has ended.
      5.   Street signs shall be located so as not to obscure vision or create
other public safety hazards as determined by the public works director.
(Ord. 2016-04, 4-19-2016)
9-5F-9: ELECTRONIC BILLBOARDS:
   A.   Intent and Purpose. It is the intent of this section to allow a limited
number of electronic billboards (billboards with electronically changeable
copy) within the city limits through the Conditional Use Permit process and
subject to design standards.
   B.   General Provisions.
      1.   No billboard shall be constructed, relocated, or upgraded within the
city without a Conditional Use Permit (CUP) unless otherwise allowed by this
Chapter. Each application shall be considered separately and individually.
Multiple billboards shall not be combined into a single application. Multiple
faces on a single billboard shall be submitted as a single application. CUP
requests will be heard in the order that complete applications are received.
      2.   The City may permit a total of up to four (4) electronic billboards
within city limits through the CUP process. No new billboards that are not
electronic shall be permitted. Any existing legal nonconforming billboard in
place at the time of the approval of this section may not be converted to an
electronic billboard.
      3.   All CUPs approved for electronic billboards shall require that the
placement, design, and operations standards in this section be met. The
Planning Commission or City Council may add additional conditions based on
specific circumstances.
   C.   Placement.
      1.   Electronic billboards shall only be permitted within 200 feet of
Highway 198 or Highway 41 and only in the Regional Commercial (RC), Light
Industrial (ML), or Parks and Recreation/Ponding Basin (PR) zone districts.
      2.   No electronic billboard shall be placed within 1,000 feet of another
electronic billboard on the same side of the highway. No electronic billboard
shall be placed within 300 feet of a highway-oriented sign on the same side of
the highway.
   D.   Design.
      1.   The total height of an electronic billboard shall not exceed 60 feet
to the top of the billboard. The bottom of the billboard face shall be no lower
than 30 feet. These standards may be adjusted in the CUP process where the
billboard is adjacent to an elevated highway.
      2.   The electronic billboard sign support shall be a single pole with
façade-like embellishments wrapped around the pole. The materials used in the
sign support embellishments shall be primarily natural stone, brick, approved
masonry panels, stucco, or architectural metal.
      3.   Electronic billboards must have clearance or necessary approvals in
writing from Caltrans Outdoor Advertising prior to issuance of the building
permit.
      4.   No portion of the electronic copy on the sign face shall change more
frequently than once every six seconds.
      5.   The electronic sign shall not emit any audible sound, buzz, or
noise. The electronic copy shall be limited to no more than thirty lumens
output, measured at 10 feet from the sign face.
   E.   Findings for Approval. The following findings shall be made by the
approving authority before a Conditional Use Permit is approved:
      1.   The proposed sign is consistent with the general plan and all
applicable provisions of this title; and
      2.   The establishment, maintenance, or operation of the electronic
billboard will not, under the circumstances of the particular case (location,
size, design, and operating characteristics), be detrimental to the health,
safety, peace, morals, comfort, or general welfare of persons residing or
working in the neighborhood of such use, or the general welfare of the city;
and
      3.   The proposed electronic billboard would not create a traffic or
safety problem, including problems associated with on-site access circulation
or visibility; and
      4.   The proposed electronic billboard shall not constitute a hazard to
the safe and efficient operation of vehicles upon a highway; and
      5.   The electronic billboard will not cause light and glare to intrude
upon residential uses, including those in mixed-use districts or developments.
   F.   Operation.
      1.   All electronic billboards shall be maintained in a safe,
presentable, and good structural condition at all times, including the
replacement of defective parts, painting, repainting, cleaning, ensuring the
sign facing is not dilapidated or faded, and other acts required for the
maintenance of such billboard.
      2.   The operator of an electronic billboard sign shall provide to the
City of Lemoore Community Development Department 24-hour contact information
for a person who has the authority and ability to turn off the electronic sign
promptly after a malfunction occurs. Any sign not properly functioning needs to
be repaired to the City’s satisfaction within 30 days of written notice or be
potentially subject to CUP revocation.
      3.   The operator of an electronic billboard shall coordinate with the
local authorities to display, when appropriate, emergency information important
to the traveling public, including, but not limited to, Amber Alerts and other
alerts of emergency situations. Emergency information messages shall remain in
the advertising rotation according to the protocols of the agency that issues
the information.
      4.   The Planning Commission or City Council may require that the City be
provided with message time to advertise events or provide civic information on
the electronic billboard with no or a reduced fee.
(Ord. 2025-02, 4-1-2025)
ARTICLE G. AFFORDABLE HOUSING INCENTIVES (DENSITY BONUS)
SECTION:
9-5G-1: Purpose
9-5G-2: Eligibility For Density Bonus And Incentives And Concessions
9-5G-3: General Provisions For Density Bonus And Incentives And Concessions
9-5G-4: Number And Types Of Density Bonuses And Incentives And Concessions
Allowed
9-5G-5: Location Of Density Bonus Units
9-5G-6: Continued Availability
9-5G-7: Process For Approval Or Denial
9-5G-1: PURPOSE:
The purpose of this article is to provide incentives for the production of
housing for very low income, lower income, moderate income, special needs, and
senior households in the city of Lemoore and to establish procedures for
carrying out the legislative requirements and complying with California
Government Code section 65915 et seq. In enacting this article, it is the
intent of the city to facilitate the development of affordable housing by
positively impacting the economic feasibility of providing lower income housing
and implementing the goals, objectives, and policies of the city's housing
element. (Ord. 2013-05, 2-6-2014)
9-5G-2: ELIGIBILITY FOR DENSITY BONUS AND INCENTIVES AND CONCESSIONS:
   A.   The city shall grant one density bonus, with concessions or incentives,
as specified in section
9-5G-4, "Number And Types Of Density Bonuses And Incentives And Concessions
Allowed", of this article, when the applicant for the residential development
seeks and agrees to construct a residential development, excluding any units
permitted by the density bonus awarded pursuant to this article, that will
contain at least one of the following. The units qualifying a development for a
density bonus shall be referred to as "target units". The applicant shall
specify which of the following is the basis for the density bonus:
      1.   Ten percent (10%) of the total units of a housing development for
lower income households;
      2.   Five percent (5%) of the total units of a housing development for
very low income households;
      3.   A senior citizen housing development or age restricted mobilehome
park; or
      4.   Ten percent (10%) of the total dwelling units in a common interest
development as defined in California Civil Code section 4000 et seq., for
persons and families of moderate income, provided that all units in the
development are offered to the public for purchase. (Ord. 2013-05, 2-6-2014)
9-5G-3: GENERAL PROVISIONS FOR DENSITY BONUS AND INCENTIVES AND CONCESSIONS:
The following general requirements apply to the application and determination
of all incentives and bonuses:
   A.   Rounding: All density calculations resulting in fractional units shall
be rounded up to the next whole number; except that the percentage of total
units proposed to qualify the development for a density bonus shall not be
rounded up. For example, for a two hundred (200) unit project that proposes
twenty one (21) lower income units (or 10.5 percent), the allowed density bonus
would be based on ten percent (10%) lower income units, not eleven percent
(11%).
   B.   Relation To General Plan, Zoning: The granting of a density bonus, or a
concession or incentive, shall not be interpreted, in and of itself, to require
a general plan amendment, zoning change (rezone), or other discretionary
approval.
   C.   Density Bonus Excluded In Calculation: The density bonus shall not be
included when calculating the total number of housing units that qualifies the
housing development for a density bonus.
   D.   Parking: Upon request by the applicant, the city shall not require that
a housing development meeting the requirements of section
9-5G-2, "Eligibility For Density Bonus And Incentives And Concessions", of this
article provide a vehicular parking ratio, inclusive of handicapped and guest
parking that exceeds the following:
      1.   Zero (studio) to one bedroom: One on site parking space per unit.
      2.   Two (2) to three (3) bedrooms: Two (2) on site parking spaces per
unit.
      3.   Four (4) or more bedrooms: Two and one-half (2.5) parking spaces per
unit.
If the total of parking spaces required for a housing development is other than
a whole number, the number shall be rounded up to the next whole number. For
purposes of this subsection, a development may provide "on site parking"
through tandem parking or uncovered parking, but not through on street parking.
   E.   Waived Or Reduced Development Standards: The city shall not apply any
development standard that would have the effect of physically precluding the
construction of a housing development meeting the requirements of section
9-5G-2, "Eligibility For Density Bonus And Incentives And Concessions", of this
article at the densities or with the incentives or concessions permitted by
this article. A proposed waiver or reduction of development standards shall
neither reduce nor increase the number of allowable incentives or concessions
under section
9-5G-4, "Number And Types Of Density Bonuses And Incentives And Concessions
Allowed", of this article.
An applicant may submit to the city a proposal for the waiver or reduction of
development standards, when standards would have the effect of physically
precluding the proposed development, and may request a meeting with the city.
Nothing in this subsection, however, shall be interpreted to require the city
to waive or reduce development standards if:
      1.   The waiver or reduction would have a specific adverse impact, as
defined in paragraph (2) of subdivision (d) of section 65589.5 of the
California Government Code, upon health and safety or the physical environment
and for which the city determines there is no feasible method to satisfactorily
mitigate or avoid the specific adverse impact;
      2.   This would have an adverse impact on any real property that is
listed in the California register of historical resources; or
      3.   The waiver or reduction would be contrary to state or federal law.
   F.   Multiple Zoning Districts: If the site of a development proposal is
located in two (2) or more zoning districts, the number of dwelling units
permitted in the development is the sum of the dwelling units permitted in each
of the zoning districts based on the site acreage within each zoning district.
The permitted number of dwelling units may be distributed within the
development without regard to the zone boundaries.
   G.   City Authority: Nothing in this article shall be construed to enlarge
or diminish the authority of the city to require a developer to donate land as
a condition of development.
   H.   Agreement Required:
      1.   Prior to the award of a density bonus and any related incentives or
concessions, the applicant shall enter into an agreement with the city to
ensure the continued affordability of all target units.
      2.   For all target units, the agreement shall specify the household
income classification, number, location, size, and construction scheduling and
shall require target units in a project and phases of a project to be
constructed concurrently with the construction of nontarget units. The
agreement shall include such other provisions as necessary to establish
compliance with the requirements of this article.
   I.   Reports: The applicant shall submit financial or other reports along
with the application for the project to establish compliance with this article.
The city may retain a consultant to review any financial report (pro forma).
The cost of the consultant shall be borne by the applicant, except that if the
applicant is a nonprofit organization, the cost of the consultant may be paid
by the city upon prior approval of the city council. (Ord. 2013-05, 2-6-2014)
9-5G-4: NUMBER AND TYPES OF DENSITY BONUSES AND INCENTIVES AND CONCESSIONS
ALLOWED:
   A.   Density Bonus: A housing development that satisfies the eligibility
requirements in section
9-5G-2, "Eligibility For Density Bonus And Incentives And Concessions", of this
article shall be entitled to the following density bonus:
      1.   For developments providing ten percent (10%) lower income target
units, the city shall provide a twenty percent (20%) increase above the
otherwise maximum allowable residential density as of the date of application,
plus a one and a half percent (1.5%) supplemental increase over that base for
every one percent (1%) increase in low income target units above ten percent
(10%). The maximum density bonus allowed including supplemental increases is
thirty five percent (35%).
      2.   For developments providing five percent (5%) very low income target
units, the city shall provide a twenty percent (20%) increase above the
otherwise maximum allowable residential density as of the date of application,
plus a two and a half percent (2.5%) supplemental increase over that base for
every one percent (1%) increase in very low income target units above five
percent (5%). The maximum density bonus allowed including supplemental
increases is thirty five percent (35%).
      3.   For senior citizen housing developments, a flat twenty percent (20%)
of the number of senior units.
      4.   For common interest developments providing ten percent (10%)
moderate income target units, the city shall provide a five percent (5%)
increase above the otherwise maximum allowable residential density as of the
date of application, plus a one percent (1%) increase in moderate income units
above ten percent (10%). The maximum density bonus allowed including
supplemental increases is thirty five percent (35%).
   B.   Number Of Incentives Or Concessions: In addition to the density bonus
described in this section, an applicant may request specific incentives or
concessions. The applicant shall receive the following number of incentives or
concessions:
      1.   One incentive or concession for projects that include at least ten
percent (10%) of the total units for lower income households, at least five
percent (5%) for very low income households, or at least ten percent (10%) for
persons and families of moderate income in a common interest development.
      2.   Two (2) incentives or concessions for projects that include at least
twenty percent (20%) of the total units for lower income households, at least
ten percent (10%) for very low income households, or at least twenty percent
(20%) for persons and families of moderate income in a common interest
development.
      3.   Three (3) incentives or concessions for projects that include at
least thirty percent (30%) of the total units for lower income households, at
least fifteen percent (15%) for very low income households, or at least thirty
percent (30%) for persons and families of moderate income in a common interest
development.
      4.   The city shall grant the concession or incentive requested by the
applicant unless it makes a written finding of any of the following:
         a.   The concession or incentive is not required in order to provide
for affordable housing costs, as defined in section 50052.5 of the Health And
Safety Code, or for rents for the targeted units to be set as specified in
subdivision (c).
         b.   The concession or incentive would have a specific adverse impact,
as defined in paragraph (2) of subdivision (d) of section 65589.5 of the
California Government Code, upon public health and safety or the physical
environment or on any real property that is listed in the California register
of historical resources and for which there is no feasible method to
satisfactorily mitigate or avoid the specific adverse impact without rendering
the development unaffordable to low and moderate income households.
         c.   The concession or incentive would be contrary to state or federal
law.
   C.   Available Incentives And Concessions:
      1.   A reduction in the site development standards or a modification of
the requirements of this title that exceed the minimum building standards
approved by the California building standards commission as provided in part
2.5 (commencing with section 18901) of division 13 of the Health And Safety
Code, including, but not limited to, a reduction in setback and square footage
requirements and in the ratio of vehicle parking spaces that would otherwise be
required and that results in identifiable, financially sufficient, and actual
cost reductions.
      2.   Approval of mixed use zoning in conjunction with the housing
development if the nonresidential land uses will reduce the cost of the housing
development and the nonresidential land uses are compatible with the housing
development and existing or planned development in the area in which the
housing development will be located.
      3.   Other regulatory incentives or concessions proposed by the applicant
or the city that result in identifiable, financially sufficient, and actual
cost reductions.
      4.   Priority processing of a housing development that qualifies for a
density bonus based on income restricted units.
   D.   Additional Density Bonus And Incentives And Concessions For Donation Of
Land To The City:
      1.   When an applicant for a tentative subdivision map, parcel map, or
other residential development approval donates land to the city and agrees to
include a minimum of ten percent (10%) of the total units before the density
bonus for very low income households, the applicant shall be entitled to a
fifteen percent (15%) increase above the otherwise maximum allowable
residential density, plus a one percent (1%) supplemental increase for each
additional percentage of very low income units to a maximum density bonus of
thirty five percent (35%) for the entire development.
      2.   The density bonus provided in this subsection shall be in addition
to any other density bonus provided by this article up to a maximum combined
density bonus of thirty five percent (35%).
      3.   The applicant shall be eligible for the increased density bonus
described in this subsection if all of the following conditions are met:
         a.   The applicant donates and transfers the land no later than the
date of approval of the final subdivision map, parcel map, or residential
development application;
         b.   The developable acreage and zoning designation of the land being
transferred are sufficient to permit construction of units affordable to very
low income households in an amount not less than ten percent (10%) of the
number of residential units of the proposed development;
         c.   The transferred land is at least one acre in size or of
sufficient size to permit development of at least forty (40) units, has the
appropriate general plan designation, is appropriately zoned with appropriate
development standards for development at the density described in paragraph (3)
of subdivision (c) of section 65583.2 of the Government Code, and is or will be
served by adequate public facilities and infrastructure;
         d.   The transferred land shall have all of the entitlements and
approvals, other than building permits, necessary for the development of the
very low income housing units on the transferred land, not later than the date
of approval of the final subdivision map, parcel map, or residential
development application, except that the city may subject the proposed
development to subsequent design review to the extent authorized by subdivision
(i) of section 65583.2 of Government Code if the design is not reviewed by the
city prior to the time of transfer;
         e.   The transferred land and the affordable units shall be subject to
a deed restriction ensuring continued affordability of the units consistent
with the requirements of this article which shall be recorded on the property
at the time of the transfer;
         f.   The land is transferred to the city or to a housing developer
approved by the city;
         g.   The transferred land shall be within the boundary of the proposed
development or, if the city agrees, within one-fourth (1/4) mile of the
boundary of the proposed development; and
         h.   A proposed source of funding for the very low income units shall
be identified not later than the date of approval of the final subdivision map,
parcel map, or residential development application.
      4.   Nothing in this subsection shall be construed to enlarge or diminish
the authority of the city to require a developer to donate land as a condition
of development.
   E.   Additional Density Bonus Or Incentives And Concessions For Development
Of Childcare Facility:
      1.   Housing developments meeting the requirements of section
9-5G-2, "Eligibility For Density Bonus And Incentives And Concessions", of this
article and including a childcare facility that will be located on the premises
of, as part of, or adjacent to the housing development shall receive either of
the following:
         a.   An additional density bonus that is an amount of square footage
of residential space that is equal to or greater than the amount of square
footage in the childcare facility;
         b.   An additional incentive or concession that contributes
significantly to the economic feasibility of the construction of the childcare
facility.
      2.   The city shall require the following as conditions of approving the
housing development:
         a.   The childcare facility shall remain in operation for a period of
time that is as long as or longer than the period of time during which the
target units are required to remain affordable, pursuant to subdivision (c) of
section 65915 of the Government Code; and
         b.   Of the children who attend the childcare facility, the children
of very low income households, lower income households, or persons or families
of moderate income shall equal a percentage that is equal to or greater than
the percentage of target units that are required pursuant to section
9-5G-2, "Eligibility For Density Bonus And Incentives And Concessions", of this
article.
      3.   Notwithstanding any other requirements of this section, the city
shall not be required to provide a density bonus or incentive or concession for
a childcare facility if it makes a written finding, based upon substantial
evidence, that the community has adequate childcare facilities.
   F.   Condominium Conversion Incentives For Low Income Housing Development:
      1.   An applicant for approval to convert apartments to a condominium
project may submit to the city a preliminary proposal pursuant to this
subsection prior to the submittal of any formal requests for subdivision map
approvals. The city shall, within ninety (90) days of receipt of a written
proposal, notify the applicant in writing of the manner in which it will comply
with this subsection.
         a.   When an applicant for approval to convert apartments to a
condominium project agrees to the following, the city shall grant either a
density bonus of twenty five percent (25%) over the number of apartments, to be
provided within the existing structure or structures proposed for conversion,
or provide other incentives of equivalent financial value;
         b.   Provide at least thirty three percent (33%) of the total units of
the proposed condominium project to persons and families of low or moderate
income, or provide at least fifteen percent (15%) of the total units of the
proposed condominium project to lower income households; and
         c.   Agree to pay for the reasonably necessary administrative costs
incurred by the city.
      2.   For purposes of this subsection, "other incentives of equivalent
financial value" shall not be construed to require the city to provide cash
transfer payments or other monetary compensation but may include the reduction
or waiver of requirements which the city might otherwise apply as conditions of
conversion approval.
      3.   Nothing in this subsection shall be construed to require the city to
approve a proposal to convert apartments to condominiums.
      4.   An applicant shall be ineligible for a density bonus or other
incentives under this subsection if the apartments proposed for conversion
constitute a housing development for which a density bonus or other incentive
was previously provided. (Ord. 2013-05, 2-6-2014)
9-5G-5: LOCATION OF DENSITY BONUS UNITS:
The location of density bonus units within the housing development may be at
the discretion of the developer. However, the target units shall be dispersed
throughout the housing development and when feasible shall contain, on average,
the same number of bedrooms as the nontarget units in the development, and
shall be compatible with the design or use of the remaining units in terms of
appearance, materials, and quality finish. (Ord. 2013-05, 2-6-2014)
9-5G-6: CONTINUED AVAILABILITY:
   A.   Minimum Thirty Years: If a housing development provides low or very low
income target units to qualify for a density bonus, the target units must
remain restricted to lower or very low income households for a minimum of
thirty (30) years from the date of issuance of the certificate of occupancy by
the building official, or longer if required by the project financing.
   B.   Common Interest Housing: In the case of a common interest housing
development providing moderate income target units to qualify for a density
bonus, the initial occupant of the target unit must be a person or family of
moderate income. Upon resale, the seller of the target units shall retain the
value of any improvements, the down payment, and the seller's proportionate
share of appreciation, and the city shall recapture any initial subsidy and its
proportionate share of appreciation which shall then be used within three (3)
years for any of the purposes described in subdivision (e) of section 33334.2
of the California Health And Safety Code that promote homeownership. The city's
initial subsidy shall be equal to the fair market value of the home at the time
of initial sale minus the initial sale price to the moderate income household,
plus the amount of any down payment assistance or mortgage assistance. If upon
resale the market value is lower than the initial market value, then the value
at the time of the resale shall be used as the initial market value. The city's
"proportionate share" shall be equal to the percentage by which the initial
sale price to the moderate income household was less than the fair market value
of the home at the time of the initial sale.
   C.   Direct Financial Contributions: Where there is a direct financial
contribution to a housing development pursuant to Government Code section
65915, the city shall assure continued availability for low and moderate income
units for thirty (30) years. (Ord. 2013-05, 2-6-2014)
9-5G-7: PROCESS FOR APPROVAL OR DENIAL:
   A.   Process For Approval: The density bonus and incentive(s) and concession
(s) request shall be considered in conjunction with any necessary development
entitlements for the project. The designated approving authority for density
bonuses, incentives, and concessions shall be the city council. In approving
the density bonus and any related incentives or concessions, the city and
applicant shall enter into a density bonus agreement.
   B.   Approval Of Density Bonus Required: The city shall grant the density
bonus requested by the applicant provided it is consistent with the
requirements of this article and state law.
   C.   Approval Of Incentives Or Concessions Required Unless Findings Made:
The city shall grant the incentive(s) and concession(s) requested by the
applicant unless the city makes a written finding, based upon substantial
evidence, of any of the following:
      1.   The incentive or concession is not required in order to provide for
affordable housing costs or affordable rent for the target units.
      2.   The incentive or concession would have a specific adverse impact, as
defined in paragraph (2) of subdivision (d) of section 65589.5 of the
California Government Code, upon public health and safety or the physical
environment or on any real property that is listed in the California register
of historical resources and for which the city determines there is no feasible
method to satisfactorily mitigate or avoid the specific adverse impact without
rendering the development unaffordable to low and moderate income households.
      3.   The concession or incentive would be contrary to state or federal
law.
   D.   Administrative Fee: The city shall charge applicants an administrative
fee to cover the city's cost to review all materials submitted in accordance
with this article and for ongoing enforcement of this article. The amount of
the administrative fee shall be established by city council resolution and
updated as required. Fees will be charged for staff time and materials
associated with:
      1.   Review and approval of applications for the proposed development;
      2.   Project marketing and lease-up; and
      3.   Long term compliance of the applicant and successors in interest to
the applicant, with respect to the affordable housing units. (Ord. 2013-05, 2-
6-2014)
CHAPTER 6
DOWNTOWN DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS
SECTION:
9-6-1: Purpose And Overview
9-6-2: Base Development Standards
9-6-3: Parking Area And Encroachments
9-6-4: Architectural Design Standards
9-6-5: Building Types And Frontages
9-6-6: Special Design And Operational Standards
9-6-7: Conversion Of Residences To Nonresidential Uses
9-6-1: PURPOSE AND OVERVIEW:
   A.   Purpose: This chapter describes the specific development and land use
standards for the downtown area of Lemoore. These standards work in concert
with the other provisions of this title to define the allowed use, development,
and design parameters for the downtown.
   B.   Overview Of Form Based Zoning: Form based zoning provides a method of
regulating development to achieve a desired urban form characterized by
building typologies, and street frontage requirements. Form based provisions
address the relationship between building facades and the public realm (e.g.,
streets and sidewalks), and the form and mass of buildings.
   C.   Applicability Of Standards: As established in chapter 3, "Zoning
Districts And Map", of this title, downtown Lemoore is broken down into three
(3) zoning districts: downtown mixed use - core (DMX-1), downtown mixed use -
auto oriented (DMX-2), and downtown mixed use - transitional (DMX-3). Chapter
4, "Land Uses", of this title identifies the allowed uses within each of these
districts. This chapter identifies the development standards and design
requirements for all new development and remodels of existing development
within these districts. Unless otherwise exempted, all development and
redevelopment in the DMX-1, DMX-2, and DMX-3 districts shall comply with the
standards in this chapter and shall be reviewed for consistency as part of site
plan and architectural review and zoning plan review.
   D.   Deviations: Deviations from this chapter shall be allowed through the
site plan and architectural review process for public/civic buildings. (Ord.
2013-05, 2-6-2014)
9-6-2: BASE DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS:
All proposed development and redevelopment of property within the downtown
shall comply with the base development standards listed in this section.
   A.   Building Placement: Each proposed new or remodeled structure shall
comply with the build-to line, setback, and buildable area standards listed in
table 9-6-2-A1, "Building Placement", of this section, except that
encroachments into the public right of way may be allowed as provided in
subsection
9-6-3B, "Encroachments", of this chapter.
      TABLE 9-6-2-A1
      BUILDING PLACEMENT
Development Standard Measurement
                     DMX-1 DMX-2 DMX-3
Development Standard            Measurement
                                DMX-1  DMX-2 DMX-3
Build-to line (maximum distance from property line):
Front                           0' 1,2 5' 3  No max.
Street side, corner lot         0' 1,2 5' 3  No max.
Setback (minimum distance from property line):
Front                           0'     0'    15'
Street side, corner lot         0'     0'    15'
Side                            0'     0'    5'
Rear, adjacent to property line 0'     0'    15'
Rear, adjacent to alley         0'     0'    0' 4
 
   Notes:
      1.   Up to 30 percent of the length of the building facade along a street
may be recessed. A higher percentage shall be allowed through site plan and
design review where the setback area provides a more meaningful pedestrian
area, such as patio seating for a restaurant, or other gathering spaces. See
figure 9-6-2-A1, "Recessed Spaces", of this section.
      2.   Exceptions shall be granted through site plan and design review for
historic home/office conversion buildings and frontages to a maximum of 20
feet.
      3.   Exceptions shall be granted through site plan and design review for
automotive related uses to a maximum setback of 30 feet.
      4.   Row houses may be developed with no side yard setback and no alley
setback as part of site plan and design review.
   FIGURE 9-6-2-A1
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/08286aa2a408810754fa2332ce2e067d759ab116/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2303.jpg]
 
   RECESSED SPACES
Up to 30 percent of the length of the building facade for each building along a
street may be recessed to create inviting pedestrian spaces such as entries,
courtyards, and patios.
   B.   Height: Height standards for development within the downtown are listed
in
table 9-6-2-B1, "Height", of this section and shown in
figure 9-6-2-B1, "Height", of this section.
TABLE 9-6-2-B1
HEIGHT
Development Standard Measurement
                     DMX-1 DMX-2 DMX-3
Development Standard  Measurement
                      DMX-1                DMX-2              DMX-3
General height standards (maximum height):
Structure height
(finished grade to    16' min., 40' max. 1 16' min., 25' max. No min., 20' max.
top of roof)
First floor ceiling
height (finished      10' min., 20' max.   9' min., 11' max.  No min. or max.
floor to finished
ceiling top plate)
Upper floor(s)
ceiling height        9' min., 11' max.    9' min., 11' max.  9' min., No max.
(finished floor to
finished ceiling)
Projections (additional height above maximum):
Parapet wall,
mechanical screen,    4' min., 8' max.     4' max.            4' max.
and sloped false
roofs
Towers, spires,
elevator structures   10' max.             10' max.           10' max.
and similar features
Vertical clearance of
architectural         8' min.              8' min.            Not allowed
features over public
right of way
 
   Note:
      1.   See special requirements for landmark buildings in subsection
9-6-4D, "Landmark Buildings", of this chapter.
   FIGURE 9-6-2-B1
   HEIGHT
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/08286aa2a408810754fa2332ce2e067d759ab116/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2305.jpg]
 
(Ord. 2013-05, 2-6-2014)
9-6-3: PARKING AREA AND ENCROACHMENTS:
   A.   Parking: In places where parking is required or provided at the option
of the property owner, parking areas shall be developed consistent with the
standards listed in
table 9-6-3-A, "Parking Area Design", of this section.
TABLE 9-6-3-A
PARKING AREA DESIGN
 
Development Standard                   Measurement
                                       DMX-1    DMX-2    DMX-3
Parking lot location (minimum setback):
Setback from front property line       10' min. 10' min. 15' min.
Setback from side property line        5' min.  5' min.  5' min.
Setback from street side property line 10' min. 10' min. 10' min.
Setback from rear property line        4' min.  4' min.  4' min.
 
   B.   Encroachments: Permanent structures or improvements, including, but not
limited to, planter boxes, seating, galleries, and awnings, are allowed within
the public right of way within the DMX-1 and DMX-2 districts with approval of
an encroachment agreement. Encroachments into the public right of way shall be
in conformance with the standards in
table 9-6-3-B1, "Encroachments", of this section and shown in figures 9-6-3-B1,
"Encroachments", and 9-6-3-B2, "Sidewalk Clearance", of this section.
TABLE 9-6-3-B1
ENCROACHMENTS
 
Development Standard              Measurement
                                  DMX-1 DMX-2 DMX-3
Encroachment location:
Front and street side (maximum    8'    8'
encroachment distance)
Clear space to curb (minimum
distance to maintain clear at all 4'    4'
times)                                        Permanent encroachments not
Clear walk path (minimum distance 4'    4'    allowed in the DMX-3 district
to maintain clear at all times)
Vertical clear area to sidewalk
(minimum distance to maintain     8'    8'
clear at all times)
 
   FIGURE 9-6-3-B1
   ENCROACHMENTS
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/08286aa2a408810754fa2332ce2e067d759ab116/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2307.jpg]
 
   FIGURE 9-6-3-B2
   SIDEWALK CLEARANCE
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/08286aa2a408810754fa2332ce2e067d759ab116/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2309.jpg]
 
(Ord. 2013-05, 2-6-2014)
9-6-4: ARCHITECTURAL DESIGN STANDARDS:
This section includes architectural design standards for all new buildings,
renovated buildings, and remodels within the downtown.
The city shall not require more than twenty percent (20%) of the construction
costs for the building to be toward architectural detailing. Documentation
showing the cost of the detailing relative to the overall cost of the structure
will only need to be submitted by the applicant if they seek relief as part of
the site plan and architectural design review process.
   A.   Architectural Details:
      1.   New and remodeled buildings within the downtown shall include
architectural detailing consistent with the design character of the DMX
district within which it is located. Design features include, but are not
limited to, the following concepts identified below and illustrated in
figure 9-6-4-A1, "Design Concepts", of this section:
         a.   Detailed cornice such as relief banding, tile banding, and accent
tiles;
         b.   Trim around windows (e.g., window hoods and lintels) and doors;
         c.   Windows with muntins or glazing bars (elements that divide the
window into multiple panes/lites) and/or mullions (structural elements that
divide adjacent window units);
         d.   Expression lines between the first and second floors of multi-
story buildings;
         e.   Transom windows on the first floor;
         f.   Recessed entries;
         g.   Large display windows that run the length of the building
frontage; and
         h.   Wainscot base treatments along the bulkhead.
   FIGURE 9-6-4-A1
   DESIGN CONCEPTS
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/08286aa2a408810754fa2332ce2e067d759ab116/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2311.jpg]
 
      2.   The physical design of building facades shall vary every twenty (20)
to thirty (30) linear feet. This can be achieved through such techniques as:
         a.   Architectural division into multiple buildings,
         b.   Break or articulation of the facade,
         c.   Significant change in facade design,
         d.   Placement of window and door openings, or
         e.   Position of awnings and canopies.
   B.   Building Materials: Building materials and finishes shall be selected
to reinforce the overall design intent of the project and be consistent with
the desired architectural character of the building. Buildings and structures
shall be constructed with durable, low maintenance, and timeless building
materials of the same or higher quality as surrounding developments. See
figure 9-6-4-B1, "Building Materials", of this section.
      1.   The following materials are encouraged, but not required:
         a.   Roofs:
            (1)   Barrel "U" shaped mission tile in a natural terra cotta or
clay earth tone color;
            (2)   Concrete tiles in terra cotta or earth tones;
            (3)   Exposed wood structural members such as rafter tails, roof
beams, and corbels;
            (4)   Copper accents, gutters, downspouts, and scuppers;
            (5)   Built up stucco or preformed molding on parapets for flat
roof buildings.
         b.   Building walls:
            (1)   Stucco (with hand troweled, smooth appearance), adobe, terra
cotta, brick, replica brick, and cut stone are all acceptable materials to use
on a main surface of a building;
            (2)   Wood surfaces in the form of lap siding or board and batten
may be used when consistent with architectural character of the building;
            (3)   Ornamental tiles, wood, and bricks can be used as trim or
accents around the base of the building;
            (4)   Split face block may be used on unexposed sides and rears of
buildings.
      2.   The following materials are prohibited:
         a.   Roofs:
            (1)   Brightly colored glazed roofing tiles; and
            (2)   Wood shingles and shake roofs.
         b.   Building walls:
            (1)   Synthetic materials of poor quality;
            (2)   Corrugated fiberglass;
            (3)   Coarsely finished or unfinished plywood;
            (4)   Metal siding;
            (5)   Unfinished concrete block and split face block;
            (6)   Shingles and T-111 siding;
            (7)   Slumpstone block; and
            (8)   Stucco when applied by sprayer (lace, sand finishes).
   FIGURE 9-6-4-B1
   BUILDING MATERIALS
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/08286aa2a408810754fa2332ce2e067d759ab116/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2313.jpg]
 
   C.   Colors And Painting: Color is an important aspect of the overall
building design and character. Palettes shall be balanced, using the correct
proportions between the lighter base colors and the brighter accent colors.
Colors are to be chosen from the city adopted historic color palette, which is
the Benjamin Moore Historic Colors palette, the America's Colors palette, and
the Ready Mixed Colors palette. See
figure 9-6-4-C1, "Building Color", of this section.
      1.   Brick: Brick shall not be painted unless it has been determined by
the chief building official that the brick has lost its fire face and clear
coat painting is necessary to assist in slowing the degradation of the brick
and mortar.
      2.   Base Color: Buildings with large expanses of blank walls shall have
a light and subtle base color. The base color on smaller buildings or those
with more elaborate detail may use slightly stronger tones. Examples of base
colors include, but are not limited to, light gray, cream, white, pale flesh,
pale yellow, light beige, sage green, and caramel.
      3.   Accent Color: Brighter accent colors shall be used minimally to
accent windows, doors, and awnings. Special materials such as glazed tile can
also be used to introduce accent colors on building facades. Examples of accent
colors include, but are not limited to, forest green, deep blue green, brick
red, deep blue, and sea green.
   FIGURE 9-6-4-C1
   BUILDING COLOR
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/08286aa2a408810754fa2332ce2e067d759ab116/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2343.jpg]
 
   D.   Landmark Buildings: The city encourages that new and remodeled
buildings on corner lots in the DMX-1 zone be developed with the following
features, achieving a concept called "landmark buildings" where corner lots
have a more prominent presence and character than interior lots.
      1.   Utilize a multi-story design (at least 2 stories tall) with full,
habitable upper floors;
      2.   Utilize corner treatments, including the use of towers, angled
entries, balconies, and plaza areas;
      3.   Incorporate a higher level of architectural treatment than interior
lots, including, but not limited to, articulated parapets and enhanced facade
detail and trim (e.g., detailed cornice and expression line).
   E.   Lighting: Lighting shall be used to enhance the architectural details
of a building, such as spotlighting for a shadow effect, to provide security to
a building and to indicate whether a business is open. In addition to the
requirements of section
9-5B-4, "Outdoor Lighting", of this title, development within the downtown
shall comply with the following lighting standards:
      1.   Lighting fixtures shall be attractively designed to complement the
architecture of the project. Accent lighting should be used to accent building
details such as tower elements, ornamental windows, and tile, or to accent
landscaping.
      2.   Lighting should improve visual identification of residences and
businesses and create an inviting atmosphere for passersby.
      3.   Wall mounted lights should be used to the greatest extent possible
to minimize the total number of freestanding light standards and shall be well
detailed to complement the building architecture.
      4.   Parking lot lighting fixtures should not exceed twenty four feet
(24') in height. When within fifty feet (50') of residential properties,
fixtures should not exceed eighteen feet (18').
      5.   The light source used in outdoor lighting should provide a warm,
calm glow, such as yellow light.
      6.   Street lighting shall be provided consistent with the city's
improvement standards and other adopted lighting standards for the downtown,
including specifically the type and style of historic light fixture similar to
those existing in downtown. See
figure 9-6-4-E1, "Street Lighting", of this section for an example.
   FIGURE 9-6-4-E1
   STREET LIGHTING
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/08286aa2a408810754fa2332ce2e067d759ab116/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2341.jpg]
 
   F.   Roof Forms: The following are the required design of roofs within the
downtown. See
figure 9-6-4-F1, "Roof Forms", of this section.
      1.   Parapet walls shall be used on all flat roof buildings to screen
roof mounted mechanical equipment. Parapets shall always include a cap and
corner detail.
      2.   The visible portion of sloped roofs should be sheathed with a
roofing material complementary to the architectural style of the building and
other surrounding buildings.
      3.   Simple, low pitched gable and shed roofs should be used with Spanish
styled architecture. Terra cotta Spanish tile with detailed corbels and rafter
tails can also be used.
   FIGURE 9-6-4-F1
   ROOF FORMS
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/08286aa2a408810754fa2332ce2e067d759ab116/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2315.jpg]
 
   G.   Windows, Doors, And Awnings: New and remodeled windows, doors, and
awnings shall meet the following standards:
      1.   Recess doors and windows to give the appearance of traditional,
thick masonry walls consistent with architecture of the early 1900s and to
produce interesting shadows.
      2.   Provide large storefront windows along first floor elevations
accessible by the general public. These windows open up the sidewalk to create
an inviting pedestrian atmosphere.
      3.   Use consistent treatment and types of windows and door frames across
the entire building (or tenant space when a building is visually broken down to
appear as multiple buildings from the street).
      4.   Windows shall include muntins or glazing bars (elements that divide
the window into multiple panes/lites) and/or mullions (structural elements that
divide adjacent window units) consistent with the architectural style of the
building.
      5.   Awnings and canopies shall be constructed of canvas and metal.
Textured plastic is not allowed.
      6.   Store entrances should open onto the public sidewalk. Space
entrances to stores, particularly in the DMX-1 district, between twenty feet
(20') and thirty feet (30') apart.
      7.   Windows shall not be reflective or dark glass and may not be tinted
more than to meet building energy codes. (Ord. 2013-05, 2-6-2014)
9-6-5: BUILDING TYPES AND FRONTAGES:
   A.   Overview Of Standards: This section identifies the types of buildings
and frontages allowed within downtown. Frontage type refers to the
architectural composition of the front facade of a building, particularly
concerning how it relates and ties into the surrounding public realm. The
downtown Lemoore frontage types are intended to enhance social interactions in
the historic downtown while simultaneously providing appropriate levels of
privacy in residential areas. All new development within the downtown shall be
consistent with one or more of the building and frontage types allowed within
the applicable DMX district.
There are nine (9) types of buildings and frontages that can be developed
throughout the downtown. The types allowed in each downtown district are listed
in subsection B, "Allowed Buildings And Frontages In Each DMX District", of
this section. The frontage types are defined, along with specific development
standards for each type, in subsection C, "Building And Frontage Definitions
And Standards", of this section.
   B.   Allowed Buildings And Frontages In Each DMX District: Allowed building
and frontage types in the different DMX districts are listed in
table 9-6-5-B1, "Allowed Buildings And Frontages", of this section. The symbols
in the table shall have the following meanings:
      1.   An "A" means that the building and frontage type is allowed;
      2.   An "E" means that the building and frontage type is preferred and
encouraged; and
      3.   An "N" means that the building and frontage type is not permitted.
TABLE 9-6-5-B1
ALLOWED BUILDINGS AND FRONTAGES
Building And Frontage Type Allowed Buildings And Frontages By Downtown District
                           DMX-1 DMX-2 DMX-3
                                Allowed Buildings And Frontages By Downtown
Building And Frontage Type      District
                                DMX-1 DMX-2 DMX-3
Alley/paseo - active            E     A     N
Alley/paseo - nonactive         A     A     A
Balcony/bay window              A     N     N
Gallery - deck or roof          E     N     N
Historic home/office conversion A     A     E
Porch                           N     A     A
Row house                       N     A     A
Storefront                      E     A     N
 
   C.   Building And Frontage Definitions And Standards: The following defines
the various building and frontage types allowed in the downtown. Each type
includes text and illustrations describing the features that define the
building and its frontage. It also includes a series of development standards
for each type (e.g., minimum spacing between supporting columns). Development
applications will be reviewed for consistency with these standards as part of
site plan and architectural review and building permit plan check. These
standards are in addition to any requirements of the city adopted building and
fire codes as may be required at the time of building permit issuance.
   ALLEY/PASEO - ACTIVE
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/08286aa2a408810754fa2332ce2e067d759ab116/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2347.jpg]
 
Alley/Paseo - Active Description: The active alley/paseo frontage is the
development of the rear of a building abutting an alley with an active
pedestrian area. Examples include patio seating for restaurants, primary
entrances for ground floor businesses, and other gathering spaces for
pedestrians. While alleys are typically used as the service areas for buildings
(e.g., trash collection, utility service), the city recognizes that parcels in
the downtown have substantial depth and present an opportunity for property
owners to create multiple tenant spaces at both ends of their buildings.
      Alley/Paseo - Active Dimensions
 
Development Standard Measurement
Pedestrian area:
Width                10 feet minimum
Depth                15 feet minimum
 
   ALLEY/PASEO - NONACTIVE
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/08286aa2a408810754fa2332ce2e067d759ab116/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2345.jpg]
 
Alley/Paseo - Nonactive Description: The nonactive alley/paseo frontage is the
development of a building directly abutting the rear property line where there
is an alley. This type of frontage may have secondary/emergency access to the
building, along with utility and service access. This type of frontage is
appropriate for retail and office buildings throughout the downtown, as well as
row houses with alley access garages. This frontage type does allow for a
balcony or balconies to be built along the frontage, provided the balcony does
not encroach into the alley.
      Alley/Paseo - Nonactive Dimensions
 
Development Standard Measurement
There are no specific development standards for the alley/paseo - nonactive
building and frontage beyond the building placement and height standards in
section
9-6-2, "Base Development Standards", of this chapter.
 
   BALCONY/BAY WINDOW
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/08286aa2a408810754fa2332ce2e067d759ab116/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2353.jpg]
 
Balcony/Bay Window Description: A balcony/bay window frontage is characterized
by a facade which is aligned close to or directly on the build-to line with the
building entrance at the sidewalk grade and by a balcony or bay window
projecting into the right of way on a floor other than the ground floor. This
frontage is typically appropriate for ground floor retail or restaurant use
with office or residential above. An encroachment agreement is needed to
construct this frontage type.
      Balcony/Bay Window Dimensions
Development Standard Measurement
Development Standard                      Measurement
Depth                                     2 feet minimum
                                         6 feet maximum
Height (base to sidewalk)                 8 feet minimum clear
Percentage of building front (collective) 50 percent to 100 percent
Doorways (ground floor):                   
Doorway inset                             0 feet to 12 feet
Doorway width                             5 feet to 11 feet
Ground floor windows:                      
Window width                              5 feet to 7 feet
Window height (allowed range)             6 feet to 7 feet
 
   GALLERY - DECK OR ROOF
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/08286aa2a408810754fa2332ce2e067d759ab116/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2351.jpg]
 
Gallery - Deck Or Roof Description: A gallery - deck or roof frontage is
characterized by a facade which is aligned close to or directly on the build-to
line with the building entrance at the sidewalk grade and with an attached
colonnade deck that projects over the public sidewalk and encroaches into the
public right of way. The sidewalk must be fully absorbed within the colonnade
so that a pedestrian may not bypass it. The colonnade may project over the
public sidewalk, provided that the upper stories of the building do not also
project over the public sidewalk. This frontage is typically appropriate for
retail use. An encroachment agreement is needed to construct this frontage
type.
      Gallery - Deck Or Roof Dimensions
Development Standard Measurement
Development Standard                     Measurement
Depth                                    8 feet
Height (base to sidewalk)                8 feet minimum clear
                                         16 feet maximum
Percentage of building front             100 percent
Spacing between columns                  8 feet minimum to 12 feet maximum
Minimum column width                     4 inches
Doorways (ground floor, allowed ranges):  
Doorway inset                            0 feet to 12 feet
Doorway width                            5 feet to 11 feet
Ground floor windows (allowed ranges):    
Window width                             5 feet to 7 feet
Window height                            6 feet to 7 feet
 
   HISTORIC HOME/OFFICE CONVERSION
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/08286aa2a408810754fa2332ce2e067d759ab116/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2349.jpg]
 
Historic Home/Office Conversion Description: The historic home/office
conversion frontage is the reuse of an existing home for a nonresidential use
(typically office or general medical service), or the development of a new
structure to resemble a historic home that has been converted to an office use.
      Historic Home/Office Conversion Dimensions
 
Development Standard              Measurement
Setback                           20 feet maximum
Distance to porch                 6 feet minimum
                                  20 feet maximum
Porch height above sidewalk grade 3 feet minimum
                                  6 feet maximum
Porch width                       10 feet minimum
Porch depth                       6 feet minimum
Clearance above porch to roof     10 feet minimum
 
Note: ADA ramp(s) shall be located to connect to the side of the porch. Ramps
are exempt from setback standards.
   PORCH
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/08286aa2a408810754fa2332ce2e067d759ab116/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2325.jpg]
 
Porch Description: The porch frontage is intended for residential uses. The
type is characterized by a covered, active outdoor living space connected to
the front of the building. The porch shall be raised above the finished grade
of the lot and adjacent public sidewalk.
      Porch Dimensions
 
Development Standard              Measurement
Porch height above sidewalk grade 18 inches minimum
                                  6 feet maximum
Porch width                       10 feet minimum
Porch depth                       6 feet minimum
Clearance above porch to roof     8 feet minimum
 
   ROW HOUSE
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/08286aa2a408810754fa2332ce2e067d759ab116/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2327.jpg]
 
Row House Description: A row house is a residential dwelling with little to no
side yard. The entrance to the dwelling is raised above the sidewalk in order
to create privacy for the occupant. Living spaces are located at the front of
the unit. Parking is accessible from the alley behind the unit.
      Row House Dimensions
 
Development Standard              Measurement
Stoop height above sidewalk grade 18 inches minimum
                                  6 feet maximum
Stoop depth                       3 feet minimum
Clearance above stoop             8 feet minimum
 
   STOREFRONT
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/08286aa2a408810754fa2332ce2e067d759ab116/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2329.jpg]
Storefront Description: A storefront frontage is characterized by a facade
which is aligned close to or directly on the public right of way line with the
building entrance at sidewalk grade. Storefront frontages have substantial
glazing on the ground floor and provide awnings or canopies cantilevered over
the sidewalk. Building entrances may either provide a canopy or awning, or
alternatively, may be recessed behind the front building facade. Awnings over
the public sidewalk require approval of an encroachment agreement.
      Storefront Dimensions
Development Standard Measurement
Development Standard                  Measurement
Awning depth                          3 feet minimum
                                      8 feet maximum
Height (base to sidewalk)             8 feet minimum clear
                                      12 feet maximum
Doorways (allowed range):              
Doorway inset                         0 feet to 12 feet
Doorway width                         5 feet to 11 feet
Ground floor windows (allowed range):  
Window width                          5 feet to 7 feet
Window height                         6 feet to 7 feet
 
(Ord. 2013-05, 2-6-2014)
9-6-6: SPECIAL DESIGN AND OPERATIONAL STANDARDS:
The following are special development standards for the downtown pertaining to
trash enclosures and utilities. These standards are intended to ensure that
services for properties within the downtown are planned and developed in a
manner that is consistent with the overall character of the area.
   A.   Outdoor Dining: The development standards below apply to all outdoor
seating for food uses, including both fixed and movable seats. These standards
are intended to be consistent with the requirements of the state alcoholic
beverage control agency.
      1.   Location: Seating shall be located proximate to the dining
establishment. Where seating is located within the public right of way, an
encroachment agreement shall be required and seating areas shall be installed
consistent with subsection
9-6-3B, "Encroachments", of this chapter, specifically maintaining a clear walk
path as illustrated in section
9-6-3,
figure 9-6-3-B2, "Sidewalk Clearance", of this chapter.
      2.   Enclosure: An enclosure wall, fence, or planter shall be required
around any outdoor seating areas with restaurant table service where alcohol is
served, consistent with state licensing requirements. Walls, fences, and
planters shall not exceed a maximum height of three and one-half feet (3.5').
The wall/fence may be extended to a maximum height of six feet (6') if the area
above three and one-half feet (3.5') remains primarily open view (e.g., glass,
wrought iron).
   B.   Outdoor Sales (Temporary): The following development and operational
standards apply to all temporary outdoor sales. See also
figure 9-6-6-B1, "Temporary Outdoor Sales", of this section.
      1.   Location: Outdoor sales are allowed to occur when consistent with
the following standards:
         a.   On private property, on the same lot as the associated retail
operation; and
         b.   Along the public sidewalk when consistent with subsection
9-6-3B, "Encroachments", of this chapter, specifically maintaining a clear walk
path as illustrated in section
9-6-3,
figure 9-6-3-B2, "Sidewalk Clearance", of this chapter. Displays shall be
located directly against the building and not along the curbside.
      2.   Maximum Area: Outdoor sales areas may not take up more than seventy
five percent (75%) of the frontage of the building that they are associated
with.
      3.   Product Display: Products shall be displayed as follows:
         a.   Tables: Products displayed on tables shall be kept organized at
all times. The tables shall be covered with a table cloth or skirt such that
the legs and under table area is screened.
         b.   Display Carts: Display carts shall be no taller than six feet
(6'), no longer than eight feet (8'), and no wider than three feet (3').
      4.   Term: Products may only be displayed outdoors during the business
hours of the associated retail use. Goods may not be displayed outside
overnight.
   FIGURE 9-6-6-B1
   TEMPORARY OUTDOOR SALES
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/08286aa2a408810754fa2332ce2e067d759ab116/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2355.jpg]
 
   C.   Outdoor Storage And Sales (Permanent): The following development and
operational standards apply to all permanent outdoor storage.
      1.   Location: Outdoor storage and permanent sales are allowed in the
rear of the lot or within interior side yards. Outdoor storage is not allowed
within front and street side yards.
      2.   Maximum Area: The maximum area allowed for outdoor storage shall be
twenty five percent (25%) of the total lot area.
      3.   Enclosure/Screening: Outdoor storage areas shall be enclosed through
the use of walls or fencing. The maximum allowed fence height is six feet (6').
Fencing shall be of a solid surface, blocking all views into the storage space,
such as CMU block (required to be treated with a graffiti resistant material)
and solid wood.
      4.   Storage Area Maintenance And Upkeep When Visible From Public Right
Of Way: When the storage area is viewable from the public right of way (e.g.,
sidewalk), the storage area shall be regularly maintained and kept orderly and
clean such that it does not create a public nuisance.
   D.   Trash Collection: The following provisions describe the city's minimum
standards for the design and location of trash and other refuse collection
areas as part of new development.
      1.   Trash storage must be fully screened from public streets, subject to
design approval from the city and operational approval from the public works
department. Where practical, storage at common enclosures is preferred. Other
design solutions may include, but are not limited to, incorporating within the
main structure (subject to compliance with city adopted building and fire
codes) or within a separate freestanding enclosure.
      2.   Trash enclosures shall be architecturally compatible with the
project. Examples include use of the same materials and colors as the building.
      3.   Refuse containers and service facilities shall be screened from view
by solid masonry walls with powder coated solid metal doors. Chainlink or wood
fencing is prohibited.
      4.   When possible, trash enclosures shall be located away from
residential uses to minimize nuisance for the adjacent property owners.
   E.   Utilities: Utilities for new development and redevelopment of property
shall be integrated either into the structure(s), placed underground, or
otherwise designed as an integral part of the project. (Ord. 2013-05, 2-6-2014)
9-6-7: CONVERSION OF RESIDENCES TO NONRESIDENTIAL USES:
   A.   Purpose: The purpose of this section is to provide development
standards that accommodate the conversion of historic residences for
nonresidential use in the DMX zone districts, while maintaining the historic
character of the neighborhoods.
   B.   Development Standards: When existing buildings that have historically
been used as residences are converted to nonresidential uses the standards of
this section shall be met.
      1.   Significant Alteration: For existing residences, exterior
alterations or additions will be permitted so long as they do not significantly
alter the original architectural style and provided that the changes enhance or
upgrade the property.
      2.   Standards For Conversion: Exterior modifications to buildings shall
be minimized to the extent possible. When exterior modifications are made, the
standards in
table 9-6-7-B, "Standards For Conversion To Nonresidential Use", of this
section shall be met.
TABLE 9-6-7-B
STANDARDS FOR CONVERSION TO NONRESIDENTIAL USE
 
Development Standard    Measurement
Setback - front         20 feet minimum
Setback - interior side 5 feet minimum
Setback - corner side   10 feet minimum
Setback - rear          5 feet minimum
Building height         35 feet maximum
 
      3.   Porches And Handrails: Buildings with existing front and/or side
yard covered porches and handrails that are indicative of the architectural
style shall remain and be improved.
      4.   Parking: Parking shall be located in the rear of the lot. Parking
shall not be allowed in the front or corner side setback areas of a corner lot.
      5.   Access: Parking shall only be accessed from the alley. (Ord. 2013-
05, 2-6-2014)
CHAPTER 7
MIXED USE DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS
SECTION:
9-7-1: Purpose And Applicability
9-7-2: Design Concept
9-7-3: Conceptual Plan Requirements
9-7-4: Residential Development
9-7-5: Connectivity And Circulation
9-7-6: Development Standards
9-7-7: Architectural Design Standards
9-7-8: Pedestrian Spaces And Ways
9-7-1: PURPOSE AND APPLICABILITY:
   A.   Purpose: This chapter establishes the rules and regulations for
development and design of property designated as a mixed use (MU) district.
Provisions herein address the compatible integration of residential,
commercial, office, and/or industrial uses on a contiguous project site within
the mixed use district. The regulations are intended to be flexible to allow a
variety of activities and mix of tenants. These provisions implement mixed use
land use policies within sections 2.5 (downtown and shopping centers) and 3.5
(activity centers) of the general plan. The requirements for specific master
planning of mixed use sites through conceptual plans is adopted consistent with
the provisions provided to the city by section 65302.4 of the California
Government Code.
Specifically, mixed use development standards do the following:
      1.   Allow a range of uses;
      2.   Establish incentives for mixed use development that create a public
benefit (e.g., workforce housing, daycare centers, small scale commercial/
service uses);
      3.   Provide for the flexible integration of different use types
independent of property locations;
      4.   Provide guidance for the types of mixed use development desired by
the city;
      5.   Ensure that new mixed use centers are compatible with surrounding
neighborhoods;
   B.   Applicability Of Standards: The standards within this chapter apply to
the mixed use (MU) zoning district. This chapter identifies the development
standards and design requirements for all development within this district.
Unless otherwise exempted, all new development and reuse redevelopment of
existing structures within the mixed use district shall comply with the
standards in this chapter and shall be reviewed for consistency as part of site
plan and design review and building permit plan check. Exemptions to specific
standards may be approved through the site plan and architectural review
process if the approving authority makes a finding that the there are special
circumstances applicable to the site that warrant an exemption from the
standard.
   C.   Mixed Use Centers Established: The city's general plan establishes five
(5) mixed use centers, each a collection of parcels adjacent to each other that
are collectively designated under the general plan as mixed use. These
properties are all zoned mixed use. These centers are located at the following
major roadway intersections and shall be referred to by these names and can be
identified in
figure 9-7-1-C1, "Mixed Use Centers", of this section:
      1.   Bush Street and College Avenue.
      2.   19th Avenue and Iona Avenue.
      3.   East D Street and Bush Street.
      4.   Lemoore Avenue and Cinnamon Drive.
      5.   Hanford-Armona Road and State Route 41.
   FIGURE 9-7-1-C1
   MIXED USE CENTERS
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/08286aa2a408810754fa2332ce2e067d759ab116/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2317.jpg]
 
(Ord. 2013-05, 2-6-2014)
9-7-2: DESIGN CONCEPT:
   A.   The design concept for the mixed use district is intended to provide
the following key characteristics:
      1.   Retail, residential, office, business and personal services, public,
and institutional uses in neighborhood oriented centers in a variety of mixed
use configurations, such as ground floor commercial with residential or office
uses above, or collocation of buildings with different single uses on a
contiguous mixed use area.
      2.   Development is pedestrian oriented to enhance street life and to
enhance the vibrancy of new and existing neighborhoods.
      3.   Residential density ranges from eight (8) to twenty (20) units per
gross acre.
      4.   Buildings are typically a combination of one-, two-, and three-story
buildings, with less development intensity adjacent to single-family
residential areas. (Ord. 2013-05, 2-6-2014)
9-7-3: CONCEPTUAL PLAN REQUIREMENTS:
A conceptual plan is required for all new development and redevelopment within
a designated mixed use district. The planning director may waive the
requirement for a conceptual plan when it is determined that the proposed new
development is minor or is replacing or expanding existing development.
   A.   Conceptual Plan Purpose: The intent of the conceptual plan is to
illustrate key components of each mixed use center. The conceptual plan should
include information on the private realm (development standards, building
prototypes, and frontage types) and the design of the public realm (street
typologies). The conceptual plan shall describe the conceptual configuration of
land uses, the on site circulation system, and the relationship to adjacent
properties and uses for the center. The purpose is to develop each mixed use
center in an integrated fashion with connected streets, an integrated
pedestrian system, and common parking areas. It is not meant to lock landowners
into a set development pattern or restrict the types or range of uses that are
allowed on a given property. Rather, its focus is on planning for and providing
integrated access across properties for efficient and cohesive operations and
placement of proposed uses appropriately based on existing surrounding
development.
   B.   Conceptual Plan Components: A conceptual plan shall be established for
a mixed use center prior to or in conjunction with approval of the first
tentative subdivision or parcel map or site plan and design review within the
center. The plan shall be created by the project proponent and submitted to the
city for review and approval (see subsection C of this section, conceptual plan
approval).
Each conceptual plan shall specifically include the following written and
graphic components:
      1.   Location of any new streets and pedestrianways;
      2.   Location of any plazas and other types of open space;
      3.   Location of storefront frontage along key pedestrian paths;
      4.   Location of storefront frontage along streets;
      5.   Anticipated vehicular and pedestrian connections within the entire
mixed use district as well as connections to adjacent properties;
      6.   Location of any common parking facilities (individual parking lots
are discouraged in the mixed use district);
      7.   Location of any transit/bus stop; and
      8.   A written description of how the conceptual plan achieves the
development standards within this chapter.
   C.   Conceptual Plan Approval And Modification: A conceptual plan shall be
reviewed and approved by the city through a minor site plan and architectural
review (see section
9-2B-12, "Minor Site Plan And Architectural Review", of this title). The plan
shall be prepared by the applicant consistent with the requirements of this
chapter and submitted to the planning department for review. As part of the
submittal, the applicant shall demonstrate that they have provided a copy of
the draft plan to other owner(s) of property within the center for review and
provide copies of their comments (if any) to the city.
After approval of the conceptual plan, the plan may be modified through an
amendment to the minor site plan and architectural review. The amendment may be
prepared by any landowner within the mixed use center or by the city.
The city may, at its discretion, provide assistance to property owners with the
preparation of the conceptual plan prior to submittal of subsequent application
for development of the site.
   D.   Development Proposal Process: After approval of the conceptual plan,
subsequent planning permits and entitlements and other approvals may be issued.
(Ord. 2013-05, 2-6-2014)
9-7-4: RESIDENTIAL DEVELOPMENT:
   A.   Residential Uses Generally: The city encourages each mixed use center
to include residential uses within the development. In doing so, these centers
create opportunities for people to live, work, and shop in the same area. It
builds in a dedicated customer base for retail and restaurant uses and creates
flexible housing choices for workers. Consistent with the city's general plan,
where residential uses are provided in mixed use centers, the minimum
residential density is eight (8) dwelling units per acre and the maximum
density is twenty (20) dwelling units per acre.
   B.   Transfer Of Units Between Properties: To further encourage the
development of residential uses within mixed use centers, the city allows for
the residential development potential of one or more parcels within a mixed use
center to be transferred to any other parcel or parcels within the same center
by right, provided the maximum number of residential dwellings in each center
does not exceed the number identified in
table 9-7-4-A1, "Maximum Residential Development", of this section. The number
of dwellings listed in
table 9-7-4-A1 of this section is calculated based upon the number of acres in
each center multiplied by the maximum allowed density of twenty (20) units per
acre.
         TABLE 9-7-4-A1
         MAXIMUM RESIDENTIAL DEVELOPMENT
 
                              Mixed Use Centers
                              Bush/   19th/ East D/ Lemoore/ Hanford/
                              College Iona  Bush    Cinnamon 41
Maximum residential dwellings 101     560   271     386      163
 
(Ord. 2013-05, 2-6-2014)
9-7-5: CONNECTIVITY AND CIRCULATION:
In keeping with the design concept for mixed use development (see section
9-7-2, "Design Concept", of this chapter), mixed use centers shall be developed
with an internal set of streets, drive aisles, and other similar paths that
divide the sites into smaller blocks. To that end, mixed use centers are
subject to the connectivity requirement in
table 9-7-5-1, "Connectivity Requirements", of this section. The intent is to
achieve these requirements through the implementation of the regulating plan
established for each mixed use center (see section
9-7-3, "Conceptual Plan Requirements", of this chapter). The standards listed
in
table 9-7-5-1 of this section are illustrated using a variety of development
types in
figure 9-7-5-1, "Connectivity", of this section. A new regulating plan shall be
created or updated prior to development within each mixed use center.
      TABLE 9-7-5-1
      CONNECTIVITY REQUIREMENTS
 
Development Standard                            Measurement
Block length                                       800 feet maximum
Block perimeter                                    3,000 feet maximum
Distance between pedestrian paths (e.g., paseo)    400 feet maximum
 
   FIGURE 9-7-5-1
   CONNECTIVITY
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/08286aa2a408810754fa2332ce2e067d759ab116/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2319.jpg]
 
   A.   Street System: Each mixed use center, as part of the regulating plan,
shall establish an internal system of streets that connect to the city street
system at appropriate locations. These internal streets may be public (street)
or private (drive aisle). Internal streets shall be based upon the following
roadway hierarchy and consistent with the development standards listed in
subsection C, "Development Standards For Streets And Pedestrianways", of this
section:
      1.   Main Street: A "main street", or "main way", is a drive aisle or
street that functions as a major vehicular pathway through a site. This street
features active pedestrian spaces with wide sidewalks (greater than 8 feet).
Buildings are constructed directly adjacent to the sidewalk (e.g., 0 foot
built-to line). On street parking is provided within the pavement area and is
typically angled such that vehicles can only pull into spaces directly in front
of them on the passenger side of the vehicle. The sidewalk is lined with street
trees in tree wells near the curb. Intersections may be controlled with stop
signs when warrants support such controls.
      2.   Drive Aisle: A drive aisle is a vehicular pathway that provides
access from the public street system or on site private main street(s) to the
parking areas of the project.
      3.   Alley: Alleys are narrow roads that provide access to utility areas.
These roads are intended for large deliveries and trash collection and are not
meant as pedestrian areas. Alleys do not provide parking (but may provide
access to parking).
   B.   Pedestrianways: Pedestrianways within mixed use centers are generally
broken down into two (2) categories: sidewalks and other pedestrian paths. Each
shall comply with the following standards:
      1.   Sidewalks: Every internal street or drive aisle shall include a
sidewalk between the roadway and the adjacent building. Exceptions shall be
granted through regulating plan approval for alleys and areas where pedestrians
should not be. Sidewalks shall be designed consistent with the standards listed
in subsection C, "Development Standards For Streets And Pedestrianways", of
this section.
      2.   Other Pedestrian Paths: As identified in
table 9-7-5-1, "Connectivity Requirements", of this section, additional
pedestrian paths shall be provided between block ends within mixed use centers.
These paths shall comply with the following standards:
         a.   Pedestrian paths between buildings shall be a minimum of ten feet
(10') wide with a minimum paved area of five feet (5').
         b.   Pedestrian paths shall be designed with features such as enhanced
paving, trellis structures, and additional landscaping or lighting to
distinguish paths from the sidewalk.
         c.   Hardscape materials used in pedestrian oriented spaces such as
plazas, paths, and sidewalks shall be attractive, durable, slip resistant, of
high quality, and compatible in color and pattern with a project's design.
Surfaces in pedestrian circulation areas shall be constructed from materials
that provide a hard, stable surface and that permit maneuverability for people
of all abilities.
         d.   Pedestrian pathways crossing a vehicle drive, loading area, or
parking area shall be made identifiable by the use of an alternative hardscape
material such as pavers or patterned, stamped, or colored concrete.
   C.   Development Standards For Streets And Pedestrianways: Main streets
shall include the design features in
table 9-7-5-C, "Main Street Design Features", of this section.
      TABLE 9-7-5-C
      MAIN STREET DESIGN FEATURES
Component Measurement
Component           Measurement
Sidewalk:            
Total width         10 feet to 24 feet
Minimum clear space 4 feet
Tree planters:       
Planter size        4 feet by 4 feet
Planter spacing     30 feet on center
Parking:             
Angle               45 degrees preferred
 
(Ord. 2013-05, 2-6-2014)
9-7-6: DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS:
All proposed development and redevelopment of property within the mixed use
district shall comply with the base development standards listed in this
section.
   A.   Building Placement: New structures shall comply with the build-to line,
setback, and buildable area requirements listed in
table 9-7-6-A1, "Building Placement", of this section. Setbacks and build-to
lines shall be measured from the back of the property line when along a public
street or from a sidewalk when along an internal, private drive. The planning
director may waive this requirement if it is determined that the proposed new
development is replacing or expanding existing development.
      TABLE 9-7-6-A1
      BUILDING PLACEMENT 3,4
Development Standard Measurement
Development Standard                           Measurement
Build-to line:                                  
Front                                          0 feet minimum
                                               10 feet maximum 1
Street side, corner lot                        0 feet minimum
                                               10 feet maximum 1
Interior side                                  0 feet
Rear, adjacent to residential zone district    10 feet 2
Rear, adjacent to nonresidential zone district 10 feet
Rear, adjacent to alley                        10 feet 2
Minimum building frontage:                      
Primary street                                 50 percent
Secondary street                               40 percent
 
   Notes:
      1.   The building facade along a street may be recessed to create
inviting pedestrian spaces.
      2.   Residential dwellings may be developed with no rear yard setback and
no alley setback as part of site plan and design review.
      3.   Additional setbacks may be provided through regulating plan approval
to allow for the creation of pedestrian plazas.
      4.   Buildings, including awnings, arcades, galleries, and other
architectural features, are allowed to encroach over and into sidewalks that
are not part of the public right of way, provided a minimum 4 foot clear walk
path is provided.
   B.   Height: Height standards for development within the mixed use district
are listed in
table 9-7-6-B1, "Height", of this section and shown in
figure 9-7-6-B1, "Height", of this section. (Ord. 2013-05, 2-6-2014)
      TABLE 9-7-6-B1
      HEIGHT
Development Standard Measurement
Development Standard                        Measurement
General height standards:                    
Structure height                            60 feet maximum
First floor ceiling height                  9 feet minimum
Upper floor(s) ceiling height               9 feet minimum
Architectural features (additional height):  
Parapet wall/mechanical screen              4 feet maximum
Towers, spires and similar features         10 feet maximum
 
(Ord. 2015-08, 1-5-2016)
   FIGURE 9-7-6-B1
   HEIGHT
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/08286aa2a408810754fa2332ce2e067d759ab116/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2321.jpg]
 
(Ord. 2013-05, 2-6-2014; amd. Ord. 2015-08, 1-5-2016)
   C.   Parking: Parking within mixed use centers is meant to be shared among
all properties and uses within the center. The intent is to allow people the
opportunity to park once and then travel by foot between the various uses
within the center. Parking within mixed use centers shall be provided through a
combination of parking lots behind buildings and on street parking spaces along
internal main streets and minor streets.
      1.   On Street Parking Standards: On street parking shall be developed
consistent with the standards identified in section
9-7-5, "Connectivity And Circulation", of this chapter.
      2.   Parking Lot Standards: Parking lots (off street parking) shall be
developed consistent with the standards listed in
table 9-7-6-C1, "Parking Lots", and
figure 9-7-6-C1, "Parking Lot Location", of this section. In addition to these
standards, parking lots shall be lighted and landscaped consistent with the
standards in sections
9-5B-4, "Outdoor Lighting", and
9-5D1-2, "Landscape Standards", of this title, and parking stall dimensions
shall be consistent with the standards of section
9-5E-5, "Design And Development Standards For Off Street Parking Areas", of
this title.
      TABLE 9-7-6-C1
      PARKING LOTS
Development Standard Measurement
Development Standard              Measurement
Location of parking lot:           
Between building and main street  Not allowed
Between building and drive aisles Allowed
Setbacks:                          
Setback to side property line     0 feet minimum
Setback to minor street           10 feet minimum 1
Setback to rear property line     0 feet minimum
 
   Note:
      1.   Intent is to allow space for pedestrian path and landscape screening
between the street and parking lot.
   FIGURE 9-7-6-C1
   PARKING LOT LOCATION
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/08286aa2a408810754fa2332ce2e067d759ab116/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2323.jpg]
 
      3.   Number Of Required Parking Spaces: The number of parking spaces
required for mixed use centers shall be based upon the standards listed in
chapter 5, article E, "Off Street Parking And Loading", of this title. The
required parking shall be calculated based upon the range of uses developed
within the center by type of use during the peak parking period.
      4.   Location Of Parking Spaces: The parking required for each individual
use need not be provided on the same parcel or immediately adjacent to the use
generating the required parking. Rather, the required parking just needs to be
provided somewhere within the center. (Ord. 2013-05, 2-6-2014)
9-7-7: ARCHITECTURAL DESIGN STANDARDS:
Buildings within mixed use centers shall comply with the architectural
standards of chapter 5, article C, "Architectural And Site Design Standards",
of this title for the type of use. (Ord. 2013-05, 2-6-2014)
9-7-8: PEDESTRIAN SPACES AND WAYS:
This section identifies the development standards for the public areas of mixed
use centers, more specifically the streets, alleys, and other pedestrianways.
The intent of this section is to identify how the public spaces shall be
developed and maintained in order to promote an active pedestrian environment.
   A.   Required Pedestrian Spaces: Every mixed use center shall include one or
more outdoor gathering spaces. Public space shall occupy at minimum two percent
(2%) of the gross area of each mixed use center.
   B.   Standards For Pedestrian Spaces: All pedestrian spaces shall comply
with the following standards:
      1.   Landscaping: Landscaping in pedestrian spaces shall be consistent
with the requirements of chapter 5, article D1, "Landscaping Standards", of
this title.
      2.   Lighting: Pedestrian spaces shall be illuminated for safety and to
complement the architecture of the space. Lighting shall be consistent with the
standards of section
9-5B-4, "Outdoor Lighting", of this title.
      3.   Electrical Power: Pedestrian spaces shall be serviced with at least
two (2) electrical outlets for every two thousand (2,000) square feet of public
space. The intent is to provide adequate power for temporary uses and
activities and to facilitate proper maintenance.
      4.   Materials: Materials used in pedestrian oriented spaces shall be
attractive, durable, slip resistant, of high quality, and compatible in color
and pattern with a project's design. Surfaces in pedestrian circulation areas
shall be constructed from materials that provide a hard, stable surface and
that permit comfortable maneuverability for people of all abilities. Wherever a
pathway crosses a drive aisle, loading area, or parking area, the pathway shall
be made identifiable by the use of one of the following: elevation changes,
changes in paving materials, and/or the use of colors. (Ord. 2013-05, 2-6-2014)
CHAPTER 8
RESERVED
(Ord. 2013-05, 2-6-2014)
CHAPTER 9
OVERLAY ZONING DISTRICTS
ARTICLE A. PURPOSE AND INTENT OF OVERLAY ZONING DISTRICTS
SECTION:
9-9A-1: Purpose And Intent
9-9A-2: Designation On Zoning Map
9-9A-3: Applicability Of Standards
9-9A-1: PURPOSE AND INTENT:
This chapter establishes a series of overlay zoning districts. These overlay
zoning districts supplement the land use regulations and/or development
standards of the corresponding underlying base zoning district by recognizing
distinct areas of the city that have special, unique, or important social,
architectural, site, neighborhood, environmental, or compatibility issues or
characteristics that, because of their nature, require special considerations
not otherwise adequately provided by the underlying base zoning district
applicable to the property. (Ord. 2013-05, 2-6-2014)
9-9A-2: DESIGNATION ON ZONING MAP:
As described in chapter 3, "Zoning Districts And Map", of this title, overlay
zoning districts shall be designated on the city zoning map by their
representative symbol along with the base zoning district in a format
determined by the planning director. For example, a planned development overlay
zoning district combined with a medium density residential base zoning district
would be shown on the zoning map with the medium density residential shown as
the underlying district and the overlay shown with an outline. (Ord. 2013-05,
2-6-2014)
9-9A-3: APPLICABILITY OF STANDARDS:
The provisions of this chapter shall apply to all parcels of land located
within the designated boundaries of an overlay district as illustrated on maps
contained on the city zoning map. In the event of a conflict with the
regulations of the underlying base zoning district and the overlay zoning
district, the provisions of the overlay zoning district shall apply. Where an
overlay zoning district is silent, the regulations of other sections of this
title shall apply. (Ord. 2013-05, 2-6-2014)
ARTICLE B. PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENT (PUD) OVERLAY ZONING DISTRICTS
SECTION:
9-9B-1: Purpose And Intent
9-9B-2: Form And Content Of Planned Unit Development Overlay Zones
9-9B-3: Adoption Of Planned Unit Development Overlay Zones
9-9B-4: Special Development Standards For Specific Planned Unit Developments
9-9B-1: PURPOSE AND INTENT:
This article establishes the Planned Unit Development (PUD) Overlay Zone for
the purpose of providing project specific architectural and development
standards for new development of residential subdivisions in the City. The PUD
is intended to allow some flexibility in the zoning district development
standards with special consideration and review. (Ord. 2013-05, 2-6-2014)
9-9B-2: FORM AND CONTENT OF PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENT OVERLAY ZONES:
   A.   Form And Adoption Of New Planned Unit Development Overlay Zones:
Subsequent to the adoption of this title, all new Planned Unit Development
Overlay Zones shall be established by ordinance of the City Council. The
ordinance shall include, or shall reference in a separate document, all of the
components for a planned unit development as described in subsection B of this
section.
   B.   Required Components: Each new Planned Unit Development Overlay Zone
shall, at a minimum, contain the following components:
      1.   Performance and development requirements related to yards, lot area,
intensity of development on each lot, parking, landscaping, and signs;
      2.   Time, phasing, and sequence of development projects;
      3.   Infrastructure plan;
      4.   Circulation plan;
      5.   Master home plan floor plans and elevation plans; and
      6.   Other design standards appropriate for the specific site and
development.
   C.   Requirements For Existing Planned Unit Developments: Existing Planned
Unit Development Overlay Zones need not be modified to include these components
unless the underlying tentative subdivision map has expired or the project
proponent is requesting a significant change in the project design as
determined by the City. Otherwise, the conditions of approval for the tentative
map shall serve as the plan for the development. (Ord. 2013-05, 2-6-2014)
9-9B-3: ADOPTION OF PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENT OVERLAY ZONES:
The Planned Unit Development Overlay Zones listed in
table 9-9B-3-1, "Planned Unit Development Overlay Zones", of this section are
hereby adopted into this Code by reference. (Ord. 2013-05, 2-6-2014)
   TABLE 9-9B-3-1
   PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENT OVERLAY ZONES
Number Name Date Approved Resolution Number Average Density Per Gross Acre
                                            (du/ac)
                                                                Average Density
Number  Name               Date Approved      Resolution Number Per Gross Acre
                                                                (du/ac)
        Lutheran Church
8301    (20 units) Tract   April 5, 1983      8305              8.27
        469
9101    Daley Patio Homes  August 6, 1991     9128              7.6
9301    Capistrano Tract   August 3, 1993     9305              3.44
        700
9401    Windsor #5 Tract   April 19, 1994     9411              3.38
        707
        Pierce, Country
9402    Club Villas Tract  July 5, 1994       9422              4.018
        704
9403    Stanrich Tract 717 October 18, 1994   9432              3.67
        Fairway Homes,
2000-02 Coker Ellsworth    February 1, 2005   2005-04           4.24
        Tract 758
        Jonathan Homes
2002-01 Country Club       December 3, 2001   2002-41           3.47
        Villas, Tract 783
        Phase II
        Parkview Estates
2003-02 Robert Frisone,    October 7, 2003    2003-38           4.31
        Tract 797
2004-01 Terrence B.        September 7, 2004  2004-47           3.6
        Flatley, Tract 817
        Coker Ellsworth
2004-02 Fairway Courtyards September 7, 2004  2004-48           8.5
        Condos, Tract 820
2004-03 Lennar Homes,
        Tract 821 Phase I  February 15, 2005  2005-08           3.94
       Davante Homes
        Tract 821 Phase II
        Daley Enterprises
2004-05 Silva Estates 10,  March 15, 2005     2005-11           3.85
        Tract 838
2005-01 Victory Village    June 6, 2006       2006-28           3.98
        Tract 845
2006-02 Badasci, Tract 872 May 2, 2006        2006-15           2.92
2010-01 Lennar Tract 817   January 18, 2011   2011-02           3.6
        II & III
2011-02 Wathen Castanos    August 16, 2011    2011-34           5.17
        Tract 791
        Lennar Homes,
2011-03 Tract 821 Phase II December 20, 2011  2011-46           3.94
        (37 lots)
        Lennar Homes,
2017-01 Tract 920 Phases I September 19, 2017 2017-05           4.35
        & II
2019-01 Brisbane East,     June 18, 2019      2019-02           3.41
        Tract 921
2020-01 Lennar Homes,      June 16, 2020      2020-20           6.7
        Tract 848
2020-02 Assemi Group,      May 3, 2022        2022-19           4.81
        Tract 932
        GJ Gardner,
2020-03 Fairway,           April 20, 2021     2021-XX           6.3
        Courtyards
2021-01 Lennar Homes,      April 5, 2022      2022-16           6.3
        Tract 935
2022-01 Wathen Castanos    October 3, 2023    2023-32           5.32
        Tract 939
 
(Ord. 2013-05, 2-6-2014; amd. Ord. 2017-11, 9-19-2017; Ord. 2019-02, 6-18-2019;
Ord. 2020-06, 7-7-2020; Ord. 2022-04, 4-19-2022; Ord. 2022-06, 5-17-2022)
9-9B-4: SPECIAL DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS FOR SPECIFIC PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENTS:
In an effort to provide design flexibility and consistency with the
architectural standards historically required for planned unit developments, as
well as the standards provided in this title, the City has approved special
setback standards for some planned unit developments.
Table 9-9B-4-1, "Development Standards For Planned Unit Development Overlay
Zones", of this section identifies the standards for each planned unit
development where they deviate from the requirements of this title. The City
may approve special setbacks for new planned unit developments, subject to an
amendment to this table to include the special standards.
   TABLE 9-9B-4-1
   DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS FOR PLANNED
   UNIT DEVELOPMENT OVERLAY ZONES
Number Name Front Setback Side Setback Rear Setback
Number   Name             Front Setback     Side Setback      Rear Setback
         Lutheran Church
8301     (20 units) Tract 23'               5' and 5'         5'
         469
9101     Daley Patio      20'               5' to nearer      5'
         Homes                              interior lot
9301     Capistrano Tract 25'               5' and 10'        10' 1
         700
9401     Windsor #5 Tract 25'               5' and 10'        10'
         707
         Pierce Financial                   5'                20' adjacent to
9402     & Insurance      20'               10' between       golf course,
         Country Club                       structures        otherwise 10'
         Villas Tract 704
         Stanrich, R-1-   20' minimum       5' and 10'        10'
9403     7 Tract 717
         Tract 717        15' minimum       5' and 5'         5'
         Stanrich, RM-3
         Coker Ellsworth                                      20' adjacent to
2000-02  Fairway Homes,   18'-25'           10' and 5'        golf course,
         Tract 758 I and                                      otherwise 10'
         II
         Country Club                                         20' adjacent to
2002-01  Villas 2,        25'               5' and 10'        golf course,
         Jonathan Homes                                       otherwise 10'
         Tract 783
         Robert Frisone                     10' minimum on
2003-02  Parkview         20'-25'           garage and 5'     10' minimum
         Estates, Tract                     opposite
         797
         Flatley Tract
2004-01/ 817 Phase I and                    10' garage side
2010-01  II/Lennar Tract  20'-25'           and 5' opposite   10'
         817 Phase II and
         III
         Lennar Homes,
         Tract 821 Phase                    10' garage side
2004-03/ I, Davante Tract                   5' opposite
2011-03  821 Phase II,    18'-25'           10'-10' for 2     10'
         Lennar Homes,                      story
         Tract 821 Phase
         II (37 lots)
         Coker Ellsworth,                                     20' 2 adjacent to
2004-04  Tract 752        18'-25'           10' and 5'        golf course,
                                                              otherwise 10'
         Silva Estates
2004-05  10, Daley        18'-25'           5' and 5'         10'
         Enterprises
         Tract 838
         Victory Village, 12' (face of
2005-01  Pharris Tract    curb)             5' and 5'         10' 3
         845
2006-02  Badasci, Tract   18'-25'           5' and 5' single  10'
         872                                story
                                            6' adjacent to
         Wathen Castanos  15'-18'           garage and 4'
2011-02  Tract 791        Garages setback   opposite          10' 3
                          minimum 18'       10' side yard on
                                            street side
         Lennar Homes,
2017-01  Tract 920 Phases 18' - 22'         5' and 10'        10'
         I & II
                                            5' and 5' (larger
                          As per subsection setback on garage As per subsection
2019-01  Brisbane East,   9-5A-4A,          side), 10' street 9-5A-4A,
         Tract 921        table 9-5A-4A of  side (both one-   table 9-5A-4A of
                          this title        story and two-    this title
                                            story)
                          Front to living
                          space (minimum)
                          12' to one-story
                          - See note
                          12' to covered
                          porch
                          15' to two-story
                          Front to garage
                          (minimum) 20'     Interior side     10' for one-
         Lennar Homes,    Note - Plan 7512  (minimum) 5'      story
2020-01  Tract 848        (Olive) may have  Street side       15' for two-
                          a 10- foot        (minimum) 10'     story
                          minimum front
                          setback to living
                          space on lots
                          less than 84'
                          deep. Plan 7512
                          (Olive) shall not
                          be constructed on
                          corner lots less
                          than 84' deep.
                          15' for compact*                    10' for compact*
         Assemi Group     and medium* lots                    lots
         Tract 932        (12' to covered                     15' for medium*
         *Compact,        porch)            5' interior side  lots
2020-02  medium, and      20' for estate*   10' street side   20' for estate*
         estate lots      lots (14' to                        lots
         defined on Tract covered porch)                      One story homes
         Map              20' to garage                       only on TSM Lots
                                                              93 to 121
         GJ Gardner,      10' to living                       10' (lots 1 to
2020-03  Fairway          space             5' interior side  14)
         Courtyards       18' to garage     15' street side   10' (lots 15 to
                                                              29)
                                                              10' for one story
                          12' to living                       15' feet for two
2021-01  Lennar Homes,    space             5' interior side  story
         Tract 935        20' to garage     10' street side   One story homes
                                                              only on TSM Lots
                                                              24 to 37
                          10 feet minimum   5 feet minimum
2022-02  Wathen Castanos  to living space   interior side     10 feet
         Tract 939        18 feet minimum   10 feet minimum
                          to garage         street side
 
Notes:
   1.   All lots adjacent to canal are 10,000 square foot lots and must have a
40 foot clearance between house and canal.
   2.   20 feet amended Resolution 9224 to allow architectural features in 20
foot clear area.
   3.   Lots backing onto arterials, collectors or railroads have 20 foot rear
setback.
(Ord. 2013-05, 2-6-2014; amd. Ord. 2017-11, 9-19-2017; Ord. 2019-02, 6-18-2019;
Ord. 2020-06, 7-7-2020; Ord. 2022-04, 4-19-2022; Ord. 2022-06, 5-17-2022; Ord.
2023-12, 10-17-2023)
ARTICLE C. NAVAL AIR STATION LEMOORE (NASL) OVERLAY ZONE
SECTION:
9-9C-1: Purpose
9-9C-2: Applicability
9-9C-3: Development Standards
9-9C-1: PURPOSE:
This article establishes the Naval Air Station Lemoore (NASL) overlay zoning
district for the purpose of recognizing the potential adverse impacts on the
population from Naval Air Station Lemoore and establishing special development
regulations to ensure public health, safety, and welfare. (Ord. 2013-05, 2-6-
2014)
9-9C-2: APPLICABILITY:
The regulations of the Naval Air Station Lemoore (NASL) overlay zone as
provided in this article shall apply to those properties as designated on the
zoning map, generally west of State Route 41 and south of the city limits,
which fall in the military influence area (MIA). (Ord. 2013-05, 2-6-2014)
9-9C-3: DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS:
   A.   Overlay Areas: Lands within the NASL overlay zoning district are broken
down into overlay areas I, II, and III, as described in the joint land use
study. Overlay I areas are the most restrictive, applying to accident potential
zones (APZs) and areas experiencing aircraft noise greater than seventy five
decibels (>75 dB CNEL). Overlay II areas are those experiencing aircraft noise
between sixty five and seventy five decibels (65–75 dB CNEL). Overlay III areas
are those that experience aircraft noise less than sixty five decibels (<65 dB
CNEL).
Figure 9-9C-3-A, "NASL Overlay Areas", of this section illustrates the location
of these overlay areas. While there are no overlay I areas within the NASL
overlay zoning district, there are properties within overlay II and overlay
III, as well as low level flight tracking.
   FIGURE 9-9C-3-A
   NASL OVERLAY AREAS
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/08286aa2a408810754fa2332ce2e067d759ab116/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2357.jpg]
 
   B.   Height Limit: Restrictions on the height of structures within the NASL
overlay zone are necessary to ensure that structures will not impair flight
safety. To that end, no structure shall be built and no tree shall be allowed
to grow above a height of one hundred fifty feet (150').
   C.   Construction Requirements: Development located within overlay II and
overlay III of the NASL overlay zone where aircraft noise exceeds sixty five
decibels (65 dB CNEL) shall be constructed so as to attain an indoor noise
level of forty five decibels (45 dB CNEL). New residences shall be constructed
in accordance with noise attenuation standards of the city adopted building
code.
   D.   Development Review And Notification Required: Applications for
development, including conditional use permits, site plan and architectural
review, tentative maps, rezones, and general plan amendments, within the NASL
overlay zone shall be routed to Naval Air Station Lemoore and the federal
aviation administration for notification and review when involving tall
structures.
   E.   Disclosure Requirements: All new subdivisions of land within the NASL
overlay zone through tentative map as provided in title 8, chapter 7, article
F, "Tentative Maps", of the municipal code shall be required, as a condition of
approval, to record at time of final or parcel map an easement on all lots
created. Such easement shall identify that the property is near a military
installation subject to high aircraft noise, low level aircraft, aircraft
tests, and/or other military related issues within overlays II and III. (Ord.
2013-05, 2-6-2014)
CHAPTER 10
RESERVED
(Ord. 2012-01, 4-17-2012)
CHAPTER 11
RESERVED
(Ord. 2012-01, 4-17-2012)
CHAPTER 12
GLOSSARY OF TERMS
SECTION:
9-12-1: Purpose And Organization
9-12-2: Glossary Of Terms Used In This Title
9-12-1: PURPOSE AND ORGANIZATION:
The purpose of this chapter is to provide definitions for unique terms used
throughout this title that are technical or specialized in nature. Where any
definition in this chapter may conflict with definitions in other titles of the
Lemoore municipal code, the definition herein shall prevail for the purposes of
this title. If a word is not defined in this chapter, or in other provisions of
the Lemoore municipal code, the most common dictionary definition is presumed
to be correct. Terms are organized alphabetically. (Ord. 2013-05, 2-6-2014)
9-12-2: GLOSSARY OF TERMS USED IN THIS TITLE:
   A.   "A" Terms:
    ACCESSORY BUILDING: A detached structure ten (10) square feet in size or
greater. Such structures are broken down into one of the following three (3)
categories:
      1.   Fully Enclosed: Structures that are enclosed with walls for at least
fifty percent (50%) of the perimeter of the building. These include, but are
not limited to, garages, greenhouses, pool houses, sunrooms, workshops, storage
sheds, barns, windmills, water towers, and other agricultural outbuildings;
      2.   Limited/No Enclosure: Structures that are substantially open on all
sides (less than 50 percent of the perimeter is enclosed), including:
         a.   With solid roofs: These include, but are not limited to,
carports, solid roofed patio covers and gazebos, and lean-tos and similar
agricultural outbuildings with solid roof construction; and
         b.   With substantially open roofs: These include trellis patio
covers, arbors, pergolas, and similar structures constructed with a latticelike
roof structure. For purposes of this definition "substantially open" shall mean
a minimum of fifty percent (50%) of the covered area is open to light and air.
   ACCESSORY STRUCTURE: A detached structure or building which is subordinate
to, and the use of which is subordinate to, and whose use is customarily
incidental to, that of the main building, structure, or use on the same or
attached/adjacent lot. Accessory structures include accessory buildings,
landscape features, pool/spas, deck, and play equipment.
   ACCESSORY USE: A land use that is in addition to, secondary and incidental
to, and commonly associated with the primary use.
   ADMINISTRATIVE DECISIONS: Decisions that require limited interpretation or
exercise of policy or legal judgment in evaluating approval criteria because
the decision is made according to specific criteria where little to no
discretion is involved. Examples include zoning clearance as part of an
application for a building permit.
   ADMINISTRATIVE USE PERMIT: See definition of Use Permit.
   AFFORDABLE RENT: Monthly housing expenses, including a reasonable allowance
for utilities, for rental target units reserved for very low or lower income
households, not exceeding the following calculations:
      1   .Very low income: Fifty percent (50%) of the area median income for
Kings County, adjusted for household size, multiplied by thirty percent (30%)
and divided by twelve (12).
      2.   Lower income: Eighty percent (80%) of the area median income for
Kings County, adjusted for household size, multiplied by thirty percent (30%)
and divided by twelve (12).
   AFFORDABLE SALES PRICE: A sales price at which lower or very low income
households can qualify for the purchase of target units, calculated on the
basis of underwriting standards of mortgage financing available for the
development.
   ANTENNA: Any system of wires, poles, rods, reflecting disks, or similar
devices used for the transmission or reception of electromagnetic waves when
such system is either external to or attached to the exterior of a structure,
or is portable or movable. Antennas shall include devices having active
elements extending in any direction, and directional beam type arrays having
elements carried by and disposed from a generally horizontal boom that may be
mounted upon and rotated through a vertical mast or tower interconnecting the
boom and antenna support, all of which elements are deemed to be a part of the
antenna.
   ANTENNA, AMATEUR RADIO: Any antenna which is used for the purpose of
transmitting and receiving radio signals in conjunction with an amateur radio
station licensed by the federal communications commission.
   ANTENNA, BUILDING MOUNTED: Any antenna directly attached or affixed to a
building, tank, tower, or other structure. Building mounted antennas are
identified in two (2) distinct categories herein as follows:
      1.   Wall mounted: Attached or affixed to the elevation of the structure;
and
      2.   Roof mounted: Attached or affixed to the rooftop or top of the
structure.
   ANTENNA, DIRECTIONAL (Also Known As A PANEL ANTENNA): An antenna that
transmits and/or receives radio frequency signals in a directional pattern of
less than three hundred sixty degrees (360°).
   ANTENNA, GROUND MOUNTED: Any antenna with its base (either single or
multiple posts) placed directly on the ground or a mast twelve feet (12') or
less in height and six inches (6") in diameter.
   ANTENNA, PARABOLIC (Also Known As SATELLITE DISH ANTENNA): Any device
incorporating a reflective surface that is solid, open mesh, or bar configured
that is shallow dish, cone, horn, bowl, or cornucopia shaped and is used to
transmit and/or receive electromagnetic or radio frequency communication/
signals in a specific directional pattern from orbiting satellites or ground
transmitters. This definition is meant to include what are commonly referred to
as television receive only (TVRO) and satellite microwave antennas.
   APPEAL AUTHORITY: The identified authority is the designated appeal
authority for the application in the event that an appeal is filed pursuant to
section
9-2A-8, "Appeals", of this title.
   APPLICANT: The owner(s) or proponent(s) with a controlling interest in the
proposed project and any successors in interest.
   ARCADE: A continuously covered public space open on the sides, except for
structural columns or piers, adjacent to and extending along the facade of a
building. The space may be located between the facade and a sidewalk or another
public space, or it may replace a sidewalk along a private street where no
building setback is present.
   B.   "B" Terms:
    BASE ZONING DISTRICT: The primary zoning district that applies to a
property as listed in chapter 3, "Zoning Districts And Map", of this title.
   BUILD-TO LINE: A distance dimension that delineates the maximum distance
from the property line that a front or street side building facade can be
placed. A distance other than the number listed is not allowed.
   BUILDING: Any structure having a roof, columns, walls, and foundation.
   BUILDING HEIGHT: The vertical distance from the ground to the highest point
on the structure. See section
9-5A-2, "Height Limits Measurement And Exceptions", of this title for an
explanation of how to determine height.
   BUILDING OFFICIAL: The chief building official of the city of Lemoore.
   C.   "C" Terms:
    CALIFORNIA ENVIRONMENTAL QUALITY ACT (CEQA): Section 21000 et seq., as
amended, of the California Public Resources Code.
   CHILDCARE FACILITY: A facility installed, operated, and maintained for the
nonresidential care of children as defined under applicable state licensing
requirements for the facility. Such facilities include, but are not limited to,
infant centers, preschools, extended daycare facilities, school age childcare
centers, or family daycare homes as defined in this title.
   CITY: The city of Lemoore, California.
   CITY COUNCIL: The city council of the city of Lemoore, which is the
legislative body of the city and which has those duties as provided in chapters
1 and 2 of this title.
   CITY ENGINEER: The city engineer of the city of Lemoore.
   CITY MANAGER: The city manager of the city of Lemoore.
   CITY PROPERTY: Land or other property in which the city of Lemoore holds a
present right of possession and control, plus all public rights of way, plus
public parks, regardless of ownership. Schools, even if publicly owned or
operated, are not within this definition.
   CLEAR VISIBILITY AREA: A triangular shaped area on corner lots or where
driveways exit onto public streets. This area shall be kept unobstructed by any
structure or landscape between thirty inches (30") and seven feet (7') above
the surface of the public sidewalk as follows:
      1.   At any corner formed by the intersection of a driveway/alley and
street, the cross visibility area shall be a triangle having two (2) sides ten
feet (10') long and running along the driveway/alley edge and curb line of
street, said length beginning at their intersection and the third side formed
by a line connecting the two (2) ends.
      2.   At any corner formed by the intersecting streets, the cross
visibility area shall be a triangle having two (2) sides thirty feet (30') long
and running along each curb line, said length beginning at their intersection
and the third side formed by a line connecting the two (2) ends.
   FIGURE 9-12-2-3
   CLEAR VISIBILITY AREA
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/08286aa2a408810754fa2332ce2e067d759ab116/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2369.jpg]
 
    COLLOCATION: A wireless communication facility owned and operated by a
communication service provider which is located on the same tower, building,
accessory structure, or property as another communication facility owned or
operated by a different communication service provider.
   COMMERCIAL VEHICLE: A motor vehicle used for commercial, industrial, or
agricultural purposes and rated more than one ton capacity. Examples of
commercial use vehicles include, but are not limited to, tow trucks, flatbed
trucks, mobile food preparation vehicles including large trucks converted to
food vehicles (e.g., ice cream truck), street sweepers, buses, utility trucks
with hydraulic arms or lifts, and tractors and semitrailers, etc.
   COMMISSARY: A food facility approved by the Kings County public health
department that services mobile food vehicles where any of the following occur:
1) food, containers or supplies are stored, 2) food is prepared or prepackaged
for sale or service at other locations, 3) utensils are cleaned, and/or 4)
liquid and solid wastes are disposed of or potable water is obtained.
   COMMON INTEREST DEVELOPMENT: As defined in California Civil Code section
1351, means any of the following:
      1.   A community apartment project;
      2.   A condominium project;
      3.   A planned development; and
      4.   A stock cooperative.
   COMMUNITY APARTMENT PROJECT: A development in which an undivided interest in
land is coupled with the right of exclusive occupancy of any apartment located
thereon.
   COMMUNITY NOISE EQUIVALENT LEVEL (CNEL): Weighted average of sound levels
gathered throughout a twenty four (24) hour period.
   CONCERTINA WIRE: A type of barbed wire or razor wire that is formed into
large coils that usually sit atop another type of fencing.
   CONDITIONAL USE PERMIT: See definition of Use Permit.
   CONDITIONS OF APPROVAL: Those conditions placed on the approval of a
planning permit or entitlement that are reasonable and necessary in order to
ensure compliance with this title and to prevent adverse or detrimental impact
to the surrounding neighborhood.
   CONDOMINIUM PROJECT: A development consisting of condominiums. A condominium
consists of an undivided interest in common in a portion of real property
coupled with a separate interest in space called a unit, the boundaries of
which are described on a recorded final map, parcel map, or condominium plan in
sufficient detail to locate all boundaries thereof. The area within these
boundaries may be filled with air, earth, or water, or any combination thereof,
and need not be physically attached to land except by easements for access and,
if necessary, support. The description of the unit may refer to: 1) boundaries
described in the recorded final map, parcel map, or condominium plan, 2)
physical boundaries, either in existence, or to be constructed, such as walls,
floors, and ceilings of a structure or any portion thereof, 3) an entire
structure containing one or more units, or 4) any combination thereof. The
portion or portions of the real property held in undivided interest may be all
of the real property, except for the separate interests, or may include a
particular three-dimensional portion thereof, the boundaries of which are
described on a recorded final map, parcel map, or condominium plan. The area
within these boundaries may be filled with air, earth, or water, or any
combination thereof, and need not be physically attached to land except by
easements for access and, if necessary, support. An individual condominium
within a condominium project may include, in addition, a separate interest in
other portions of the real property.
   CUSTOM HOME: A home whose floor plan is only used once in a subdivision.
   D.   "D" Terms:
    DECK: An exterior floor supported by posts, piers, or other independent
supports. As an accessory structure, a deck is not attached by an adjacent
structure (e.g., dwelling).
   DENSITY BONUS: A density increase over the otherwise maximum allowable
residential density under the applicable zoning district and the land use
element of the general plan.
   DENSITY BONUS HOUSING AGREEMENT: A legally binding agreement between a
developer and the city to ensure that the requirements of this title are
satisfied.
   DENSITY BONUS UNITS: Those residential units granted pursuant to the
provisions of this title which exceed the otherwise maximum residential density
for the development site.
   DEVELOPED SITE: A site that has paved concrete or asphalt parking surfaces
and paved ingress and egress as well as landscaping that meets city standards.
   DEVELOPMENT: A proposed or already constructed building or group of
buildings.
   DEVELOPMENT AGREEMENT: An agreement between the city and a property owner
and/or developer for purposes of modifying development rules, regulations, and
policies governing permitted uses of land and density, and governing design,
improvements, construction standards and specifications, and phasing applicable
to development of the property involved in the agreement as provided in
sections 65864 through 65869.5, as amended, of the California Government Code.
   DISTRICT OR ZONE: A portion of the city within which certain uses of land
and buildings are permitted or prohibited, certain yards and other open spaces
are required, and certain height limits are established for buildings.
   E.   "E" Terms:
    ELECTROMAGNETIC: An electrical wave propagated by an electrostatic and
magnetic field of varying intensity.
   EQUIVALENT FINANCIAL INCENTIVE: A monetary contribution, based upon a land
cost per dwelling unit value, equal to one of the following:
      1.   A density bonus and an incentive(s); or
      2.   A density bonus, where an incentive(s) is not requested or is
determined to be unnecessary.
   ESTABLISHMENT: Any nonresidential use of land involving structures, as
defined in the building code, and the presence of human beings during normal
hours of operation. By way of example and not limitation, this definition
includes businesses, factories, farms, schools, hospitals, hotels and motels,
offices, and libraries, but does not include power transformer or other utility
facilities at which human beings are usually not present.
   F.   "F" Terms:
    FENCE AND/OR WALL: A vertical structure used to prevent the passage of
people and animals or obstruct views, air, or light. This does not include
structures or portions of structures designed to support a roof, awning, or
other horizontal structure, such as the wall of a building. Wing walls or other
extensions of a building wall that do not support the building shall be
included in the definition of a fence for purposes of this title.
   FINAL AUTHORITY: The identified authority is the designated approving
authority for the application.
   FLOOR AREA RATIO (FAR): The ratio between gross floor area of the primary
structure(s) on a site and gross site area. It includes all occupiable floors
of a building, making it a three- dimensional unit of measure. For example, a
multi-story building with a total floor area of one hundred thousand (100,000)
square feet on a fifty thousand (50,000) square foot lot will have a FAR of
2.0.
   FOOT-CANDLE: A unit of illumination produced on a surface, all points of
which are one foot (1') from a uniform point of one candle.
   FORM BASED ZONING: Provides a method of regulating development to achieve a
desired urban form characterized by a uniform street and circulation system,
building typologies, and street frontage requirements. Form based provisions
address the relationship between building facades and the public realm (e.g.,
streets and sidewalks), the form and mass of buildings, and the size,
character, and type of streets and blocks.
   FULL SHIELDING: A technique or method of construction where the fixture
completely conceals and recesses the light source from all viewing positions
except those positions permitted to receive illumination.
   G.   "G" Terms:
    GARDEN STRUCTURE: A detached decorative structure that is placed outside of
any other structure. Such features are sometimes used in conjunction with plant
materials for aesthetic enhancement. This definition includes trellises and
vertical lattice structures less than ten (10) square feet in size, statues,
fountains/water features, and similar features.
   GENERAL PLAN AMENDMENT: A planning process for approving an amendment to the
general plan of the city of Lemoore, including the land use map.
   GLARE: Light emitting from a luminaire with an intensity great enough to
reduce a viewer's ability to see and, in extreme cases, causing momentary
blindness.
   GRADE: The lowest point of elevation of the finished surface of the ground.
   GRADE, EXISTING: The natural grade in place prior to the preparation of
property for development.
   GRADE, FINISH: The final contour of the ground surface of a site that
conforms to the approved grading plan.
   H.   "H" Terms:
    HOME OCCUPATION PERMIT: A permit for the operation of a home occupation.
   HOUSING COST: The sum of actual or projected monthly payments for all of the
following associated with for sale target units: principal and interest on a
mortgage loan, including any loan insurance fees, property taxes and
assessments, fire and casualty insurance, property maintenance and repairs,
homeowner association fees, and a reasonable allowance for utilities.
Adjustments should be made as necessary for down payment assistance.
   HOUSING DEVELOPMENT: One or more groups of projects for residential units
planned for construction in the city. It includes a subdivision or common
interest development as defined in section 4000 et seq., of the California
Civil Code, residential units or unimproved residential lots, the
rehabilitation of existing multi-family dwellings where the rehabilitation
would result in a net increase in available units, and the conversion and
rehabilitation of an existing commercial building to residential use.
   I.   "I" Terms:
    INCENTIVE AND CONCESSION: Such regulatory concessions as specified in
subdivision (I) of Government Code section 65915 which include, but are not
limited to, the following:
      1.   The reduction of site development standards or a modification of
zoning code requirements or architectural design requirements that exceed the
minimum building standards approved by the California building standards
commission including, but not limited to, a reduction in setback and square
footage requirements and in the ratio of vehicular parking spaces that would
otherwise be required that results in identifiable financially sufficient and
actual cost reductions;
      2.   Approval of mixed use zoning in conjunction with the housing project
if commercial, office, industrial, or other land uses will reduce the cost of
the housing development and if the commercial, office, industrial, or other
land uses are compatible with the housing project and the existing or planned
development in the area where the proposed housing project will be located;
      3.   Direct financial assistance; and/or
      4.   Other regulatory incentives or concessions which result in
identifiable cost reductions or avoidance.
   J.   "J" Terms: Reserved for future use.
   K.   "K" Terms:
    KITCHEN: A room or space within a building used or intended to be used for
the cooking or preparation of food, which includes at a minimum:
      1.   A stove, oven, range top, or provisions for future installation of a
stove, oven, or range top including a two hundred twenty (220) volt outlet or
gas piping stub-out; and
      2.   At least one of the following:
         a.   A dishwasher, or
         b.   A kitchen sink that meets the definition of a "kitchen, domestic
sink" with a drainage fixture unit value of two (2.0) as described in the
California plumbing code, as now existing or hereafter amended. A microwave
alone shall not constitute a stove, oven, or range top for the purposes of this
definition.
   L.   "L" Terms:
    LANDSCAPE WALL: A wall of stone, brick, block, wood, or similar material
used to retain soil for purposes of creating a landscape area raised above the
finish grade of the lot. A landscape wall does not function as a "retaining
wall" as defined by this title.
   LEGISLATIVE DECISIONS: Decisions that must be made by the city council.
Legislative land use decisions apply to the general population and prescribe
policy and require the greatest amount of discretion and evaluation of
subjective approval criteria. A public hearing is required.
   LIGHT POLLUTION: Artificial light that causes a detrimental effect on the
environment, astronomical research, or enjoyment of the night sky or causes
undesirable glare or unnecessary illumination of adjacent property.
   LIGHT TRESPASS: The shining of light produced by a luminaire beyond the
boundaries of the property on which it is located.
   LOT: A parcel of land shown on a subdivision map, parcel map, certificate of
compliance, or a record of survey map or described by metes and bounds and
recorded in the office of the county recorder of Kings County; a part of a
single parcel of land when such part is used as though a separate lot for all
purposes and under all of the requirements of this title; and includes two (2)
or more abutting lots when combined and used as though a single lot. Types of
lots include the following (see
figure 9-12-2-4 of this definition):
   Lot, Corner: A lot situated at the intersection of two (2) or more public
streets having an angle of intersection of not more than one hundred thirty
five degrees (135°).
   Lot, Double Frontage: A lot having a frontage on two (2) parallel or
approximately parallel streets.
   Lot, Flag Or Corridor: A parcel of land shaped like a flag; the staff
(access corridor) is a narrow strip of land providing vehicular and pedestrian
access to the street with the bulk of the property lying to the rear of other
lots.
   Lot, Interior: A lot other than a corner lot or reverse corner lot.
   Lot, Key: The first lot to the side of a reversed corner lot, whether or not
separated by an alley.
   Lot, Loop Out: A lot along the outside curve (or knuckle) of two (2)
intersecting streets where one street curves into another to form a two-way
intersection.
   Lot, Reverse Corner: A corner lot, the street side of which is substantially
a continuation of the front lot line of the lot upon which it rears.
   FIGURE 9-12-2-4
   LOT TYPES
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/08286aa2a408810754fa2332ce2e067d759ab116/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2367.jpg]
 
    LOT COVERAGE: That portion of a lot or building site which is occupied by
any building or structure, including uncovered paved areas, walks, and swimming
pools, regardless of whether said building or structure is intended for human
occupancy. It is a ratio or percentage of the site encumbered by structures
that only looks at the footprint of structures relative to the lot, making it a
two-dimensional unit of measure.
   LOT DEPTH: The horizontal distance between the front and rear lot lines
measured on the longitudinal centerline.
   LOT FRONTAGE: The portion of a property that abuts one side of a public
street which allows access to the property.
   LOT LINE, FRONT: In the case of an interior lot, a line separating the lot
from the street; in the case of a corner lot, a line separating the narrowest
street frontage of the lot from the street. In the case of a flag lot, it shall
be the property line that abuts the access corridor (see
figure 9-12-2-5 of this definition).
   FIGURE 9-12-2-5
   FLAG LOT
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/08286aa2a408810754fa2332ce2e067d759ab116/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2365.jpg]
 
   FIGURE 9-12-2-6
   CUL-DE-SAC, ELBOW, AND SIMILAR LOTS
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/08286aa2a408810754fa2332ce2e067d759ab116/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2363.jpg]
 
    LOT LINE, REAR: A lot line which is opposite and most distant from the
front lot line and, in case of an irregular, triangular, or gore shaped lot, a
line ten feet (10') in length within the lot, parallel to and at the maximum
distance from the front lot line (see
figure 9-12-2-7 of this definition).
   FIGURE 9-12-2-7
   IRREGULAR AND CONVERGING LOTS
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/08286aa2a408810754fa2332ce2e067d759ab116/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2361.jpg]
 
    LOT LINE, SIDE: Any lot boundary line not a front lot line or a rear lot
line.
   LOT LINE, STREET SIDE: A side lot line that abuts a public street.
   LOT WIDTH: The horizontal distance between the side lot lines, measured at
right angles to the lot depth at a point midway between the front and rear lot
lines.
   LOWER INCOME HOUSEHOLD: Households whose income does not exceed the lower
income limits applicable to Kings County (less than 80 percent of median
adjusted for household), as published and periodically updated by the state
department of housing and community development pursuant to Health And Safety
Code section 50079.5.
   LUMINAIRE: A complete lighting unit consisting of a light source and all
necessary mechanical, electrical, and decorative parts. The pole, post, or
bracket is not considered a part of the luminaire.
   M.   "M" Terms:
    MASTER HOME PLAN: A home plan where the plan/home is being used multiple
times within a single subdivision. Includes all variants of the same (or
mirrored) floor plan where the exterior design has been altered to reflect a
different architectural style but the interior floor plans are substantially
the same.
   MAXIMUM RESIDENTIAL DENSITY: The maximum number of residential units
permitted by the city's general plan land use element and the applicable zoning
district at the time of application.
   MINOR DEVIATION: A planning permit allowing flexibility in project design
with regard to specific development standards by allowing deviations not to
exceed ten percent (10%) in building height, setback, lot coverage, and
parking.
   MODERATE INCOME HOUSEHOLD: Households whose income does not exceed the
moderate income limits applicable to Kings County (80 to 120 percent of median
adjusted for household), as published and periodically updated by the state
department of housing and community development pursuant to Health And Safety
Code section 50093.
   N.   "N" Terms:
    NOISE: Sound of any kind.
   NONCONFORMING STRUCTURE: A structure (including signs) which is not
permitted under the provisions of this title (or any amendments thereto) but
was legally in place, with licenses and permits in current status, at the
effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter or any subsequent
ordinance.
   NONCONFORMING USE: A use which is not permitted under the provisions of this
title (or any amendments thereto) but was legally in place, with licenses and
permits in current status, at the effective date of the ordinance codified in
this chapter or any subsequent ordinance.
   NONIONIZING ELECTROMAGNETIC RADIATION (NIER): Electromagnetic radiation
primarily in the visible, infrared, and radio frequency portions of the
electromagnetic spectrum.
   NONRESTRICTED UNIT: All units within a housing development excluding the
target units.
   O.   "O" Terms:
    ODOR: Fumes emitted that are perceptible without instruments by a
reasonable person at the lot line of the site.
   OFFICIAL ZONING INTERPRETATION: The process for clarification of ambiguity
in the regulations of this title in order to provide consistent interpretation
and application. See section
9-2B-8, "Official Zoning Interpretation", of this title.
   OPEN VIEW FENCING: Fencing that does not create a solid visual barrier, such
as wrought iron or tubular steel.
   OVERLAY ZONING DISTRICT: That/those supplemental zoning district(s) that
apply to a property in addition to the base zoning district as listed in
chapter 3, "Zoning Districts And Map", of this title.
   P.   "P" Terms:
    PARKING FACILITY: A public or shared parking lot.
   PARTICULATE MATTER AND AIR CONTAMINANTS: Smoke, sulfur compounds, dust,
soot, carbon, noxious acids, gases, mist, odors, or particulate matter, or
other air contaminants or combination which exceed any local, state, or federal
air quality standards or which might be obnoxious or offensive to anyone
residing or conducting business either on site or abutting the subject site.
Particulate matter shall not be discharged into the atmosphere in excess of the
standards of the federal environmental protection agency, the California air
resources board, or the San Joaquin Valley air pollution control district.
   PASEO: A public space that is located within a block's interior and that
connects two (2) streets that are parallel or within forty five degrees (45°)
of being parallel to each other.
   PEDESTRIAN PATHWAYS: The infrastructure that provides a safe pedestrian
circulation system throughout the development site that minimizes the conflict
between pedestrians and vehicular traffic at all points, including parking
areas and building access points.
   PERSONS AND FAMILIES OF MODERATE INCOME: Households whose income does not
exceed the moderate limits applicable to Kings County (80 to 120 percent of
median adjusted for household), as published and periodically updated by the
state department of housing and community development pursuant to section 50093
of the California Health And Safety Code.
   PLANNED DEVELOPMENT: A development (other than a community apartment
project, a condominium project, or a stock cooperative) having either or both
of the following features:
      1.   he common area is owned either by an association or in common by the
owners of the separate interests who possess appurtenant rights to the
beneficial use and enjoyment of the common area.
      2.    power exists in the association to enforce an obligation of an
owner of a separate interest with respect to the beneficial use and enjoyment
of the common area by means of an assessment which may become a lien upon the
separate interests in accordance with section 4000 et seq., of the Civil Code.
   PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENT: A planning process for the review of development
looking at the diversity in the relationship between buildings and open spaces.
   PLANNING AGENCY: The planning agency of the city of Lemoore as required by
section 65100 of the California Government Code, including the planning
director, city manager, planning commission, and city council.
   PLANNING COMMISSION: Pursuant to section 65101 of the California Government
Code, the planning commission of the city of Lemoore as established in title 2,
chapter 1 of the municipal code and assigned the duties as provided in chapters
1 and 2 of this title.
   PLANNING DIRECTOR: The planning director of the city of Lemoore, who
oversees, manages, and directs the efforts of the planning department.
   PLAY EQUIPMENT: Any structure used for recreational purposes including play
structures, jungle gyms, and swings, as defined in the California building
code.
   POOL/SPA: As defined in the city adopted building code, any structure
intended for swimming or recreational bathing that contains water over eighteen
inches (18") deep. This includes inground, aboveground, and onground swimming
pools, hot tubs, and spas. Also includes incidental equipment and housing
(e.g., pumps, heating equipment, etc.).
   PREPARED FOOD: Food sold at retail that, prior to such sale, is washed,
cooked, or combined or otherwise prepared at the vending facility.
   PREZONING: A zoning designation, formally adopted by the city, that applies
to property outside of the existing limits in advance of annexation of the area
into the city. The zoning districts applied through a prezoning do not take
effect until the annexation is approved and recorded by the Kings County local
agency formation commission.
   PRIMARY BUILDING FRONTAGE: The building frontage that faces the street. In
cases where a building has more than one street frontage, or where a business
has no building frontage facing a street, the building frontage with the
primary business entrance shall be considered the primary building frontage.
   PRIMARY USE: The main purpose for which a site is developed and/or used,
including the activities that are conducted on the site a majority of the hours
during which activities occur. A site may have more than one primary use.
   PROPERTY LINE: See definitions of Lot Line.
   PUBLIC FORUM: Public parks, sidewalks which are connected to the city's main
pedestrian circulation system, and the pedestrian area immediately surrounding
city hall (not including the interior thereof). In consultation with the city
attorney, the city shall interpret this phrase in light of relevant court
decisions.
   PUBLIC HEARING: A meeting held by the designated approving authority (i.e.,
the planning commission or city council) that is open to the public and at
which the approving authority transparently deliberates a planning permit or
entitlement and accepts testimony from the public as required by the provisions
of this title or state statute.
   Q.   "Q" Terms:
    QUALIFYING HOUSING DEVELOPMENT: A housing development where the applicant
or developer of the housing development agrees to provide one or more of the
following:
      1.   At least ten percent (10%) of the total units of the housing
development as target units affordable to lower income households;
      2.   At least five percent (5%) of the total units of the housing
development as target units affordable to very low income households;
      3.   At least ten percent (10%) of the total dwelling units in a common
interest development project 1 or in a planned development 2 for persons of
moderate income; or
      4.   Senior citizen housing.
   QUALIFYING SENIOR RESIDENT: Senior citizens or other persons eligible to
reside in a senior citizen housing development.
   QUASI-JUDICIAL DECISIONS: Decisions typically involving some level of
discretion or policy determination on the part of the approving authority's
action and involve making a set of findings as part of the approval process. A
public hearing is held, evidence is weighed, and conclusions are drawn. The
approving authority uses this information as the basis for their decision.
   R.   "R" Terms:
    REASONABLE ACCOMMODATION: As required by law, means a planning permit that
provides a process for individuals with disabilities to make requests for
reasonable accommodation for relief from the various land use, zoning, or
rules, policies, practices, and/or procedures of the city.
   RECOMMENDING AUTHORITY: The identified authority makes a recommendation on
the application to another body.
   RECREATIONAL VEHICLE (RV): Means and includes the following:
      ALL-TERRAIN VEHICLES: A recreational vehicle designed for or capable of
travel over rough ground, including but not limited to, 4-wheelers, 3-wheelers,
ATVs, dune buggies, and other similar type vehicles.
      AUXILIARY DOLLY: A vehicle, not designed for carrying persons or property
on its own structure, which is so constructed and used in conjunction with a
semitrailer as to support a portion of the weight of the semitrailer and any
load thereon, but not permanently attached to the semitrailer, although a part
of the weight of such dolly may rest on another vehicle.
      BUS: A motor vehicle designed for carrying more than ten persons
including the driver and used or maintained for the transportation of
passengers.
      COMMERCIAL COACH: A vehicle, with or without motive power, designed and
equipped for human occupancy for industrial, professional, or commercial
purposes, including a trailer coach.
      MOTOR HOME: A vehicle, with or without motive power, designed for human
habitation for recreational or emergency occupancy.
      MOTOR TRUCK: A vehicle, designed, used or maintained primarily for the
transportation of property and which has an unladen weight in excess of 6,500
pounds.
      SEMITRAILER: A vehicle with a gross weight of more than 6,000 pounds,
designed for carrying persons or property, used in conjunction with a motor
vehicle, and so constructed that some of its weight and that of its load rests
upon, or is carried by, another vehicle.
      TENT TRAILER: A vehicle, with or without motive power, designed for human
habitation for recreational or emergency occupancy.
      TRAILER: A vehicle designed for carrying persons or property on its own
structure and for being drawn by a motor vehicle and so constructed that no
part of its weight rests upon any other vehicle and which has a wheelbase in
excess of four feet. For purposes of this chapter, a trailer shall also
include, but not be limited to, a boat trailer and utility trailer or any other
such similar apparatus.
      TRUCK TRACTOR: A motor vehicle designed and used primarily for drawing
other vehicles and not so constructed as to carry a load other than a part of
the weight of the vehicle and load so drawn.
      WATERCRAFT: A boat or other vessel that travels on water, including but
not limited to, boats, jet skis, wave runners, or any other similar personal
watercraft or vessel.
   RETAINING WALL: A wall constructed as part of the development of the site
through the issuance of a grading permit or as part of a roadway improvement
project that is designed and engineered to retain soil for purposes of soil
stabilization.
   REZONING: A planning permit that changes the zoning designation on a piece
of property within the city as recorded on the zoning map.
   RIGHT OF WAY LINE: The future right of way line or plan lines of any highway
or street as shown on the current circulation plan of the city's general plan.
   ROOFLINE: Either the top of a parapet of a building or, in the case of a
building with a shed roof, the bottom of the eave.
   S.   "S" Terms:
   SATELLITE EARTH STATION: A facility consisting of more than a single
satellite dish or parabolic antenna that transmits to and/or receives signals
from an orbiting satellite.
   SENIOR CITIZEN HOUSING DEVELOPMENT: A residential development developed,
substantially rehabilitated, or substantially renovated for senior citizens
that has at least thirty five (35) dwelling units and complies with the
requirements of section 51.3 of the California Civil Code.
   SETBACK: The minimum distance between a structure and a property line of the
lot, measured at a right angle from the designated property line.
   SHIELDING: A technique or method of construction to block the light from
illuminating certain distant surfaces.
   SIMILAR USE DETERMINATION: A formal action to determine whether or not a
proposed use is similar to a permitted or conditionally permitted use and
whether such proposed use may be permitted in a particular zoning district. See
section
9-2B-7, "Similar Use Determination", of this title.
   SITE PLAN AND ARCHITECTURAL REVIEW: That process for the review of the
design and layout of new development in the city to ensure that it is
consistent with the regulations of this title and will not result in a
detriment to the city or the environment.
   SPECIAL NEEDS POPULATION: Persons identified as having special needs related
to any of the following:
      1.   Mental health;
      2.   Physical disabilities;
      3.   Developmental disabilities, including, but not limited to, mental
retardation, cerebral palsy, epilepsy, and autism;
      4.   The risk of homelessness; or
   Persons eligible for mental health services funded in whole or in part by
the mental health services fund, created by section 5890 of the Welfare And
Institutions Code.
   SPECIFIC PLAN: A specific plan for the implementation of the city's general
plan as provided in section 65450 of the California Government Code.
   STOCK COOPERATIVE: A development in which a corporation is formed or availed
of, primarily for the purpose of holding title to, either in fee simple or for
a term of years, improved real property, and all or substantially all of the
shareholders of the corporation receive a right of exclusive occupancy in a
portion of the real property, title to which is held by the corporation. The
owners' interest in the corporation, whether evidenced by a share of stock, a
certificate of membership, or otherwise, shall be deemed to be an interest in a
common interest development and a real estate development for purposes of
subdivision (f) of section 25100 of the Corporations Code. A "stock
cooperative" includes a limited equity housing cooperative which is a stock
cooperative that meets the criteria of section 817 of the Civil Code.
   STRUCTURE: Anything constructed or erected, the use of which requires
attachment to the ground or attachment to something located on the ground.
Examples include, but are not limited to, buildings, fences and walls, pools,
patio covers, decks, and signs. All buildings are considered structures but not
all structures are considered buildings.
   T. "T" Terms:
    TARGET UNIT: A dwelling unit within a housing development which will be
reserved for sale or rent to, and affordable to, very low or lower income
households or qualifying senior residents.
   TEMPORARY USE: A use established for a limited time with the intent to
discontinue the use upon expiration of the time period.
   TEMPORARY USE PERMIT: An administrative permit, issued by the city, for
qualifying short term activities.
   TITLE: This title of the city of Lemoore municipal code.
   TOWER: A mast, pole, monopole, lattice tower, or other structure designed
and primarily used to support antennas. This definition includes ground mounted
structures twelve feet (12') or greater in height and building mounted
structures that extend above the roofline, parapet wall, or other roof screen
with a mast greater than six inches (6") in diameter.
   TRAILER: An unpowered vehicle pulled by a powered vehicle. Commonly, the
term trailer refers to such vehicles used for transport of goods and materials.
Travel trailers are considered recreational vehicles.
   TREE PERMIT FOR TREES ON PRIVATE PROPERTY: A permit issued by the city
authorizing the removal, relocation, or topping of those trees specific in this
title that are on private property.
   U.   "U" Terms:
    USE: The purpose for which land or a building thereon is designed,
arranged, or intended or for which it is or may be occupied or maintained.
   USE PERMIT: A planning permit issued by the city for the establishment of a
specific use of land within the city. In approving the use permit, the city may
establish reasonable conditions on the use. There are two (2) types of use
permits: administrative use permits, which are reviewed and decided by the
planning director, and conditional use permits, which are reviewed and decided
by the planning commission.
   V.   "V" Terms:
    VARIANCE: A planning permit that approves, based on a quasi-judicial
decision that meets findings, exceptions to the development standards and
provisions of this title in cases where, because of special circumstances
applicable to the property, the strict application of this title deprives such
property of privileges enjoyed by other property in the vicinity and under
identical land use zoning districts.
   VERY LOW INCOME HOUSEHOLD: Households whose income does not exceed the very
low income limits applicable to Kings County (less than 50 percent of area
median income adjusted for household), as published and periodically updated by
the state department of housing and community development pursuant to section
50105 of the California Health And Safety Code.
   VESSEL: Watercraft used or capable of being used as a means of
transportation on water.
   W.   "W" Terms: Reserved for future use.
   X.   "X" Terms: Reserved for future use.
   Y.   "Y" Terms:
    YARD: An open space other than a court, on a lot, unoccupied and
unobstructed from the ground upward, except as otherwise provided in this
title. Types of yards include the following:
   Yard, Front: Front yard shall mean a yard extending across the full width of
the lot between the front of the main building and the front lot line. The
depth of the required front yard shall be measured horizontally between the
nearest part of the closest building and the nearest point of the front lot
line.
   Yard, Rear: Rear yard shall mean a yard extending across the full width of
the lot between the most rear main building and the rear lot line. The depth of
the required rear yard shall be measured horizontally from the nearest part of
a main building toward the nearest point of the rear lot line.
   Yard, Side: Side yard shall mean a yard, between a building and the side lot
line, extending from the front yard to the rear yard. The width of the required
side yard shall be measured horizontally from the nearest point of the side lot
line toward the nearest part of the closest building.
   Yard, Side Street: Street side yard shall mean a yard, between a building
and the side lot line adjacent to the street right of way, extending from the
front yard to the rear yard. The depth of the required side street yard shall
be measured horizontally between the nearest part of the closest building and
the nearest point of the side lot line adjacent to the street.
   YARD AREA, ACTUAL: The area of a lot that is unencumbered by structures.
   YARD AREA, REQUIRED: The required yard area (front, interior side, street
side, and/or rear) of a lot is the horizontal area between the property line
and the minimum setback distance for the respective yard pursuant to chapter 5,
article B, "Development Standards By Zoning District", of this title.
   FIGURE 9-12-2-8
   ACTUAL AND REQUIRED YARD AREA
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/08286aa2a408810754fa2332ce2e067d759ab116/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2359.jpg]
 
   Z.   "Z" Terms:
    ZONING CLEARANCE: An administrative process, completed as part of the
building permit review or similar administrative permit issuance that ensures
the proposed activity or construction is consistent with applicable sections
and standards of this title. See section
9-2B-3, "Zoning Clearance", of this title for more information.
   ZONING CODE: This title of the city of Lemoore municipal code.
   ZONING CODE AMENDMENT: A planning process for approving an amendment to this
title consistent with the city's general plan and/or specific plans.
   ZONING MAP: The map identifying the designations, locations, and boundaries
of the zoning districts established by this title. This map and all notations
and information on it are a part of this title by reference.
(Ord. 2013-05, 2-6-2014; amd. Ord. 2024-07, 12-3-2024)
 
Notes
1 1. As defined by CIV §4000 et seq.
2 2. As defined by CIV §4000 et seq.
TITLE 10
ENTERPRISE REVENUE BOND LAW
CHAPTER 1
GENERAL PROVISIONS AND DEFINITIONS
SECTION:
10-1-1: Short Title
10-1-2: Purpose
10-1-3: Amendment
10-1-4: Definitions
10-1-1: SHORT TITLE:
This title may be cited as the ENTERPRISE REVENUE BOND LAW. (Ord. 2018-02, 4-3-
2018)
10-1-2: PURPOSE:
The City Council hereby finds that the City's issuance of bonds to finance
capital improvement costs is a Municipal affair and promotes a necessary and
essential public purpose. (Ord. 2018-02, 4-3-2018)
10-1-3: AMENDMENT:
So long as any bonds issued pursuant to this title is outstanding, this title
may not be amended to have a material, adverse effect upon the rights of the
holders of any outstanding bonds without the written consent of the bond
holders, except as follows:
   A.   The amendment is needed to cure an ambiguity or to correct or
supplement a defective provision; or
   B.   If the City Council finds that the amendment will not materially impair
or adversely affect the City's interests or the interests of any bond holder;
or
   C.   The amendment will apply solely to bonds issued after its effective
date; or
   D.   The amendment is permitted under the issuing instrument. (Ord. 2018-02,
4-3-2018)
10-1-4: DEFINITIONS:
The following definitions apply in the provisions of this title:
BONDS: Means any bonds, notes, loans, interim certificates, debentures,
installment-purchase agreements, leases, or other obligations that are issued
or incurred under this title and are payable from revenues described in the
issuing instrument.
CAPITAL IMPROVEMENT: Means either or both of the following:
   A.   Any addition, betterment, replacement, renewal, extension, equipping,
or improvement of or to an enterprise, including but not limited to, the
acquisition of land or any interests in land;
   B.   Any capital costs for the extension, reinforcement, enlargement, or
other improvement of a facility or property, or for the acquisition of an
interest in a facility or property, that is not part of an enterprise but is
determined by the City to be necessary or convenient in connection with use of
an enterprise.
CAPITAL IMPROVEMENT COSTS: Means all costs and expenses the City pays or incurs
in connection with planning, designing, acquiring, constructing, installing,
furnishing, equipping, and financing a capital improvement; placing a capital
improvement in operation; disposing of a capital improvement; and obtaining
governmental approvals, certificates, permits, and licenses for a capital
improvement. "Capital improvement costs" includes the following:
   A.   Reimbursement to the City for any costs and expenses that are included
in this definition, are paid by the City, have not previously been reimbursed
to the City, and will not be reimbursed from contributions in aid of
construction.
   B.   Costs of preliminary investigation and development, including the cost
of performing or acquiring feasibility and planning studies; the cost of
securing regulatory approvals; the cost of acquiring land and land rights; fees
for engineering and contractor services; the costs of labor, materials,
equipment, utility services, and supplies; and legal fees and financing
expenses.
   C.   Working capital and working-capital reserves in such amounts as the
City determines to be appropriate.
   D.   Interest accruing in whole or in part on bonds before and during
construction of a capital improvement or any portion of a capital improvement,
and interest accruing for such additional time as the City determines.
   E.   Deposits from the proceeds of bonds in any funds or accounts when the
issuing instrument requires the deposits.
   F.   The payment of principal, purchase price, premium, and interest of any
indebtedness, the proceeds of which were applied to capital improvement costs.
   G.   Training and testing costs that are properly allocable to acquiring or
constructing a capital improvement or placing it in operation.
   H.   All costs of insurance that is in effect when a capital improvement is
constructed and placed in operation.
   I.   All costs relating to injury and damage claims that arise out of the
acquisition or construction of a capital improvement (less insurance proceeds).
   J.   Any Federal, State, and local taxes and payments in lieu of taxes that
are legally required or permitted and apply to acquiring or constructing a
capital improvement and placing it in operation.
   K.   Amounts due the United States of America as rebate of investment
earnings on the proceeds of bonds or as penalties in lieu of rebate.
   L.   Amounts payable for capital costs of expanding, reinforcing, enlarging,
or otherwise improving facilities the City determines to be necessary in
connection with the use of a capital improvement, and the costs associated with
the removal from service of, or reductions in service by, any facilities as a
result of the expansion, reinforcement, enlargement or other improvement of
such facilities or the construction of a capital improvement.
   M.   Costs of issuance of any bonds, including but not limited to costs of
legal, underwriting, feasibility, engineering, and other consultants; costs of
City staff; funding of bond reserve funds (including the purchase of reserve
surety or any similar instrument permitted or required by the issuing
instrument); costs of bond insurance or other credit or liquidity enhancement;
and, in connection with issuance of refunding bonds, the costs of establishing
any related refunding escrow.
   N.   Fees and expenses relating to any lending or credit facility or
agreement for a capital improvement or any portion of a capital improvement.
   O.   All other costs the City incurs that are properly allocable to the
design, acquisition, construction, or placing in operation of a capital
improvement, including City staff costs.
   P.   Any other cost as the City Council may, in its discretion, define as a
capital improvement cost in the issuing instrument.
ENTERPRISE: Means the properties, improvements, and works owned, controlled, or
operated at any time by the City as part of a self-supporting City program that
provides services to the general public on a user-fee basis and is accounted
for separately from other City funds in the City's financial statements through
the use of an Enterprise Fund.
FINANCE DIRECTOR: Means the City's Finance Director (or such other person
serving at the time as the City's Chief Financial Officer).
INCLUDE: Include and its variants are terms of enlargement rather than of
limitation, so that "includes" means "includes but not limited to", and
"including" means "including but not limited to".
ISSUING INSTRUMENT: Means the resolution of the City Council adopted under this
title and any indenture, trust agreement, loan agreement, lease, installment-
purchase agreement, revolving- credit agreement, credit or liquidity agreement,
or other instrument or agreement under which the City issues bonds.
RATE STABILIZATION FUND: Means any fund established by such name in an issuing
instrument and intended to stabilize the rates paid by end-users of an
enterprise over a given time.
REVENUES: Means all income, rents, rates, fees, charges, and other monies that
the City derives from an enterprise and that the City Council may, in its
discretion, designate as "revenues" in the issuing instrument. (Ord. 2018-02,
4-3-2018)
CHAPTER 2
ISSUANCE OF BONDS
SECTION:
10-2-1: General Powers
10-2-2: Authorization Of Bonds
10-2-3: Proceedings Authorizing Issuance; Public Or Private Sales
10-2-4: Application Of Proceeds Of Bonds
10-2-5: Issuing Instrument
10-2-6: Insurance Or Credit Enhancement Or Liquidity Support
10-2-7: Bonds And Investments; Contracts To Place On Interest- Rate, Cash-Flow,
Or Other Basis
10-2-8: Investment Of Proceeds
10-2-9: Personal Liability
10-2-10: Refunding Bonds
10-2-11: Repayment Of Bonds
10-2-12: Rate Stabilization Fund
10-2-1: GENERAL POWERS:
The City is authorized and empowered to do the following:
   A.   Issue bonds for the purposes of financing capital improvement costs,
refunding outstanding bonds, and paying all costs incurred in connection with
bonds.
   B.   Establish the terms for financings undertaken in accordance with this
title.
   C.   Employ or contract for such legal, underwriting, feasibility,
engineering, and other consultant services the City Council determines to be
necessary for the issuance and sale of bonds.
   D.   Do all things necessary or convenient to carry out the purposes of this
title. (Ord. 2018-02, 4-3-2018)
10-2-2: AUTHORIZATION OF BONDS:
The City Council may adopt a resolution authorizing the issuance of bonds in
accordance with this title. Every issue of bonds must be payable from revenues
of the enterprise for which capital improvement costs are being financed. (Ord.
2018-02, 4-3-2018)
10-2-3: PROCEEDINGS AUTHORIZING ISSUANCE; PUBLIC OR PRIVATE SALES:
   A.   The resolution that authorizes issuance of bonds and the issuing
instrument may prescribe any or all of the following for the bonds:
      1.   The form of the bonds, which may be issued as serial bonds, term
bonds, or installment bonds, or any combination of them.
      2.   The date or dates to be borne by the bonds.
      3.   The date or dates of maturity of the bonds.
      4.   The interest to be borne by the bonds, which may be taxable or tax-
exempt, fixed or variable, and which may be paid on a current-interest-rate
basis or a capital-appreciation basis.
      5.   The date or dates that the bonds will be payable.
      6.   The denominations, form, and registration privileges of the bonds.
      7.   The manner of execution of the bonds.
      8.   The place or places the bonds are payable.
      9.   The terms of redemption of the bonds.
      10.   Any other terms and conditions the City deems necessary.
   B.   The bonds may be sold at either a public or private sale, on either a
negotiated or competitive basis, and at a price at, above, or below the par
value. (Ord. 2018-02, 4-3-2018)
10-2-4: APPLICATION OF PROCEEDS OF BONDS:
The proceeds of the bonds must be applied to capital improvement costs, or the
retirement of outstanding bonds. (Ord. 2018-02, 4-3-2018)
10-2-5: ISSUING INSTRUMENT:
In the discretion of the City Council, any bonds issued under this title may be
secured or evidenced by an issuing instrument in the form of an indenture or a
trust agreement between the City and a corporate trustee or trustees, which may
be any trust company or bank having the powers of a trust company. An issuing
instrument may contain any lawful provisions the City Council determines to be
reasonable and proper. (Ord. 2018-02, 4-3-2018)
10-2-6: INSURANCE OR CREDIT ENHANCEMENT OR LIQUIDITY SUPPORT:
The City may obtain bond insurance or other credit enhancement or liquidity
support for the bonds and may enter into any credit agreement, reimbursement
agreement, standby bond-purchase agreement, or similar agreement with any
person or entity. Such an agreement must contain the terms of the credit,
reimbursement, liquidity support, interest rate, and security, and any other
terms the Finance Director deems necessary or appropriate. (Ord. 2018-02, 4-3-
2018)
10-2-7: BONDS AND INVESTMENTS; CONTRACTS TO PLACE ON INTEREST- RATE, CASH-FLOW,
OR OTHER BASIS:
   A.   In connection with, or incidental to, the issuance or carrying of
bonds, or the acquisition or carrying of any investment or program of
investment with respect to bonds, the City Manager or the Finance Director may,
on the City's behalf, enter into any contracts that (s)he determines to be
necessary or appropriate to place the obligation or investment of the City (as
represented by the bonds, investment, or program of investment) and the
contract or contracts, in whole or in part, on the interest-rate, currency,
cash-flow, or other basis he or she desires, including the following:
      1.   Contracts commonly known as interest-rate-swap agreements, currency-
swap agreements, forward-payment-conversion agreements, and futures.
      2.   Contracts providing for payments based on levels of, or changes in,
interest rates, currency-exchange rates, or stock or other indices.
      3.   Contracts to exchange cash-flows or a series of payments.
      4.   Contracts to hedge payment, currency, rate, spread, or similar
exposure, including interest-rate floors or caps, options, puts, and calls.
      5.   Contracts permitted by the related issuing instrument.
   B.   Each of the City Manager and the Finance Director may also enter into
these contracts in connection with, or incidental to, entering into or
maintaining any agreement that secures bonds.
   C.   These contracts must contain the payment, security, default, remedy,
and other terms the City Manager or the Finance Director determines to be
appropriate. When determining the terms of, and the other parties to, these
contracts, the City Manager or the Finance Director shall give due
consideration to the creditworthiness of the other parties, including any
ratings of the parties by a nationally recognized rating agency. (Ord. 2018-02,
4-3-2018)
10-2-8: INVESTMENT OF PROCEEDS:
In connection with, or incidental to, the issuance or carrying of bonds the
City Manager or the Finance Director may, on the City's behalf, enter into
investment agreements, forward-purchase agreements, and other investments
relating to the investment of amounts held according to an issuing instrument.
(Ord. 2018-02, 4-3-2018)
10-2-9: PERSONAL LIABILITY:
Neither the members of the City Council; nor the City's officers, employees,
and agents; nor any person executing bonds will be liable personally on the
bonds or be subject to any personal liability or accountability by reason of
the issuance of the bonds. (Ord. 2018-02, 4-3-2018)
10-2-10: REFUNDING BONDS:
The City Council may issue bonds to refund outstanding bonds. Such a refunding
includes payment of the principal, purchase price, interest, and redemption
premiums, if any, of the outstanding bonds. At the discretion of the City
Council, based on the City Manager's or the Finance Director's recommendation,
the proceeds of bonds issued to refund outstanding bonds may be applied to the
retirement of the outstanding bonds at maturity or to the redemption (on any
redemption date) or purchase of the outstanding bonds before maturity, upon
such terms as the City Council determines to be appropriate. (Ord. 2018-02, 4-
3-2018)
10-2-11: REPAYMENT OF BONDS:
The principal and purchase price and any premium of, and interest on, the bonds
must be payable exclusively from revenues and other funds pledged under the
issuing instrument, and as described in the issuing instrument. The issuance of
bonds may not directly, indirectly, or contingently obligate the City Council
to levy or pledge any form of taxation. (Ord. 2018-02, 4-3-2018)
10-2-12: RATE STABILIZATION FUND:
The issuing instrument may establish a Rate Stabilization Fund to be held by
the City in connection with bonds and used to stabilize the rates paid by end-
users of an enterprise over a given time. (Ord. 2018-02, 4-3-2018)
CHAPTER 3
MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS
SECTION:
10-3-1: Liberal Construction
10-3-2: This Title 10 Is Complete, Additional, And Alternative
10-3-3: Validity Of Bonds
10-3-4: Title 10 Controlling
10-3-5: Partial Invalidity
10-3-1: LIBERAL CONSTRUCTION:
This title, being necessary for the health, welfare, and safety of the City and
its residents, is to be liberally construed to carry out its purposes. (Ord.
2018-02, 4-3-2018)
10-3-2: THIS TITLE 10 IS COMPLETE, ADDITIONAL, AND ALTERNATIVE:
This title provides a complete, additional, and alternative method for doing
the things authorized and is to be regarded as supplemental and additional to
the powers conferred by other laws. (Ord. 2018-02, 4-3-2018)
10-3-3: VALIDITY OF BONDS:
The validity of any bonds does not depend on, and is not affected in any way
by, any proceedings taken by the City for acquisition, construction, or
completion of any properties or projects for which the bonds are issued or any
agreements made in connection with the acquisition, construction, or operation
of those properties. The bonds will be incontestable and by their issuance and
delivery will conclusively establish the due performance of all conditions
precedent to their issue. (Ord. 2018-02, 4-3-2018)
10-3-4: TITLE 10 CONTROLLING:
To the extent this title is inconsistent with any general statute or special
act, this title will control. (Ord. 2018-02, 4-3-2018)
10-3-5: PARTIAL INVALIDITY:
If, for any reason, any part of this title is invalid, then all valid parts
that are severable from the invalid part remain in effect. (Ord. 2018-02, 4-3-
2018)
