LIVINGSTON, CALIFORNIA
CODE OF ORDINANCES
Code current through:
Ord. 662, passed 1-6-2026
 
Published by:
American Legal Publishing
525 Vine Street, Suite 310
Cincinnati, Ohio 45202
1-833-226-3439 * www.amlegal.com
ORDINANCES PENDING REVIEW FOR CODIFICATION
Listed ordinances have been passed, but they are pending review by the
publisher, and they may not amend the code of ordinances. Additionally,
ordinances listed in this section may not show the original ordinances in their
entirety. Please contact the office of the clerk if there are any questions
concerning any listed ordinances.
TITLE 1: ADMINISTRATIVE
CHAPTER 1: OFFICIAL CITY CODE
Section
1-1-1 Title
1-1-2 Acceptance
1-1-3 Amendments
1-1-4 Code alteration
§ 1-1-1 TITLE.
   Upon adoption by the City Council, this code is hereby declared to be and
shall hereafter constitute the official code of the city. This code of
ordinances shall be known and cited as the Livingston City Code, and it is
hereby published by authority of the Council and shall be kept up to date as
provided in §
1-1-3 of this chapter. Any reference to the number of any section contained
herein shall be understood to refer to the position of the same number, its
appropriate chapter and title heading, and to the general penalty clause,
relating thereto, as well as to the section itself, when reference is made to
this code by title in any legal documents.
(Ord. 331, passed 5-19-1987)
§ 1-1-2 ACCEPTANCE.
   This code, as hereby presented in printed form, shall hereafter be received
without further proof in all courts and in all administrative tribunals of this
state as the ordinances of the city of general and permanent effect, except the
excluded ordinances enumerated in §
1-2-1 of this title.
(Ord. 331, passed 5-19-1987)
§ 1-1-3 AMENDMENTS.
   Any ordinance or resolution amending this code shall set forth the title,
chapter and section number of the section or sections to be amended, and this
shall constitute sufficient compliance with any statutory requirements
pertaining to the amendment or revisions by ordinance or resolution of any part
of this code. All such amendments or revisions by ordinance or resolution shall
be immediately forwarded to the codifiers or resolution material shall be
prepared for insertion in its proper place in each copy of this code. Each such
replacement page shall be properly identified and shall be inserted in each
individual copy of this code.
(Ord. 331, passed 5-19-1987)
§ 1-1-4 CODE ALTERATION.
   It shall be deemed unlawful for any person to alter, change, replace or
deface in any way any section or any page of this code in such a manner that
the meaning of any phrase or order may be changed or omitted. Replacement pages
may be inserted according to the official instructions when so authorized by
the City Council. The Clerk shall see that the replacement pages are properly
inserted in the official copies maintained in the office of the Clerk. Any
person having in his or her custody an official copy of this code shall make
every effort to maintain said code in an up to date and efficient manner. He or
she shall see to the immediate insertion of new or replacement pages when such
are delivered to him or her or made available to him or her through the office
of the City Clerk. Said code books, while in actual possession of officials and
other interested persons, shall be and remain the property of the city and
shall be returned to the office of the Clerk when directed to do so by order of
the City Council.
(Ord. 331, passed 5-19-1987)
CHAPTER 2: SAVINGS CLAUSE
Section
1-2-1 Repeal of general ordinances
1-2-2 Public utility ordinances
1-2-3 Court proceedings
1-2-4 Severability clause
§ 1-2-1 REPEAL OF GENERAL ORDINANCES.
   All general ordinances of the city passed prior to the adoption of this code
are hereby repealed, except such as are included in this code or are by
necessary implication herein reserved from repeal (subject to the saving
clauses contained in the following sections), and excluding the following
ordinances which are not hereby repealed: tax levy ordinances; appropriation
ordinances; ordinances relating to boundaries and annexations; franchise
ordinances and other ordinances granting special rights to persons or
corporations; contract ordinances and ordinances authorizing the execution of a
contract or the issuance of warrants; salary ordinances; ordinances
establishing, naming or vacating streets, alleys or other public places;
improvement ordinances; bond ordinances; ordinances relating to elections;
ordinances relating to the transfer or acceptance of real estate by or from the
city; and all special ordinances.
(Ord. 331, passed 5-19-1997)
§ 1-2-2 PUBLIC UTILITY ORDINANCE.
   No ordinance relating to railroad crossings with streets and other public
ways, or relating to the conduct, duties, service or rates of public utilities
shall be repealed by virtue of the adoption of this code or by virtue of the
preceding section, excepting as this code may contain provisions for such
matters, in which case this code shall be considered as amending such ordinance
or ordinances in respect to such provisions only.
(Ord. 331, passed 5-19-1997)
§ 1-2-3 COURT PROCEEDINGS.
   No new ordinance shall be construed or held to repeal a former ordinance
whether such former ordinance is expressly repealed or not, as to any offense
committed against such former ordinance or as to any act done, any penalty,
forfeiture or punishment so incurred, or any right accrued or claim arising
under the former ordinance, or in any way whatever to affect any such offense
or act so committed or so done, or any penalty, forfeiture or punishment so
incurred or any right accrued or claim arising before the new ordinance takes
effect, save only that the proceedings thereafter shall conform to the
ordinance in force at the time of such proceeding, so far as practicable, if
any penalty, forfeiture or punishment be mitigated by any provision of a new
ordinance, such provision may be, by consent of the party affected, applied to
any judgment announced after the new ordinance takes effect. This section shall
extend to all repeals, either by express words or implication, whether the
repeal is in the ordinance making any new provisions upon the same subject or
in any other ordinance. Nothing contained in this chapter shall be construed as
abating any action now pending under or by virtue of any general ordinance of
the city herein repealed and the provisions of all general ordinances contained
in this code shall be deemed to be continuing provisions and not a new
enactment of the same provision; nor shall this chapter be deemed as
discontinuing, abating, modifying or altering any penalty accrued or to accrue,
or as affecting the liability of any person, firm or corporation, or as waiving
any right of the city under any ordinance or provision thereof in force at the
time of the adoption of this code.
(Ord. 331, passed 5-19-1997)
§ 1-2-4 SEVERABILITY CLAUSE.
   If any section, subsection, subdivision, paragraph, sentence, clause or
phrase of this code or any part thereof is for any reason held to be
unconstitutional or invalid or ineffective by any court of competent
jurisdiction, such decision shall not affect the validity or effectiveness of
the remaining portions of this code, or any part thereof. The City Council
hereby declares that it would have passed each section, subsection,
subdivision, paragraph, sentence, clause or phrase thereof irrespective of the
fact that any one or more sections, subsections, subdivisions, paragraphs,
sentences, clauses or phrases be declared unconstitutional, invalid or
ineffective.
(Ord. 331, passed 5-19-1997)
CHAPTER 3: DEFINITIONS
Section
1-3-1 Construction of words
1-3-2 Definitions, general
1-3-3 Catchlines
§ 1-3-1 CONSTRUCTION OF WORDS.
   (A)   Whenever any word in any section of this code importing the plural
number is used in describing or referring to any matters, parties or persons,
any single matter, party or person shall be deemed to be included, although
distributive words may not have been used.
   (B)   When any subject matter, party or person is referred to in this code
by words importing the singular number only, or the masculine gender, several
matters, parties or persons and females as well as males and bodies corporate
shall be deemed to be included; provided, that these rules of construction
shall not be applied to any section of this code which contains any express
provision excluding such construction or where the subject matter or context
may be repugnant thereto.
   (C)   The word “ordinance” contained in the ordinances of the city has been
changed in the content of this code to “title”, “chapter”, “section” and/or
“subsection” or words of like import for organizational and clarification
purposes only. Such change to the city’s ordinances is not meant to amend
passage and effective dates of such original ordinances.
(Ord. 331, passed 5-19-1997)
§ 1-3-2 DEFINITIONS, GENERAL.
   For the purpose of this code of ordinances, the following definitions shall
apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   AGENT. A person acting on behalf of another.
   CITY. The City of Livingston, County of Merced, State of California.
   EMPLOYEES. Whenever reference is made in this code to a city employee by
title only, this shall be construed as though followed by the words “of the
City of Livingston”.
   FEE. A sum of money charged by the city for:
      1.   The carrying on of a business profession or occupation; or
      2.   Service or product rendered by the city for or on behalf of fee
payor.
   INFRACTION. Any crime or public offense which is not a felony or
misdemeanor, as defined by state law, and which is not punishable by
imprisonment or subject to trial by jury.
   LICENSE. The permission granted for the carrying on of a business,
profession or occupation.
   MISDEMEANOR. Any crime or public offense which is not a felony, as defined
by state law, and excepting those offenses that are classified as infractions.
   NUISANCE. Anything offensive or obnoxious to the health and welfare of the
inhabitants of the city; or any act or thing repugnant to, or creating a hazard
to, or having a detrimental effect on the property of another person or to the
community.
   OCCUPANT. As applied to a building or land shall include any person who
occupies the whole or any part of such building or land whether alone or with
others.
   OFFENSE. Any act forbidden by any provision of this code or the omission of
any act required by the provisions of this code.
   OFFICERS. Whenever reference is made in this code to a city officer by title
only, this shall be construed as though followed by the words “of the City of
Livingston”.
   OPERATOR. The person who is in charge of any operation, business or
profession.
   OWNER. As applied to a building or land shall include any part owner, joint
owner, tenant in common, joint tenant or lessee of the whole or of a part of
such building or land.
   PERSON. Any public or private corporation, firm, partnership, association,
organization, government or any other group acting as a unit, as well as a
natural person.
   PERSONAL PROPERTY. Includes every description of money, goods, chattels,
effects, evidence of rights in action and all written instruments by which any
pecuniary obligation, right or title to property is created, acknowledged,
transferred, increased, defeated, discharged or diminished and every right or
interest therein.
   RETAILER. Unless otherwise specifically defined, shall be understood to
relate to the sale of goods, merchandise, articles or things in small
quantities direct to the consumer.
   RIGHT-OF-WAY. The privilege of the immediate use of the roadway or other
property.
   STREET. Includes alleys, lanes, courts, boulevards, public ways, public
squares, public places and sidewalks.
   TENANT. As applied to a building or land shall include any person who
occupies the whole or any part of such building or land whether alone or with
others.
   WHOLESALER and WHOLESALE DEALER. Unless otherwise specifically defined,
shall be understood to relate to the sale of goods, merchandise, articles or
things in quantity to persons who purchase for the purpose of resale.
   WRITTEN, IN WRITING. May include printing and any other mode of representing
words and letters, but when the written signature of any person is required by
law to any official or public writing or bond required by law, it shall be in
the proper handwriting of such person, or in case he or she is unable to write,
by his or her proper mark.
(Ord. 331, passed 5-19-1997)
§ 1-3-3 CATCHLINES.
   The catchlines of the several sections of this code are intended as mere
catchwords to indicate the content of the section and shall not be deemed or
taken to be titles of such sections, nor be deemed to govern, limit, modify or
in any manner affect the scope, meaning or intent of the provisions of any
division or section hereof, nor unless expressly so provided, shall they be so
deemed when any of such sections, including the catchlines, are amended or
reenacted.
(Ord. 331, passed 5-19-1997)
CHAPTER 4: GENERAL PENALTIES
Section
1-4-1 General prohibitions
1-4-2 Code enforcement
1-4-3 General criminal penalties
1-4-4 Arrests and citations
1-4-5 Public nuisances
§ 1-4-1 GENERAL PROHIBITIONS.
   (A)   It is unlawful for any person to violate, or fail to comply with, any
provision of this code or other city ordinance, or a condition of any permit
issued pursuant to this code or any other city ordinance.
   (B)   Each and every day during any portion of which any violation of any
provision of this code is committed, caused, continued, or permitted shall
constitute a new separate violation.
   (C)   Whenever in this code any act or omission is made unlawful, it
includes causing, permitting, aiding, abetting, maintaining, suffering or
concealing the fact of such act or omission.
   (D)   The owner of any property, building or structure within the city is
responsible for keeping such property, building or structure free of violations
related to its use or condition. The owner of such property, building or
structure is separately liable for violations committed by tenants or occupants
relative to the use or condition of the property.
   (E)   The prohibitions and penalties as provided in this chapter are in
addition to other provisions of this code or other law.
(Ord. 552, passed 8-15-2006)
§ 1-4-2 CODE ENFORCEMENT.
   The Police Department, Fire Department, Public Works, building official and
other persons designated by the City Manager are authorized to enforce the
various provisions of this code under their respective authority or as is
specifically assigned to them by the City Manager or City Council.
(Ord. 552, passed 8-15-2006)
§ 1-4-3 GENERAL CRIMINAL PENALTIES.
   (A)   Any person who shall violate or fail to comply with any provision or
requirement of this code or any other city ordinance, or a condition of any
permit issued pursuant to this code or any other city ordinance, shall be
guilty of a misdemeanor, unless:
      1.   Such a violation or failure is designated as an infraction or is
subsequently prosecuted as an infraction, in which case such person is guilty
of an infraction; or
      2.   Such a violation or failure is prosecuted through an administrative
citation. Any person who fails to pay an administrative fine or to comply with
an administrative order is guilty of a misdemeanor as provided in this chapter.
   (B)   Any violation of any provision of this code or any other city
ordinance, or a condition of any permit issued pursuant to this code or any
other city ordinance, may be prosecuted as a misdemeanor or as an infraction,
in the discretion of the City Attorney or his or her designee.
   (C)   Unless otherwise specifically provided in this code or by the City
Council, any person guilty of a misdemeanor under a provision of this code
shall be punished by a fine of not more than $1,000, or by imprisonment for a
period of not more than six months, or by both such fine and imprisonment.
   (D)   Unless otherwise provided by City Council, as prescribed by state law,
any person who has committed an infraction shall be punished for a first
violation by a fine not exceeding $100, and for committing the same offense a
second time within one year by a fine not exceeding $200, and for committing
the same offense a third or any subsequent time within one year, by a fine not
exceeding $500.
   (E)   Unless otherwise specifically provided in this code or by the City
Council, any violation of any building or safety provision of this code
determined to be an infraction that poses a threat to public health or safety
is punishable by the following:
      1.   A fine not exceeding one hundred thirty dollars ($130) for a first
violation.
      2.   A fine not exceeding seven hundred dollars ($700) for a second
violation of the same ordinance within one year.
      3.   A fine not exceeding:
         (a)   One thousand three hundred dollars ($1,300) for each additional
violation of the same ordinance within one year of the first violation.
         (b)   A fine not exceeding two thousand five hundred dollars ($2,500)
for each additional violation of the same ordinance within two years of the
first violation if the property is a commercial property that has an existing
building at the time of the violation and the violation is due to failure by
the owner to remove visible refuse or failure to prohibit unauthorized use of
the property.
   (F)   A person cited under this code may seek a hardship waiver to reduce
the amount of the fine upon a showing by the responsible party that the
responsible party has made a bona fide effort to comply after the first
violation and that payment of the full amount of the fine would impose an undue
financial burden on the responsible party. A request for a hardship waiver must
be filed with the City Manager within 10 calendar days from the date of the
citation. The request will be decided by the City Manager within five business
days from the date the request is received, and the City Manager’s decision is
final. The responsible party will be notified in writing of the decision on the
request. A request for hardship waiver does not extend the time to appeal the
citation.
(Ord. 552, passed 8-15-2006; Ord. 651, passed 5-16-2023)
§ 1-4-4 ARRESTS AND CITATIONS.
   (A)   Officials and employees designated to enforce provisions of this code,
or other employees designated by the City Manager, may issue citations and make
arrests without a warrant whenever they have reasonable cause to believe that
the person who is either arrested or to whom a citation is issued has committed
an infraction or misdemeanor violation of this code, or violation of any
condition of any permit issued pursuant to this code or violation of any other
city ordinance or state statute which such officers or employees have the duty
to enforce, and the violation has been committed in the presence of such
officers or employees. Police officers have full authority to arrest persons
for violations of the provision of this code pursuant to any applicable
provision of the Penal Code.
   (B)   Arrests for misdemeanors and citations for infractions shall be
processed, issued and handled as provided by state law.
   (C)   In any case in which a person is arrested pursuant to this authority
and the person arrested does not demand to be taken before a magistrate, the
officer or employee making the arrest shall prepare a written notice to appear
and release the person on his or her promise to appear, as prescribed by the
Penal Code.
   (D)   Any city officer or employee arresting any person for a violation of
any provision of this code, who does not immediately take such arrested person
before a magistrate, as prescribed in the Penal Code of the state, must prepare
in duplicate a written notice to appear in court.
      1.   The notice must contain:
         (a)   The name and address of the person arrested;
         (b)   The offense charged, the time and place of the alleged
violation; and
         (c)   Where and when such person must appear in court.
      2.   The time specified in the notice for appearance must be at least ten
days after such arrest. The place specified in the notice to appear and the
notice must conform with all applicable provisions of the Penal Code.
   (E)   The arresting city officer or employee must deliver one copy of the
notice to appear to the alleged violator. In order to secure immediate release,
the violator must give a written promise to appear in court at the time and
place indicated on the notice by signing the duplicate notice. That signed copy
must be retained by the city officer or employee. Thereafter, the arresting
city officer and employee must release the alleged violator from custody. The
duplicate copy of the notice to appear must be filed in the manner prescribed
in the Penal Code.
(Ord. 552, passed 8-15-2006)
§ 1-4-5 PUBLIC NUISANCES.
   In addition to other penalties provided by law, any violation provision of
this code or other city ordinance, any condition of any permit issued pursuant
to this code or any other city ordinance, or any condition caused or permitted
to exist in violation of any of the provisions of this code is a public
nuisance and may be abated as such by the city.
(Ord. 552, passed 8-15-2006)
CHAPTER 5: CITY COUNCIL
Section
1-5-1 Meetings of City Council
1-5-2 Salaries
1-5-3 Date of general municipal elections
1-5-4 Selection of Mayor and Mayor Pro Tempore
1-5-5 Length of service of Mayor
1-5-6 Length of service of Mayor Pro Tempore
1-5-7 Administering oaths
1-5-8 Issuance of subpoenas
1-5-9 Council act as redevelopment agency
1-5-10 Open meetings declaration of intent
1-5-11 City Council closed sessions
1-5-12 Closed session attendees
1-5-13 Release of closed session confidential information prohibited
1-5-14 Prohibited acts
§ 1-5-1 MEETINGS OF CITY COUNCIL.
   (A)   Time of regular meetings. The regular meetings of the City Council
shall be held on the first and third Tuesdays of each month at the hour of 7:00
p.m. If at any time a regular meeting falls on a holiday, the regular meeting
shall be held on the next business day.
   (B)   Place of regular meetings. The regular meetings of the City Council
shall be held in the City Council chambers, 1416 C Street, Livingston,
California.
(Ord. 440, passed 3-7-1995)
§ 1-5-2 SALARIES.
   (A)   Purpose. This section is enacted under Cal. Gov’t Code § 36516 which
authorizes a City Council to provide by ordinance that each member of the
Council may receive a salary based upon the population of the city as
determined by estimates made by the State Department of Finance.
   (B)   Population. On the date this section is adopted, the latest estimate
of population of the city made by the State Department of Finance is 15,448.
   (C)   Salaries. Each member of the City Council may receive the sum of $250
per month as prescribed in Cal. Gov’t Code § 36516 for a city having a
population of up to and including 35,000. The Mayor may receive $300 per month.
   (D)   Increase or decrease. When the State Department of Finance makes a new
estimate of population placing the city in a population group other than set
forth in subsection (C) of this section, the salary, payable to each member of
the Council, shall be increased or decreased, as the case may be, in order to
equal the sum set forth for that population group in Cal. Gov’t Code § 36516.
However, the increase or decrease in the salary becomes payable only after the
date when one or more members of the Council become eligible for the new salary
beginning a new term of office following the succeeding general municipal
election held in the city.
(Ord. 331, passed 5-19-1987)
§ 1-5-3 DATE OF GENERAL MUNICIPAL ELECTIONS.
   Under the authority of Cal. Elections Code §§ 1000 et seq., the general
municipal election shall be held on the first Tuesday after the first Monday in
November in each even numbered year.
(Ord. 331, passed 5-19-1987)
§ 1-5-4 SELECTION OF MAYOR AND MAYOR PRO TEMPORE.
   (A)   The City Council shall meet on the first regular Council meeting after
the general municipal election and choose one of its number as Mayor, and one
of its number as Mayor Pro Tempore.
   (B)   The Mayor and Mayor Pro Tempore shall serve until a new Mayor and a
new Mayor Pro Tempore are chosen after the next general municipal election.
      1.   However, the Council may remove the Mayor or the Mayor Pro Tempore
at any time without cause upon an affirmative vote of two-thirds of the members
of the Council.
      2.   For example, with one vacancy on the Council, three of the four
remaining Council member would have to vote affirmatively for the removal of
the Mayor or Mayor Pro Tempore. When the vacancy is filled, four of the five
Council member would have to vote for removal.
(Ord. 331, passed 5-19-1987)
§ 1-5-5 LENGTH OF SERVICE OF MAYOR.
   (A)   No Council person shall be selected for Mayor for more than two
consecutive four-year terms and no Council person shall be selected Mayor for
the next term who has held the office of Mayor, or acted as Mayor for more than
one year of a term to which some other Council person was initially selected as
Mayor.
   (B)   There is no limitation on the number of nonconsecutive terms a Council
person can serve as Mayor.
(Ord. 331, passed 5-19-1987)
§ 1-5-6 LENGTH OF SERVICE OF MAYOR PRO TEMPORE.
   (A)   No Council person shall be selected Mayor Pro Tempore for more than
two consecutive four- year terms and no Council person shall be selected as
Mayor Pro Tempore for the next term who has held the office of Mayor Pro
Tempore, or acted as Mayor Pro Tempore, for more than one year of a term to
which some other Council person was initially selected as Mayor Pro Tempore.
   (B)   There is no limitation on the number of nonconsecutive terms a Council
person can serve as Mayor Pro Tempore.
(Ord. 331, passed 5-19-1987)
§ 1-5-7 ADMINISTERING OATHS.
   In addition to the City Clerk and any Deputy City Clerk, each member of the
City Council and any hearing officer appointed by the City Council shall have
the power to administer oaths and affirmations in any investigation or
proceeding within the City Council’s jurisdiction. This provision shall also
apply to any investigation or proceeding where the City Council is sitting as a
board of appeal or a board of review, such as under Title 4, Chapter 1 of this
code of ordinances, and to any investigation or proceeding pending before a
duly appointed committee of the City Council.
(Ord. 331, passed 5-19-1987)
§ 1-5-8 ISSUANCE OF SUBPOENAS.
   (A)   In any investigation or proceeding within the City Council’s
jurisdiction, the City Council and any hearing officer appointed by the City
Council shall have the power and authority to compel the attendance of
witnesses, to examine them under oath and to compel the production of evidence
before it.
   (B)   The City Clerk may issue a subpoena or subpoena duces tecum signed and
sealed to a party requesting it. Subpoenas and subpoena duces tecum shall not
be issued in blank and the requesting party must submit a properly filled in
subpoena or subpoena duces tecum form to the City Clerk. The requesting party
shall use a subpoena or subpoena duces tecum form approved by the City Clerk or
a civil subpoena form adopted by the Judicial Council of California properly
modified for the investigation or proceeding in question. Compliance with the
provisions of Cal. Code of Civil Procedure § 1985 shall be a condition
precedent to the issuance of a subpoena duces tecum. Subpoenas and subpoenas
duces tecum must be served at least 48 hours before the time the person is
supposed to appear as a witness or to produce any evidence.
   (C)   No witness shall be obliged to attend at a place out of the county in
which he or she resides unless the distance is less than 150 miles from the
witnesses’ place of residence except that the City Clerk, upon affidavit of any
party showing that the testimony of such witness is material and necessary, may
endorse on the subpoena an order requiring the attendance of such witness.
   (D)   All witnesses appearing pursuant to subpoena, other than the parties
shall receive witness fees and mileage in the same amounts and under the same
circumstances as prescribed by law for witnesses in civil actions in a superior
court. Fees and mileage shall be paid by the party at whose request the witness
is subpoenaed.
   (E)   Whenever any person duly subpoenaed to appear and give evidence or to
produce any matters or things neglects or refuses to appear, or to produce any
matters or things, as required by the subpoena, or refuses to be sworn or to
testify or to answer any questions which are proper and pertinent, that person
shall be deemed in contempt and shall be punishable as provided by the general
laws of the state.
   (F)   This section shall also apply to any investigation or proceeding where
the City Council is sitting as a board of appeal or a board of review, such as
under Title 4, Chapter 1 of this code. Whenever the City Council appoints any
of its members to a committee for any investigation or proceeding within the
City Council’s jurisdiction, or upon the request of any duly constituted city
commission or board in any proceeding or investigation before such commission
or board and within that commission’s or board’s jurisdiction, the City Council
at its discretion may authorize by resolution upon a finding of good cause such
committee, commission or board the power and authority to compel the attendance
of witnesses, to examine them under oath, and to compel the production of
evidence for that proceeding or investigation in accordance with this section.
(Ord. 331, passed 5-19-1987)
§ 1-5-9 COUNCIL ACT AS REDEVELOPMENT AGENCY.
   (A)   Agency established. Blighted areas appear to exist in the city as
defined in §§ 33030 et seq. of the Cal. Health and Safety Code Chapter 1,
Article 3 of Part 1, Division 24, which Part 1 of said Division 24 of said code
is known as the Community Redevelopment Law.
      1.   Pursuant to Cal. Health and Safety Code Chapter 1, Article 3 of Part
1, Division 24, § 33100 of the Community Redevelopment Law, there is in the
city a public body, corporate and politic for the purpose of exercising the
powers granted by the Community Redevelopment Law, but provided, pursuant to
Cal. Health and Safety Code Chapter 1, Article 3 of Part 1, Division 24, §
33101 thereof, that said public body, corporate and politic, shall not transact
any business or exercise any powers, unless by ordinance the City Council
declares there is a need for such agency to function.
      2.   It is hereby determined and declared pursuant to Cal. Health and
Safety Code Division 24, Part 1, Chapter 1, Article 3, § 33100 of the Community
Redevelopment Law that there is a need for the redevelopment agency created by
Cal. Health and Safety Code Division 24, Part 1, Chapter 1, Article 3, § 33100
of said law to function in the city, and said agency is hereby authorized to
transact business and exercise its powers under the community redevelopment
law.
      3.   The official name of the redevelopment agency is hereby declared to
be the “Livingston Redevelopment Agency”.
   (B)   City Council as agency. Section 33200 of the California Community
Redevelopment Law (Cal. Health and Safety Code Division 24, Part 1, Chapter 3,
Article 1, § 33200) provides the legislative body of the community may, by
adoption of an ordinance, declare itself to be the redevelopment agency.
      1.   Pursuant to the provisions of Cal. Health and Safety Code Division
24, Part 1, Chapter 3, Article 1, § 33200 of the Community Redevelopment Law
this body declares itself to be the Livingston Redevelopment Agency.
      2.   All rights, powers, duties, privileges and immunities vested by the
community redevelopment law in such agency shall become and are vested in the
City Council.
      3.   The City Council hereby finds that declaring itself to be the
Livingston Redevelopment Agency will serve the public interest and promote the
public safety and welfare in an effective manner.
(Ord. 331, passed 5-19-1987)
§ 1-5-10 OPEN MEETINGS DECLARATION OF INTENT.
   It is the intent that the actions of the City Council or any city committee,
board or commission created by the governing body be taken openly and that
their deliberations be conducted openly, except where limited in accordance
with state law. Accordingly, all meetings of the City Council and any city
committee, board or commission shall be open and public, and all persons shall
be permitted to attend any meeting of the City Council or any city committee,
board or commission created by the governing body, except where such meetings
are held in closed session, as permitted by the Ralph M. Brown Act (the “Brown
Act”).
(Ord. 571, passed 6-3-2008)
Statutory reference:
   Closed session, see Cal. Gov’t Code §§ 54956.7 et seq.
§ 1-5-11 CITY COUNCIL CLOSED SESSIONS.
   CLOSED SESSION shall mean and include any City Council meeting that is held
as part of a regular, special or emergency meeting, but is not open to the
public because it is held pursuant to a specific exemption in the Ralph M.
Brown Act (the “Brown Act”), or any amendment made thereto after the effective
date hereof, to consider the following:
   (A)   License/permit determinations (Brown Act Cal. Gov’t Code § 54956.7);
   (B)   Conference with real property negotiator (Brown Act Cal. Gov’t Code §
54956.8);
   (C)   Conference with legal counsel - existing litigation (Brown Act Cal.
Gov’t Code § 54956.9);
   (D)   Conference with legal counsel - anticipated litigation (Brown Act Cal.
Gov’t Code § 54956.9);
   (E)   Liability claims (Brown Act Cal. Gov’t Code § 54961);
   (F)   Threat to public services or facilities (Brown Act Cal. Gov’t Code §
54957);
   (G)   Public employee appointment (Brown Act Cal. Gov’t Code § 54957);
   (H)   Public employment (Brown Act Cal. Gov’t Code § 54957);
   (I)   Public employee performance evaluation (Brown Act Cal. Gov’t Code §
54957);
   (J)   Public employee discipline/dismissal/release (Brown Act Cal. Gov’t
Code § 54957);
   (K)   Conference with labor negotiators (Brown Act Cal. Gov’t Code §
54957.6);
   (L)   Case review/planning (multijurisdictional drug law enforcement agency)
(Brown Act Cal. Gov’t Code § 54957.8);
   (M)   Report involving trade secret;
   (N)   Hearings;
   (O)   Charge or complaint involving information protected by federal law
(Brown Act Cal. Gov’t Code § 54956.86);
   (P)   Conferences involving joint powers agency (Brown Act Cal. Gov’t Code §
54956.96); and
   (Q)   Audit by Bureau of State Audits (Brown Act Cal. Gov’t Code §
54956.75).
(Ord. 571, passed 6-3-2008)
Statutory reference:
   Brown Act, see Cal. Gov’t Code §§ 54950 through 54963
   Exemptions, see Cal. Gov’t Code §§ 54957.6 et seq.
   Hearings; reports involving trade secrets, see Cal. Health and Safety Code
§§ 1461, 32106, 32155; Cal. Gov’t Code §§ 37606, 37624.3
§ 1-5-12 CLOSED SESSION ATTENDEES.
   All City Council members shall receive notice of all closed sessions.
Attendance at a closed session, other than City Council members, shall be
limited to those actually necessary to advise or take direction from the City
Council regarding a specific issue given the specific purpose of the session.
This may include the City Attorney, the City Manager, senior management staff,
experts, negotiators or consultants. Third parties not serving as agents of the
City Council shall not attend closed sessions with the exception of witnesses
in the event of a closed session to hear charges or complaints brought against
an employee.
(Ord. 571, passed 6-3-2008)
§ 1-5-13 RELEASE OF CLOSED SESSION CONFIDENTIAL INFORMATION PROHIBITED.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any member of the City Council or other
person in attendance at a lawfully held closed session of the City Council to
release or disclose confidential information that has been acquired by being
present in the closed session to a person not entitled to receive it, unless
the disclosure is authorized by majority vote of the City Council, or mandated
by court order.
   (B)   For purposes of this section CONFIDENTIAL INFORMATION shall mean a
communication made in a closed session that is specifically related to the
basis for the legislative body to meet lawfully in closed session. It shall
include, for example, a report or document prepared exclusively for closed
session, or presented, reviewed and discussed by the City Council exclusively
in closed session.
   (C)   Authorization to release or disclose any confidential information to a
person not entitled to receive it, shall be granted only upon majority vote of
the City Council members present in the closed session where the item,
information, report, material or document is discussed or acted upon.
   (D)   Notwithstanding the foregoing, any person may disclose information
acquired during closed session, whether confidential or not, for the following
purposes:
      1.   Making a confidential inquiry or complaint to a district attorney or
grand jury concerning a perceived violation of law, including disclosing facts
to a district attorney or grand jury that are necessary to establish the
illegality of an action taken by a legislative body of a local agency or the
potential illegality of an action that has been the subject of deliberation at
a closed session if that action were to be taken by a legislative body of a
local agency;
      2.   Expressing an opinion concerning the propriety or legality of
actions taken by a legislative body of a local agency in closed session,
including disclosure of the nature and extent of the illegal or potentially
illegal action;
      3.   Disclosing information acquired by being present in a closed session
under this chapter that is not confidential information; and
      4.   Disclosing information under the whistleblower statutes contained in
Cal. Labor Code § 1102.5 or Cal. Gov’t Code Title 5, Division 2, Part 1,
Chapter 2, Article 4.5 (commencing with § 53296).
(Ord. 571, passed 6-3-2008)
§ 1-5-14 PROHIBITED ACTS.
   (A)   Every officer, official, employee or agent of the city who
intentionally and without proper authorization releases or discloses
“confidential information” as defined in this chapter is guilty of a
misdemeanor. Any alleged violation of the provisions of this chapter shall be
referred to the appropriate parties for prosecution. In addition, the City
Council may enforce this chapter by relying upon current available legal
remedies including, but not limited to, the following:
      1.   Seeking injunctive relief to prevent the disclosure of confidential
information in violation of this section;
      2.   Taking disciplinary action against an employee if his or her
disclosure is willful; and
      3.   Referring a City Council member who has willfully disclosed
confidential information to the grand jury.
   (B)   This section does not prohibit the disclosure of any matters
discussed, considered at a closed session in violation of the Ralph M. Brown
Act, nor disclosure of any other violation of said act.
(Ord. 571, passed 6-3-2008)
Statutory reference:
   Brown Act, see Cal. Gov’t Code §§ 54950 et seq.
CHAPTER 6: CITY MANAGER
Section
1-6-1 Authority for enactment
1-6-2 Office created
1-6-3 Chief executive
1-6-4 Council-Manager relations
1-6-5 City Manager duties
1-6-6 City Manager powers
1-6-7 Miscellaneous provisions
1-6-8 Removal of City Manager
1-6-9 Director of Finance
1-6-9-1 Office created
1-6-9-2 Bond required
1-6-9-3 Duties of Director Of Finance
1-6-10 Public hearings
§ 1-6-1 AUTHORITY FOR ENACTMENT.
   This chapter is enacted by the City Council pursuant to the provisions of
Cal. Gov’t Code Title 4, Division 2, Part 1, Chapter 4, Article 1, being Cal.
Gov’t Code §§ 34851 through 34859.
(Ord. 331, passed 5-19-1987)
§ 1-6-2 OFFICE CREATED.
   The office of City Manager is hereby created and established. The City
Manager shall be appointed by the City Council solely on the basis of his or
her executive and administrative qualifications. He or she shall hold office
for an indefinite term at the pleasure of the City Council and shall receive
such compensation as the Council may provide.
(Ord. 331, passed 5-19-1987)
§ 1-6-3 CHIEF EXECUTIVE.
   The City Manager shall be the chief executive of the city government under
the direction and control of the Council, except as otherwise provided in this
chapter, he or she shall have authority over all other officers and employees
except the City Clerk, City Treasurer and City Attorney.
(Ord. 331, passed 5-19-1987)
§ 1-6-4 COUNCIL-MANAGER RELATIONS.
   The City Council and its members shall deal with the administrative services
of the city only through the City Manager, except for the purpose of inquiry.
Should any Council member make an inquiry, it shall be for the purpose of
compiling facts and data for possible future action by the Council. In no event
shall action be taken after completion of the inquiry without Council approval.
The City Manager shall take his or her orders and instructions from the City
Council as a body, and no individual Council member shall give any orders or
instructions to the City Manager or his or her subordinates. When a decision
has been made by the City Council as a body, it shall be final and conclusive.
Further reference to any such decision of the Council shall not be made by the
City Manager except to the Council as a whole.
   (A)   The City Manager shall attend all meetings of the City Council unless
excused therefrom by the Mayor or the City Council, except when his or her
removal is under consideration by the City Council.
   (B)   The City Manager may take part in Council discussions but may not
vote. He or she shall have the power to appear and address the Council or any
of its boards or commissions at any meeting.
   (C)   The City Manager shall recommend to the City Council for adoption such
measures and ordinances as he or she deems necessary. He or she shall keep the
City Council at all times fully advised as to the financial conditions and
needs of the city and shall make such reports as may be desirable or as
requested by the City Council.
(Ord. 331, passed 5-19-1987)
§ 1-6-5 CITY MANAGER DUTIES.
   The City Manager shall be responsible for the efficient administration of
all the affairs of the city which are under his or her control. In addition to
his or her general powers as administrative head and not as a limitation
thereon, it shall be his or her duty and he or she shall have the power to:
   (A)   Enforcement of laws. See that the laws of the state pertaining to the
city and all laws and ordinances of the city are duly enforced, and that all
franchises, contracts, permits and privileges granted by the city are
faithfully observed;
   (B)   Appoint, dismiss officers and employees.
      1.   Appoint and promote, discipline, suspend or dismiss all officers and
employees of the city except the City Clerk, City Attorney and City Treasurer.
No department head shall be appointed or removed until the City Manager shall
have first reviewed such appointment or removal with the City Council in
executive session; and
      2.   The City Manager shall provide one merit principle personnel system
for all officers and employees of the city except the City Clerk, City Attorney
and City Treasurer, and may designate an officer responsible to him or her to
administer said personnel system.
   (C)   Appoint to acting capacity. Designate himself, herself or some other
officer or employee to perform the duties of any office or position in the
administrative service under his or her control which is vacant or which lacks
administration due to the absence or disability of the incumbent;
   (D)   Purchases. Purchase or cause to be purchased by some officer
designated by him or her, all services, supplies and equipment for all of the
departments or divisions of the city. All with procedures established by
ordinance;
   (E)   General services. Provide for the proper administration and management
of all other city affairs and properties which are not otherwise reserved to
the Mayor and/or City Council;
   (F)   Annual report. Prepare and present to the Council an annual report of
the city’s affairs, including a summary of reports of department heads and such
other reports as the Council shall require;
   (G)   Annual budget and capital program. Prepare and submit to the Council
an annual budget and capital program for each ensuing fiscal year, based upon
estimates of financial needs and resources of the city;
   (H)   Miscellaneous duties.
      1.   Serve in any appointed office within the city government to which he
or she may be qualified when appointed thereto by the City Council and to hold
and perform duties thereof at the pleasure of the City Council;
      2.   Investigate all complaints related to matters concerning the
administration of the city government or services of public utilities in the
city; and
      3.   Perform such other duties and exercise such other powers as may be
delegated to him or her, from time to time, by action of the City Council.
   (I)   Contracts waiving or delaying payments to the city. The City Manager
shall not enter, on behalf of the city, into contracts waiving or delaying
payments due to the city, unless the City Manager has first obtained the
expressed consent and approval of a majority of the City Council sitting in
regular session. Any violation of this requirement shall make the contract
voidable by a majority vote of the City Council sitting in regular session.
(Ord. 331, passed 5-19-1987; Ord. 409, passed 9-1-1992)
§ 1-6-6 CITY MANAGER POWERS.
   The City Manager shall have the power and authority to properly perform any
duty assigned to him or her by the City Council or by other process of law. In
general his or her powers shall include:
   (A)   Prescribe rules. Have the power to prescribe such rules and
regulations as he or she shall deem necessary for the conduct of administrative
agencies subject to his or her authority and he or she shall have the power to
revoke, suspend or amend any rule or regulation of the administrative service
by whomever prescribed;
   (B)   Investigate. Have the power, either by himself, herself or by any
person designated by him or her, to investigate and to examine or inquire into
the affairs or operations of any department, division or office and any
contract, or the proper performance of any obligations of or to the city; and
when so authorized by the Council, he or she shall have the power to employ
consultants and professional counsel to aid in such investigations,
examinations or inquiries;
   (C)   Overrule officials. Have the power to set aside any action taken by a
department head and may supersede him or her in the functions of his or her
office;
   (D)   Delegate duties. Have the power to direct any department, division or
bureau or perform the work for any other department, division or bureau;
   (E)   Appoint administrative committees. Have the power to designate from
the administrative service such committees and the officers thereof as he or
she shall find necessary for the proper consideration of administrative
problems; and
   (F)   Administrative claims settlement. The City Manager shall have the
power to settle any claim against the city up to the amount of $10,000.
(Ord. 331, passed 5-19-1987; Ord. 464, passed 5-20-1997)
§ 1-6-7 MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS.
   (A)   Acting City Manager. During any period of his or her temporary absence
or disability, the City Manager shall designate an officer or employee of the
city to serve as the administrative head of the city for that period. In the
event of failure to make such designation, the City Council may appoint an
acting City Manager.
   (B)   Bond. The City Manager and acting City Manager shall be bonded to
assure the faithful performance of the duties imposed on them as herein
prescribed. Such bond may be part of a blanket surety bond and the premium for
same shall be a proper charge against the city.
   (C)   Expenses. The City Manager shall be reimbursed for all sums
necessarily incurred by him or her in the performance of his or her duties or
incurred while traveling on business pertaining to the city under direction of
the City Council. Reimbursement shall only be made, however, when an itemized
claim, setting forth the sums expended and for which reimbursement is
requested, has been presented to the City Council for approval.
   (D)   Eligibility. No City Council member shall be eligible for appointment
as City Manager until one year has elapsed after such Council member has ceased
to be a member of the City Council.
(Ord. 331, passed 5-19-1987)
§ 1-6-8 REMOVAL OF CITY MANAGER.
   The removal of the City Manager shall be only upon a three member vote of
the whole Council in the city in regular Council meeting, subject, however, to
the provisions of the next succeeding subsections. In case of his or her
intended removal by the City Council, the City Manager shall be furnished with
written notice stating the Council’s intention to remove him or her, at least
30 days before the effective date of his or her removal, which shall be shown
upon the written notice.
   (A)   Hearing. Within seven days after the delivery to the City Manager of
such notice, he or she may, by written notification to the City Council,
request a hearing before the City Council. Thereafter, the City Council shall
fix a time for the hearing which shall be held at its usual meeting place, at
which the City Manager may appear and be heard.
   (B)   Discretion of Council. In removing the City Manager, the City Council
shall use its uncontrolled discretion and its action shall be final and shall
not depend upon any particular showing or degree of proof at the hearing, the
purpose of which is to allow the City Manager to present his or her grounds of
opposition to his or her removal.
   (C)   Limitations. Notwithstanding the provisions of this chapter
hereinbefore enumerated, the City Manager shall not be removed from office
during or within a period of 90 days next succeeding any general municipal
election held in the city at which election a member of the City Council is
elected. The purpose of this provision is to allow any newly elected member of
the City Council or a reorganized City Council to observe the actions and
ability of the City Manager in the performance of the duties of his or her
office. After the expiration of said 90 days aforementioned, the provisions of
the preceding subsection as to the removal of said City Manager shall apply and
be effective, except where the City Manager has committed acts of moral
turpitude or a violation of any law which would bring disrepute upon his or her
office or where he or she has committed any acts of dishonesty, the Council may
forthwith discharge the City Manager upon a majority vote of the Council.
(Ord. 331, passed 5-19-1987)
§ 1-6-9 DIRECTOR OF FINANCE.
§ 1-6-9-1 OFFICE CREATED.
   The office of Director of Finance is hereby created and established. The
City Manager shall be the Director of Finance or designate a Director of
Finance in his or her place.
(Ord. 331, passed 5-19-1987)
§ 1-6-9-2 BOND REQUIRED.
   Before entering upon the duties of this office, the Director of Finance
shall be bonded to assure the faithful and honest performance of his or her
duties as herein prescribed. The penal sum of the bond shall be in the amount
provided in §
1-7-1 of this title.
(Ord. 331, passed 5-19-1987)
§ 1-6-9-3 DUTIES OF DIRECTOR OF FINANCE.
   It shall be the duty of the Director of Finance to act in all cases to
promote, secure and preserve the financial and property interests of the city
and he or she shall have the power and duty to:
   (A)   Perform the duties imposed upon the City Clerk by Cal. Gov’t Code §§
37201 to 37209 and 40802, 40804 and 40805: and
   (B)   Exercise general supervision over all city officers regarding proper
management of the fiscal concerns of their respective offices, prescribe the
form of accounts and reports to be rendered to him or her and ensure that
budget appropriations are not exceeded. He or she shall also:
      1.   Examine and audit from time to time the accounts of all officers and
departments;
      2.   See that all officers and employees receiving money pay the same
into the treasury as required and that all necessary financial reports are made
by officers and shall report all delinquencies or defaults in payments or in
reports to the City Council, and the City Attorney who shall take immediate
legal measures for the recovery of the amount of any such default or
delinquency;
      3.   Demand and receive all monies and fees owing to the city whenever
the means of collection of such is not otherwise prescribed by law. When not
collectible by other means, he or she shall report such debt to the City
Attorney for collection;
      4.   Prepare and audit a register of demands against the city and certify
the same to the City Council at a regular Council meeting at least monthly;
      5.   Keep all general accounts of the city government and transmit, at
least monthly, to the City Council and all departments and officers current
information of the classified unencumbered appropriation balances;
      6.   Collect all licenses and fees in the manner authorized and required
by law and issue all permits and licenses except those which are required by
law to be issued by a particular department or officer; and
      7.   Perform such additional duties as are prescribed from time to time
by the City Council or state authority.
(Ord. 331, passed 5-19-1987)
§ 1-6-10 PUBLIC HEARINGS.
   The City Manager may, when he or she determines a public hearing is
necessary, schedule the public hearing for the first regular City Council
meeting following the requirements prescribed by law for setting public
hearings.
(Ord. 331, passed 5-19-1987)
CHAPTER 7: CITY OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES
Section
1-7-1 Official bond(s)
1-7-2 Salaries
1-7-3 Business hours and holidays for city offices
1-7-4 Personnel rules and regulations
1-7-5 Declaration of intent
1-7-6 City Clerk responsibilities
1-7-7 Deputy City Clerk responsibilities
§ 1-7-1 OFFICIAL BOND(S).
   (A)   The amount of the bond(s) to be given by the City Manager, City Clerk,
City Treasurer and all other city employees handling money or negotiables
together before entering upon the duties of their several offices shall be
$100,000.
   (B)   The City Council may at any time require the Manager, Clerk, Treasurer
or other city employees to provide additional sureties as in its discretion the
Council may deem necessary.
(Ord. 331, passed 5-19-1987)
§ 1-7-2 SALARIES.
   (A)   City Clerk. The salary of the City Clerk shall be the sum of $1,200
per year, payable by $100 per month on the first day of each and every month.
   (B)   City Treasurer. Effective May 1, 1956, the salary of the City
Treasurer shall be the sum of $720 per year, payable $60 per month on the first
day of each and every month.
   (C)   Generally. The compensation of all other appointive officers shall be
fixed by the City Council and may be changed from time to time by motion duly
carried and entered upon its minutes.
(Ord. 331, passed 5-19-1987; Ord. 536, passed 9-20-2005)
§ 1-7-3 BUSINESS HOURS AND HOLIDAYS FOR CITY OFFICES.
   The City Hall business offices shall be open for the transaction of public
business every day except Saturdays and Sundays and the holidays established by
the City Council from 8:00 a.m. until 4:30 p.m.
(Ord. 441, passed 3-21-1995)
§ 1-7-4 PERSONNEL RULES AND REGULATIONS.
   In establishing an equitable and uniform procedure for dealing with
personnel matters and employer-employee organization relations, the city shall
abide by the policies set forth in the personnel rules and regulations of the
city as adopted by resolution of the City Council.
(Ord. 331, passed 5-19-1987)
§ 1-7-5 DECLARATION OF INTENT.
   In enacting this chapter, the City Council finds and declares that state law
recognizes that these are limited circumstances in which the protection of
confidentiality of intergovernmental communications is considered more
important than the right of the people to be informed. Specifically,
maintaining the confidentiality of communications between the city and its
attorney and management staff promotes the candor necessary to receiving the
best advice in matters in which such advice is sought. Furthermore the purpose
behind closed sessions of the City Council authorized by the Ralph M. Brown Act
is thwarted unless communications made pursuant to the act remain confidential.
A breach of the confidentiality of such communications interferes with
effective governmental operation and the protection of legitimate privacy
interests of the city and its employees.
(Ord. 438, passed 10-18-1994)
§ 1-7-6 CITY CLERK RESPONSIBILITIES.
   The office of City Clerk is created and established pursuant to Government
Code section 40801 et seq. Any bond necessary for the performance of the City
Clerk's duties shall be paid by the City if executed by a surety company duly
authorized to do business within the State of California. The surety bond for
the City Clerk shall also include and encompass activities by any Deputy City
Clerk appointed by the City Clerk. The City Clerk shall have only those
responsibilities as provided within this Section and the principal functions of
the City Clerk shall be to:
   (A)   Attend all regular meetings of the City Council except when excused by
the governing state law, opinions and/or regulations, and be responsible for
the timely recording and maintaining of a record of all the actions of the City
Council;
   (B)   Keep all ordinances and resolutions of the City Council in such a
manner that the information contained therein will be readily accessible and
open to the public. The City Clerk shall attest to each resolution and
ordinance adopted by the City Council and, as to ordinances requiring
publication, that the ordinance has been published or posted in accordance with
law;
   (C)   Prepare requirements, schedule and maintain all records of the Council
and of the office of the City Clerk, and prepare the records retention schedule
for City departments in such manner that the information contained therein will
be readily accessible and open to the public pursuant to the California Public
Records Act, Government Code Section 7920.000 et seq., until such time as any
of the records may be destroyed or reproduced and the original destroyed, in
accordance with State law;
   (D)   Serve as the official custodian of all City records;
   (E)   Receive, organize, prepare and reply to requests regulated by the
California Public Records Act;
   (F)   Serve as custodian of the seal of the City;
   (G)   Prepare the City Council agendas, in conjunction with and under the
direction of the City Manager;
   (H)   Perform the duties prescribed by the Elections Code in conducting
municipal elections;
   (I)   Perform the duties imposed upon city clerks by the California
Political Reform Act;
   (J)   Be responsible for the maintenance and distribution of the City's
Municipal Code;
   (K)   Receive and forward to appropriate departments all claims filed
against the City and its officers, agents or employees, pursuant to the
provisions of the Tort Claims Act, Government Code Section 900 et seq.;
   (L)   Administer all official oaths of office;
   (M)   Certify all official records of the City;
   (N)   Display decorum and conduct befitting a holder of a public office;
work cooperatively and positively with employees, managers, commissioners and
members of the public; maintain exceptional customer service at all times;
   (O)   The City Clerk shall appoint a Deputy City Clerk upon agreement with
the City Manager; and
   (P)    Perform such other duties as assigned.
(Ord. 652, passed 12-9-2023)
§ 1-7-7 DEPUTY CITY CLERK RESPONSIBILITIES.
   The Deputy City Clerk shall be supervised by the City Manager and perform
those functions as established within the Deputy City Clerk job duties adopted
by the City and which may change from time-to-time.
(Ord. 652, passed 12-9-2023)v
CHAPTER 8: CITY ELECTION PRECINCT
Section
1-8-1 Election precinct established
§ 1-8-1 ELECTION PRECINCT ESTABLISHED.
   The city, for the purpose of election of officers thereof and for any other
purpose for which an election may be lawfully held by the city, is hereby
consolidated into one precinct to be known as “Livingston municipal election
precinct number one”. Said precinct shall comprise all of the city.
(Ord. 331, passed 5-19-1987)
CHAPTER 9: CORPORATE SEAL, LOGO
Section
1-9-1 Official seal
1-9-2 Official logo
§ 1-9-1 OFFICIAL SEAL.
   The common seal of the City of Livingston is hereby adopted and described as
follows:
A California die, surrounding which in the margin of said seal shall appear the
words, “City Of Livingston, California” “The Last Stop”. The disk containing
said description shall contain a map of California, a factory, a highway and a
cornucopia. The seal shall be in various colors, with primary colors of navy
blue and yellow.
(Ord. 544, passed 5-24-2006)
§ 1-9-2 OFFICIAL LOGO.
   The following is the official logo of the City of Livingston:
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/bfbdf7ef948580a5f83ee4a174cfd5b656b27a6b/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2973.png]
 
(Ord. 544, passed 5-24-2006)
CHAPTER 10: DOCUMENTARY STAMP TAX
Section
1-10-1 Title
1-10-2 Tax imposed, exceptions
1-10-3 Exemptions from tax
1-10-4 Administration of tax
1-10-5 Refunds
1-10-6 Operative date
§ 1-10-1 TITLE.
   This chapter shall be known as the “Real Property Transfer Tax Ordinance of
the City of Livingston”. It is adopted pursuant to the authority contained in
Cal. Revenue and Taxation Code Part 6.7 (commencing with § 11901) of Division
2.
(Ord. 331, passed 5-19-1987)
§ 1-10-2 TAX IMPOSED, EXCEPTIONS.
   (A)   Tax imposed.
      1.   There is hereby imposed on each deed, instrument or writing by which
any lands, tenements or other realty sold within the city shall be granted,
assigned, transferred or otherwise conveyed to, or vested in, the purchaser or
purchasers, or any other person by his or her directions, when the
consideration or value of the interest or property conveyed (exclusive of the
value of any lien or encumbrances remaining thereon at the time of sale)
exceeds $100, a tax at the rate of $0.275 for each $500 or fractional part
thereof.
      2.   Any tax imposed pursuant to this subsection (A) shall be paid by any
person who makes, signs or issues any document or instrument subject to the
tax, or for whose use or benefit the same is made, signed or issued.
   (B)   Exceptions.
      1.   Any tax imposed pursuant to this chapter shall not apply to any
instrument in writing given to secure a debt.
      2.   The United States or any agency or instrumentality thereof, any
state or territory or political subdivision thereof, or the District of
Columbia shall not be liable for any tax imposed pursuant to this chapter with
respect to any deed, instrument or writing to which it is a party, but the tax
may be collected by assessment from any other party liable therefor.
(Ord. 331, passed 5-19-1987)
§ 1-10-3 EXEMPTIONS FROM TAX.
   (A)   1.   Any tax imposed pursuant to this chapter shall not apply to the
making, delivering or filing of conveyances to make effective any plan of
reorganization or adjustment:
         (a)   Confirmed under the federal Bankruptcy Code, being 11 U.S.C., as
amended;
         (b)   Approved in an equity receivership proceeding in a court
involving a railroad corporation, as defined in 11 U.S.C. § 205(m), as amended;
         (c)   Approved in an equity receivership proceeding in a court
involving a corporation, as defined in 11 U.S.C. § 506(3), as amended; or
         (d)   Whereby a mere change in identity, form or place of organization
is affected.
      2.   Subsections (A)1.(a) to (A)1.(d), inclusive, of this section shall
only apply if the making, delivery or filing of instruments of transfer or
conveyances occurs within five years from the date of such confirmation,
approval or change.
   (B)   Any tax imposed pursuant to this chapter shall not apply to the making
or delivery of conveyances to make effective any order of the Securities and
Exchange Commission, as defined in the Internal Revenue Code § 1083(a) of 1954;
but only if:
      1.   The order of the Security and Exchange Commission in obedience to
which such conveyance is made recites that such conveyance is necessary or
appropriate to effectuate the provisions of 15 U.S.C. § 79k, relating to the
Public Utility Holding Company Act of 1935;
      2.   Such order specifies the property which is ordered to be conveyed;
and
      3.   Such conveyance is made in obedience to such order.
   (C)   In the case of any realty held by a partnership, no levy shall be
imposed pursuant to this chapter by reason of any transfer of an interest in a
partnership or otherwise, if:
      1.   Such partnership (or another partnership) is considered a continuing
partnership within the meaning of the Internal Revenue Code § 708 of 1954; and
      2.   Such continuing partnership continues to hold the realty concerned.
   (D)   If there is a termination of any partnership within the meaning of the
Internal Revenue Code § 708 of 1954, for purposes of this chapter; such
partnership shall be treated as having executed an instrument whereby there was
conveyed, for fair market value (exclusive of the value of any lien or
encumbrance remaining thereon), all realty held by such partnership at the time
of such termination.
   (E)   Not more than one tax shall be imposed pursuant to this chapter by
reason of a termination described in subsection (D) of this section, and any
transfer pursuant thereto, with respect to the realty held by such partnership
at the time of such termination.
(Ord. 331, passed 5-19-1987)
§ 1-10-4 ADMINISTRATION OF TAX.
   The County Recorder shall administer this chapter in conformity with the
provisions of Cal. Revenue and Taxation Code Part 6.7 of Division 2 and the
provisions of any county ordinance adopted pursuant thereto.
(Ord. 331, passed 5-19-1987)
§ 1-10-5 REFUNDS.
   Claims for refund of taxes imposed pursuant to this chapter shall be
governed by the provisions of Cal. Revenue and Taxation Code Division 1, Part
9, Chapter 5 (commencing with § 5096).
(Ord. 331, passed 5-19-1987)
§ 1-10-6 OPERATIVE DATE.
   This chapter shall become operative upon the operative date of any ordinance
adopted by the County of Merced, pursuant to Cal. Revenue and Taxation Code
Part 6.7 (commencing with § 11901) of Division 2, or upon the effective date
hereof, whichever is the later.
(Ord. 331, passed 5-19-1987)
CHAPTER 11: PURCHASE POLICIES AND PROCEDURES
Section
1-11-1 Authority
1-11-2 Purpose
1-11-3 Organization
1-11-4 Delegation of purchasing authority
1-11-5 Formal contract procedures
1-11-6 Waiver of formal bid procedures
1-11-7 Open market purchases
1-11-8 Collusion With Bidder
1-11-9 Collusion by bidder
1-11-10 Exempt from bidding
§ 1-11-1 AUTHORITY.
   (A)   In conformance with Cal. Gov’t Code Title 5, Division 2, Part 1,
Chapter 5, Article 7, § 54203 the city shall adopt by ordinance, policies and
procedures, including bidding regulations, governing purchases of supplies and
equipment by the city.
   (B)   As per §
1-6-5(D) of this title, the authority is given for the establishment of a
purchasing policy.
(Ord. 331, passed 5-19-1987)
§ 1-11-2 PURPOSE.
   The purchasing system is hereby established in order:
   (A)   To establish efficient procedures for the purchase of city supplies,
materials, equipment and contractual services at the lowest possible cost
commensurate with quality needed;
   (B)   To exercise financial control over purchases; and
   (C)   To clearly define authority and procedure for the purchasing function.
(Ord. 331, passed 5-19-1987)
§ 1-11-3 ORGANIZATION.
   The purchasing system shall be the responsibility of the Finance Department
of the city under the supervision of the City Manager/Director of Finance.
(Ord. 331, passed 5-19-1987)
§ 1-11-4 DELEGATION OF PURCHASING AUTHORITY.
   The City Manager/Director of Finance or designee, shall have the following
responsibilities:
   (A)   For the administration of all rules and regulations established by
this chapter;
   (B)   Make and execute contracts on behalf of the city, involving budgeted
or appropriated expenditures;
   (C)   May authorize any department to purchase budgeted operational
supplies, materials, equipment and contractual services, provided that such
purchases or contracts shall be made in conformity with the procedures
established by this chapter. All purchases, however, shall be subject to review
and control of the City Manager/Director of Finance;
   (D)   Is responsible for assuring written specifications for supplies,
materials, equipment and contractual services as may be needed to conform with
good purchasing practices;
   (E)   Must authorize expenditures for each purchase over $500;
   (F)   Strive to obtain all federal and other tax exemptions to which the
city is entitled; and
   (G)   With approval of the Council, join with the state and other units of
government in cooperative purchasing plans when the best interest of the city
would be served thereby.
(Ord. 331, passed 5-19-1987)
§ 1-11-5 FORMAL CONTRACT PROCEDURES.
   All purchases in excess of $10,000 are subject to formal sealed bid
procedures and must be publicly advertised.
   (A)   Notice inviting bids.
      1.   The notice inviting bids must be published in a newspaper of general
circulation in the city by one or more insertions, the first of which must be
at least seven days before the time of bid opening. The notice shall include a
general description of the supplies, materials, equipment and contractual
services to be purchased, state where bid blanks and specifications may be
secured, and the time and place for bid opening.
      2.   Whenever feasible, copies of the bid proposal shall be sent to
prospective vendors and contractors in an attempt to encourage as wide a
response as possible.
   (B)   Bid deposits.
      1.   Where required by the city and when not so required but deemed
necessary or desirable by the City Manager/Director of Finance, all bids shall
be accompanied by either a certified or cashier’s check, or a bidder’s bond
executed by a corporate surety authorized to engage in such business in
California, made payable to the city. Such security shall be in an amount not
less than that specified in the notice inviting bids or in the specifications
referred to therein, or if no amount is specified by the notice inviting bids,
then in an amount not less than 10% of the aggregate amount of the bid. If the
successful bidder neglects or refuses to enter into the contract to provide
supplies, materials, equipment or contractual services according to
specifications referred to therein, the amount of the bidder’s security shall
be declared forfeited to the city, and shall be collected and paid into its
general fund, and all bonds forfeited shall be prosecuted and the amount
thereof collected and paid into such fund.
      2.   All bids not submitted with the required deposit shall be rejected.
Unsuccessful bidders shall be entitled to the return of deposits when such have
been required.
   (C)   Sealed bids. Bids shall be sealed, shall be identified as bids on the
envelope, shall be submitted at the place and no later than the time stated in
the public notice inviting bids, and shall be opened publicly at the time and
place stated in the public notice. Bids received after the stated time shall
not be accepted and shall be returned to the bidder unopened.
   (D)   Council may reject bids. The Council shall have the authority to
accept or reject any or all bids, or to waive any informalities or minor
irregularities in a bid. The Council, after rejecting bids, or if no bids are
received, may declare and determine that, in its opinion, based on estimates
approved by the City Manager/Director of Finance, the purchase in question may
be made without a formal bid procedure and, after the adoption of a resolution
to this effect by at least five affirmative votes of the Council, may proceed
to have said purchase made in the manner stated without further observation of
the provisions of this section.
   (E)   Lowest responsible bidder. In addition to price in determining the
“lowest responsible bidder”, consideration will be given to quality and
performance of the commodity to be purchased, or service provided by the
seller. Criteria for determining the low bid shall include, but not be limited
to, the following:
      1.   The ability, capacity and skill of the bidder to provide the
supplies, materials, equipment or contractual services as required;
      2.   The ability of the bidder to provide the supplies, materials,
equipment or contractual services within the time specified;
      3.   The character, integrity, reputation, judgment, experience and
efficiency of the bidder;
      4.   The quality or performance of previous purchases from said bidder;
and
      5.   The ability of the bidder to provide future maintenance, repair
parts and services for the use of the commodity purchased.
   (F)   Faithful performance bond. When the specifications so provide, the
successful bidder shall furnish surety in the form of certified or cashier’s
check, corporate surety bond or savings and loan certificate for faithful
performance of the contract.
(Ord. 331, passed 5-19-1987)
§ 1-11-6 WAIVER OF FORMAL BID PROCEDURES.
   Formal bid procedures of items over $10,000 can only be waived if the
purchase is:
   (A)   Of urgent necessity for the preservation of life, health or property;
   (B)   Waived by Council resolution passed by at least four affirmative
votes; and/or
   (C)   Available from only one source. Sole source procurement must be
adequately justified.
(Ord. 331, passed 5-19-1987)
§ 1-11-7 OPEN MARKET PURCHASES.
   All purchases of $10,000 or less shall be based, when feasible and when in
the best interest of the city, on at least three competitive quotations,
written or verbal, and shall be awarded to the lowest responsible bidder. Sole
source justification for awards shall be prepared by the requesting department
subject to acceptance by the City Manager/Director of Finance. Preference for
one particular brand may be challenged unless evidence can be supplied as to
the benefits to the city of limiting procurement to a specific brand.
(Ord. 331, passed 5-19-1987)
§ 1-11-8 COLLUSION WITH BIDDER.
   Any officer of the city or any department thereof who shall aid or assist a
bidder in securing a contract to furnish supplies, materials, equipment or
contractual services at a higher price than that proposed by any other bidder,
who shall favor one bidder over another by giving or withholding information,
or who shall willfully mislead any bidder in regard to the character of the
materials or supplies called for, or who shall knowingly accept commodities of
a quality inferior to those called for by the contract, or who shall knowingly
certify to a greater amount of labor performed than has actually been
performed, or to the receipt of a greater amount or different kind of materials
or supplies than have actually been received, shall be deemed guilty of
malfeasance and shall be removed from office.
(Ord. 331, passed 5-19-1987)
§ 1-11-9 COLLUSION BY BIDDER.
   If at any time it shall be found that the person to whom a contract has been
awarded has in presenting any bid or bids, colluded with any other party or
parties for the purpose of preventing any other bid being made, then the
contract so awarded shall be null and void.
(Ord. 331, passed 5-19-1987)
§ 1-11-10 EXEMPT FROM BIDDING.
   Contractual services will not include the following, which will be exempt
from the bidding requirements:
   (A)   Contracts involving the obtaining of professional or specialized
skills such as, but not limited to, services rendered by attorneys, architects,
engineers, accountants and specialized consultants;
   (B)   When calling for bids on a competitive basis in the opinion of the
City Manager/Director of Finance is undesirable, impossible, unavailing or
incongruous; and
   (C)   Where the City Manager/Director of Finance’s requirements can be met
solely by a single patented article or process.
(Ord. 331, passed 5-19-1987)
CHAPTER 12: SURPLUS PROPERTY
Section
1-12-1 General
1-12-2 Procedures
1-12-3 Delegation of authority
1-12-4 Inventory records of surplus property
1-12-5 Property transfer
1-12-6 Unclaimed property
1-12-7 Auction procedures
1-12-8 Surplus city vehicles
1-12-9 Surplus land
§ 1-12-1 GENERAL.
   (A)   The City Manager is responsible for the general control of all surplus
city property. Control of such property includes storage of surplus property,
inventory tagging of surplus property, and disposal of city surplus and
unclaimed property.
   (B)   The City Manager shall have the authority to transfer equipment and
supplies between departments and, with the approval of the City Council, sell
obsolete, unused or surplus property of the city.
(Ord. 316, passed 2-17-1987)
§ 1-12-2 PROCEDURES.
   The City Manager may dispose of surplus property by any of the following
methods:
   (A)   Assignment to a new department by property transfer;
   (B)   Public auction;
   (C)   Sale to the highest bidder after advertisement;
   (D)   In the case of surplus land, sale or lease to an appropriate local
agency or otherwise designated party as per Cal. Gov’t Code Title 5, Division
2, Part 1, Chapter 5, Article 8, § 54222; and
   (E)   Scrap materials designated surplus property may be disposed of on an
ongoing basis, as necessary, through direct sales, informal bid process,
contract negotiations or sealed bids.
(Ord. 316, passed 2-17-1987)
§ 1-12-3 DELEGATION OF AUTHORITY.
   The City Manager may authorize any department to dispose of surplus city
property, provided that such disposal be done in accordance with procedures
established by this chapter.
(Ord. 316, passed 2-17-1987)
§ 1-12-4 INVENTORY RECORDS OF SURPLUS PROPERTY.
   (A)   The City Manager shall retain a surplus property file which accounts
for all transactions completed by the city through property transfers,
auctions, sales or leasing.
   (B)   Revenues received from disposal of surplus or unclaimed property
through the year will be reported to the Director of Finance after each sale.
   (C)   At the end of each fiscal year, a summary report will be submitted to
the City Manager from the Director of Finance identifying quantities of
materials sold or leased and revenues received. This report will be included in
with the Department of Finance’s annual report of yearly activities.
   (D)   Revenues received from major sales of surplus or unclaimed property
through the year shall be reported to the City Manager after each sale.
(Ord. 316, passed 2-17-1987)
§ 1-12-5 PROPERTY TRANSFER.
   (A)   1.   Departments requesting materials and items to be transferred to
surplus must submit a written request to the City Manager.
      2.   Upon approval, the department head shall notify the Director of
Finance, and arrange for transportation of the surplus property to the
corporation yard. Surplus items will be tagged as they are received, listed on
a surplus property log, and stored until sold or requested by another
department.
   (B)   Departments wishing to secure an item from surplus property may do so
by filing a request with the City Manager, and if approved, must notify the
Director of Finance.
(Ord. 316, passed 2-17-1987)
§ 1-12-6 UNCLAIMED PROPERTY.
   (A)   Upon expiration of a six-month waiting period, any unclaimed property
(such as what might be confiscated as evidence by the Police Department) that
cannot be delivered to the owner may be appropriated for use by the city upon
order of the City Manager Any property not appropriated for use by the city may
be sold at public auction to the highest bidder.
   (B)   Unclaimed items appropriated for city use are required to obtain a
property tag if the items are valued over $100 or if they are accountable items
such as cameras, tape recorders, calculators and the like. The Department of
Finance must be notified to make changes in property records and tag any items
as necessary.
(Ord. 316, passed 2-17-1987)
§ 1-12-7 AUCTION PROCEDURES.
   At the discretion of the City Manager, a public auction may be held to
dispose of unclaimed or surplus city property. The following procedures are
established for its organization.
   (A)   General provisions.
      1.   The City Manager will select a tentative auction date 60 days in
advance and assign an auction coordinator; and
      2.   The auction coordinator will prepare a calendar of events leading up
to the auction day. The events are to be organized around these key areas:
         (a)   Auction accounting;
         (b)   Publicity;
         (c)   Property list and transfers; and
         (d)   Site preparation.
      3.   A list of unclaimed property from the Police Department is to be
submitted to the Director of Finance by the Chief of Police.
      4.   A request for surplus property may be sent to all departments or
only surplus items on hand may be considered, whichever is in the best interest
of the city as determined by the City Manager. All items listed as surplus will
be reviewed by the City Manager and Director of Finance prior to preparation of
a final list.
      5.   A final surplus and unclaimed property list may be prepared and sent
to all departments. At this time, any property declared surplus by one
department and requested by another may be transferred if approved by the City
Manager. Any unclaimed property listed by the Police Department may be
transferred to departments if approved by the City Manager. In all cases, any
item valued over $100 shall be assigned a city property number.
      6.   The auction coordinator will submit a surplus and unclaimed property
list to the Council 30 days before the auction. Council must authorize a public
auction prior to any publicity by the city.
      7.   Notice of the sale must be given by the City Clerk at least five
days before the date of the event by publication at least once in a newspaper
of general circulation published in the county.
      8.   Departments should be contacted at least two weeks in advance for
supplying personnel to assist in auction preparation. When possible, personnel
involved in previous auctions should be requested.
      9.   No city employees working auction day will be allowed to bid on
merchandise.
      10.   Staff assigned to auction accounting is to submit a financial
statement to the auction coordinator. A report on the auction including the
financial report shall be submitted to the Director of Finance.
      11.   Unsold city property and unsold police property will be returned to
the Finance Department’s holding area of surplus property.
   (B)   Auction day regulations.
      1.   Refunds. All materials are sold “as is, where is”. All sales are
final.
      2.   Found property. Any individual claiming found property the day of
the auction and who has reported the theft to the city’s Police Department
prior to the auction will be instructed to contact the Police Department and
the item shall be removed from the auction.
      3.   Tag switching. Any individual claiming tag switching will be
directed toward the claim area where the tag number will be compared to the
surplus list.
      4.   Payments. All transactions will be handled on a cash or check basis.
All items are to be paid for on the day of the auction. Requests for delayed
payments will be refused.
      5.   Claims after sale. Should a claim for an item be made after a sale,
the item is not to be released to any party. The item is to be impounded and
returned to the Police Department. In the event the buying party has paid, the
payment is to be refunded. This regulation is to apply only if the party
claiming stolen property has reported the theft prior to the auction.
(Ord. 316, passed 2-17-1987)
§ 1-12-8 SURPLUS CITY VEHICLES.
   (A)   Surplus vehicles are generally generated as a result of the following
actions.
      1.   Vehicles are withheld from trade-in in the best interest of the
city.
      2.   It has been determined that a vehicle is no longer serviceable nor
repairable and is placed into surplus.
   (B)   The procedures for the handling and disposal of surplus vehicles are
the same as those previously outlined in this chapter.
   (C)   Departments wishing to secure a vehicle for additional use must submit
a written request to the City Manager.
(Ord. 316, passed 2-17-1987)
§ 1-12-9 SURPLUS LAND.
   (A)   SURPLUS LAND is defined as real property owned by the city which is
determined to be no longer necessary for the city’s use.
   (B)   The city may dispose of such surplus land in accordance with the
conditions set by the Cal. Gov’t Code Title 5, Division 2, Part 1, Chapter 5,
Article 8, § 54222.
   (C)   Prior to disposing of that property, the city shall send a written
offer to sell or lease the property as follows:
      1.   For the purpose of developing low and moderate income housing, to
any local agencies within whose jurisdiction the surplus land is located
including, but not limited to, housing authorities or redevelopment agencies;
      2.   For park and recreational or open space purposes:
         (a)   To any Park and Recreation Department of any city within which
the land is situated;
         (b)   To any Park and Recreation Department of the county within which
the land is situated;
         (c)   To any regional park authority having jurisdiction; and
         (d)   To the state resources agency.
      3.   For enterprise zone purposes, to the nonprofit Neighborhood
Enterprise Association Corporation in the designated enterprise zone;
      4.   For designated program area purposes, to the program area agent; and
      5.   For school purposes, to any public school district within whose
jurisdiction the land is situated.
   (D)   After the city has received notice from an entity desiring to purchase
or lease the land, the city shall enter into good faith negotiations to
determine a mutually satisfactory sales price or lease terms.
   (E)   In the event that the city receives more than one offer, priority
shall be given to the entity which agrees to use the site for housing for
persons of low or moderate income, except that first priority shall be given to
an entity which agrees to use the site for park or recreational purposes if the
land being offered is already being used and will continue to be used for park
or recreational purposes, or if the land is designated for park or recreational
use in the local general plan.
(Ord. 316, passed 2-17-1987)
CHAPTER 13: INVESTMENT POLICY
Section
1-13-1 Purpose of policy
1-13-2 Objective of policy
1-13-3 Legal authority
1-13-4 Available investment instruments
1-13-5 Investment limitations
1-13-6 General investment guidelines
1-13-7 Mitigating risk of portfolio loss
1-13-8 Treasury management guidelines
1-13-9 Evaluating financial institutions
1-13-10 Administrative safeguards
1-13-11 Reporting and evaluation requirements
§ 1-13-1 PURPOSE OF POLICY.
   This statement provides guidelines for the prudent management of the city’s
investment portfolio.
(Ord. 342, passed 12-15-1987)
§ 1-13-2 OBJECTIVE OF POLICY.
   (A)   The primary objective of this investment policy is to achieve the
highest yield possible without assuming unacceptable levels of risk while
maintaining a liquidity position sufficient to meet current and anticipated
cash needs. The following major guidelines are used to achieve the primary
objective of the investment policy:
      1.   Investment authority and responsibility;
      2.   Available investment instruments;
      3.   Investment limitations;
      4.   General investment guidelines;
      5.   Prevention of risk;
      6.   Eligible financial institutions;
      7.   Administrative safeguards; and
      8.   Reporting and evaluation requirements.
   (B)   The policies described herein shall apply to the investment portfolios
of the City Redevelopment Agency and other funds that may at various times be
placed in the custody of the Treasurer.
(Ord. 342, passed 12-15-1987)
§ 1-13-3 LEGAL AUTHORITY.
   Pursuant to Cal. Gov’t Code § 53607, the City Manager and Finance Director
as chief fiscal officers are authorized to undertake investment transactions on
behalf of the city.
   (A)   Security purchases and holdings are maintained within statutory limits
imposed by the Cal. Gov’t Code §§ 53600 et seq.
   (B)   Investments shall be made with judgment and care, under circumstances
then prevailing, which persons of prudence, discretion and intelligence
exercise in the management of their own affairs, not for speculation, but for
investment, considering the probable income to be derived.
(Ord. 342, passed 12-15-1987)
§ 1-13-4 AVAILABLE INVESTMENT INSTRUMENTS.
   (A)   Government agency issues. As authorized in Cal. Gov’t Code §§ 53601(a)
through (e), this category includes a wide variety of government securities.
There are no portfolio limitations on the amount or maturity period for these
investment vehicles, which include the following:
      1.   Local government bonds or other indebtedness;
      2.   State bonds or other indebtedness;
      3.   U.S. treasury notes or other indebtedness secured by the full faith
and credit of the federal government; and
      4.   Other federal agency securities such as issued by the Government
National Mortgage Association (GNMA), Federal National Mortgage Association
(FNMA) and small business administration.
   (B)   Bankers’ acceptances.
      1.   As provided in Cal. Gov’t Code § 53601(g), 40% of the city’s
portfolio may be invested in bankers’ acceptances that are eligible for
purchase by the federal reserve system, although no more than 30% of the
portfolio may be invested in bankers’ acceptances with any one commercial bank.
      2.   Additionally, the maturity period cannot exceed 270 days; however,
bankers’ acceptances are seldom marketed with maturities in excess of 180 days.
   (C)   Commercial paper. As authorized in Cal. Gov’t Code § 53601(h), 15% of
the city’s portfolio may be invested in “prime” commercial paper as rated by
Moody’s or Standard and Poor’s with maturities not to exceed 180 days. This
percentage may be increased to 30% if the dollar weighted average maturity does
not exceed 31 days. There are a number of other qualifications regarding
investments in commercial paper based on the financial strength of the
corporation and the size of the investment.
   (D)   Negotiable certificates of deposit. As authorized in Cal. Gov’t Code §
53601(i), the city may invest 30% of its portfolio in negotiable certificates
of deposit issued by commercial banks. There is no limitation on the maturity
period for this investment vehicle.
   (E)   Repurchase and reverse repurchase agreements.
      1.   As authorized in Cal. Gov’t Code § 53601(j), these investment
vehicles are agreements between the local agency and seller for the purchase of
government securities to be resold at a specific date and for a specific
amount.
      2.   Repurchase agreements are generally used for short term investments
varying from one day to two weeks, although there is no legal limitation on the
maturity period or the amount. As provided in Cal. Gov’t Code § 53635, reverse
repurchase agreements require the prior approval of the city.
   (F)   Council financial futures and financial option contracts. As
authorized in Cal. Gov’t Code §53601(i), local agencies may invest in financial
futures or option contracts in any of the above investment categories subject
to the same overall portfolio limitations.
   (G)   Time certificates of deposit.
      1.   As authorized in Cal. Gov’t Code § 53652, certificates of deposit
are fixed term investments which are required to be collateralized 110% by
eligible pooled securities.
      2.   The pool is administered by the state, and is composed of a wide
variety of government securities, including those indicated above (except
municipal bonds), as well as promissory notes secured by first mortgages on
improved residential property located in the state. There are no portfolio
limits on the amount or maturity for this investment vehicle.
(Ord. 342, passed 12-15-1987)
§ 1-13-5 INVESTMENT LIMITATIONS.
   All investment vehicles allowed by Cal. Gov’t Code §§ 53601 and 53630 et
seq. may be used by the city with the exception of reverse repurchase
agreements. Exclusion of these vehicles is consistent with the city’s desire to
minimize risk. Although the possibility exists for greater earnings with these
vehicles, it is believed that the potential level of risk exceeds their
benefits.
(Ord. 342, passed 12-15-1987)
§ 1-13-6 GENERAL INVESTMENT GUIDELINES.
   The criteria employed by the Treasurer in the selection of investment
instruments in their order of importance are the following.
   (A)   Safety. The safety and risk associated with an investment refers to
the potential loss of principal, accrued interest or a combination of these.
The city employs investment instruments which are considered safe. The primary
duty of the Treasurer is to protect the cash and investments placed in his or
her trust on behalf of the citizens of the community.
   (B)   Liquidity. Liquidity refers to the ability to convert investment
holdings to cash immediately with a minimal loss of principal or accrued
interest. This quality of an investment is important when the need for
unexpected funds suddenly occurs.
   (C)   Yield. Yield is the dollar earnings that investment provides. Yield
becomes important only after the fundamental requirements of safety and
liquidity have been met.
(Ord. 342, passed 12-15-1987)
§ 1-13-7 MITIGATING RISK OF PORTFOLIO LOSS.
   (A)   Diversification of instruments. The portfolio should consist of a mix
of various types of securities, issuers and maturities.
   (B)   Staggering of maturities. Investment maturities are scheduled in such
a manner so that adequate cash will be available to pay disbursement
obligations as they become due and payable.
   (C)   Cash flow requirements used to establish maturity. Projected cash flow
requirements are the primary factor to be used in determining investment
maturity terms. After cash flow needs have been met, yield considerations will
be the next factor used in determining maturity terms, with the expectation
that longer maturity periods will generally yield greater returns on
investments.
   (D)   Sale of investments before maturity. Investments may be sold prior to
maturity for cash flow or appreciation purposes; however, no investment shall
be made based on yields resulting from capital gains.
   (E)   Terms of investments. Investments longer than one year may be made if
consistent with the city’s cash flow needs and related intent of holding until
maturity.
(Ord. 342, passed 12-15-1987)
§ 1-13-8 TREASURY MANAGEMENT GUIDELINES.
   (A)   Pooled cash. Cash for all general city funds are consolidated into one
general bank account and invested on a pooled concept basis. Interest earnings
are allocated according to fund ledger balances.
   (B)   Competitive bids. Purchase and sale of securities are made on the
basis of competitive offers and bids.
   (C)   Time deposit placement. Insured $100,000 time deposits are not placed
with banks and/or savings and loan associations unless an office is maintained
in the state.
   (D)   Security marketability. The marketability (salability) of a security
is considered at the time of purchase, as the security may have to be sold
prior to maturity in order to meet unanticipated cash demands.
   (E)   TCD evaluation. Time certificates of deposit (TCD) are evaluated in
terms of FDIC or FSLIC coverage. For deposits in excess of the insured maximum
of $100,000, approved collateral at full market value is required, as
prescribed in the Cal. Gov’t Code 53652.
   (F)   NCD evaluation. Negotiable certificates of deposit (NCD) are evaluated
in terms of the credit worthiness of the issuer, as these deposits are
unsecured and uncollateralized promissory notes.
   (G)   Broker authorization. Investment transactions are executed only with
previously approved brokers/dealers.
   (H)   Financial capacity. The financial capacity and credit worthiness of
the financial institution shall be considered prior to the placement of city
investments.
   (I)   Safekeeping. Securities purchased from secondary brokers/dealers shall
be held in third party safekeeping by the Trust Department of the city’s bank,
or by another third party trustee designated by the City Treasurer. Securities
purchased from primary dealers shall be held in the name of local agency with
the trustee executing investment transactions as directed by the City
Treasurer.
(Ord. 342, passed 12-15-1987)
§ 1-13-9 EVALUATING FINANCIAL INSTITUTIONS.
   (A)   Before the placement of an investment with any financial institution,
the city investigates the ability of that institution to meet its financial
obligations.
   (B)   Several criteria that portray the financial well being of an
institution are studied. Among these are:
      1.   Profitability. The first and simplest test of an institution’s
ability to meet its liabilities is to study profits or earnings history. An
institution that is losing money erodes its capital and could find insufficient
assets to offset depositors’ claims;
      2.   Capitalization. Capital is the owners’ or shareholders’ equity
investment (assets minus liabilities). A well capitalized firm can withstand
temporary losses and offers reassurance that cash will be available to redeem a
note or certificate;
      3.   Asset quality. Asset quality is a key analytical concern. Default
risk is greatest among institutions with deteriorating assets; and
      4.   Financial statement. To facilitate evaluation, the financial
institution shall submit audited financial statements prepared by an
independent certified public accountant to the city on an annual basis
prompting following the end of the institution’
(Ord. 342, passed 12-15-1987)
§ 1-13-10 ADMINISTRATIVE SAFEGUARDS.
   The city employs methods to ensure safe administration of its investment
program. Two main areas of concern are the following.
   (A)   Internal controls. The city attempts to separate the investment
placing function and the resultant accounting activity.
   (B)   Bonding. All employees involved in investment duties are properly
bonded.
(Ord. 342, passed 12-15-1987)
§ 1-13-11 REPORTING AND EVALUATION REQUIREMENTS.
   (A)   Monthly report. By law, the Treasurer must issue a monthly report to
the chief executive officer and legislative body of the city showing the type
of investment, institution, date of maturity, amount of deposit, current market
value for all securities with a maturity of more than 12 months, rate of
interest and other relevant data that may be requested.
   (B)   Annual report and review. The Treasurer shall prepare an annual report
for review with the legislative body showing average daily funds invested by
portfolio, interest earned, portfolio yield and average life. The report will
include yields on other comparable portfolios for comparison purposes. Other
topics for discussion will include the general condition of the portfolio,
outlook for future interest rates and planned strategy for executing investment
transactions. Such reviews and evaluations should result in a uniform portfolio
administration policy.
(Ord. 342, passed 12-15-1987)
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see Cal. Gov’t Code § 53646(b)(1)
CHAPTER 14: CLAIMS PROCEDURES FOR FILING CLAIMS AGAINST THE CITY
Section
1-14-1 Procedures
§ 1-14-1 PROCEDURES.
   (A)   Authority. The provisions of this chapter are subject to provisions of
Cal. Gov’t Code Title 1, Division 3.6, Part 3, Chapter 1, commencing with Cal.
Gov’t Code §§ 900 et seq. Pursuant to the authority contained in Cal. Gov’t
Code § 935, the following claims procedures are established for those claims
against the city for money or damages.
   (B)   Claims required. Notwithstanding the exceptions set forth in Cal.
Gov’t Code § 905, all claims against the city for money or damages, when a
procedure for processing such claims is not otherwise provided by state or
local laws, shall contain the information required and be presented within the
time limitations and in the manner prescribed by Cal. Gov’t Code §§ 910 through
915.2, and as further provided by this chapter. Such claims shall further be
subject to the provisions of Cal. Gov’t Code §945.4 relating to the prohibition
of suits in the absence of the presentation of claims and action thereon by the
City Council of the city.
   (C)   Form of claim. All claims or demands against the city shall be filed
with the City Clerk of the city, made in writing, and verified by the claimant
or by his or her guardian, conservator, executor or administrator. No claim or
demand may be filed on behalf of a class of persons unless verified by every
member of that class as required by this section. Notwithstanding the
foregoing, nothing herein shall permit the filing of a refund claim on behalf
of a class or group of taxpayers for a refund of taxes.
   (D)   Claim prerequisite to suit. In accordance with Cal. Gov’t Code §§ 935
(b) and 945.6, all claims shall be presented as provided in this section and
acted upon by the city prior to the filing of any action on such claims, and no
such action may be maintained by a person who has not complied with the
requirements of subsections (B) and (C) of this section.
   (E)   Suit. Any action brought against the city upon any claim or demand
shall conform to the requirements of Cal. Gov’t Code §§ 940 through 949. Any
action brought against any employee of the city shall conform with the
requirements of Cal. Gov’t Code §§ 950 through 951.
(Ord. 566, passed 4-1-2008)
CHAPTER 15: CITY POLICIES AND PROCEDURES
Section
1-15-1 Discrimination ban
1-15-2 Fair housing
§ 1-15-1 DISCRIMINATION BAN.
   (A)   The city does not discriminate on the basis of race, color, national
origin, political affiliation, religion, age, sex or disability in the
admission or access to, or treatment or employment in, its services, programs
or activities. The city has designated a coordinator to facilitate compliance
with the Americans with Disabilities Act of 1990 (ADA), being 42 U.S.C. §§
12101 et seq., and § 504 of the Rehabilitation Act of 1973, being 29 U.S.C. §
794. In an effort to address employment related complaints, the city will
provide a copy of the brochure titled Pre-Employment Inquiry Guidelines
published by the Department of Fair Employment and Housing free of charge to
any person who requests it.
   (B)   The city hereby adopts the following grievance procedure in order to
provide for the prompt and equitable resolution of any discrimination related
complaints.
      1.   City employees who have complaints alleging discrimination should
refer to the grievance procedure as outlined in the city’s personnel rules and
regulations. All other individuals can file a complaint with the City Manager’s
office for review, action or referral to the appropriate outside agency.
Complaints should be submitted in writing and addressed to the City Manager,
City of Livingston, 1416 C Street, Livingston, CA 95334. A record of the
complaint will be kept on file with the City Manager’s office.
      2.   The individual’s right to prompt and equitable resolution of the
complaint shall not impair his or her pursuit of other remedies, such as the
filing of a complaint with the U.S. Department of Justice or any other
appropriate federal agency. Furthermore, the filing of a lawsuit in state or
federal district court can occur at any time. The use of this grievance
procedure is not a prerequisite to the pursuit of other remedies.
(Ord. 482, passed 9-1-1998)
§ 1-15-2 FAIR HOUSING.
   (A)   Generally. In an effort to address the issue of fair housing the city
has established a “housing discrimination referral process”. The purpose for
the housing discrimination referral process is to promote the issue of fair
housing, as well as to establish a policy for handling housing related
complaints. All housing discrimination complaints brought to attention of the
City Manager will be handled in the following manner.
   (B)   Housing discrimination referral policy.
      1.   The city will promote equal housing opportunities by providing
information on fair housing laws through two informational brochures published
by the State Department of Fair Housing and Employment. The two brochures are A
Guide For Complainants and Housing Rights and will be made available to all
complainants as well as to anyone else who requests a copy.
      2.   All complaints must be submitted in writing and addressed to the
City Manager, City of Livingston, 1416 C Street, Livingston, CA 95334. The City
Manager’s office shall refer all complaints to the State Department of Fair
Housing and Employment - Fresno office. In addition, the City Manager’s office
shall keep a record of all housing related discrimination complaints on file.
The file shall contain the complainant’s name, address, phone number and nature
of the complaint.
(Ord. 482, passed 9-1-1998)
CHAPTER 16: REDEVELOPMENT PLAN
Section
1-16-1 Adoption of plan
1-16-2 Amendment number one
§ 1-16-1 ADOPTION OF PLAN.
   The City Council has received from the Community Redevelopment Agency of the
city (the “agency”) the proposed redevelopment plan (the “redevelopment plan”)
for the Livingston community redevelopment project (the “project”), as approved
by the agency. The following is a copy of said plan:
   Section 1: That the purposes and intents of the City Council with respect to
the project area are to promote the elimination of blight, reverse the trend of
economic stagnation and ensure the realization of the project area potential
for residential, commercial, industrial, public and other appropriate land
uses. Toward this end, the plan is designed and oriented to achieve the
following objectives:
      (A)   The elimination of existing blighted conditions and the prevention
of recurring blight within the project area.
      (B)   The provision of public services and facilities as necessary and
required for the development of the project area.
      (C)   The elimination of environmental deficiencies including inadequate
street improvements, inadequate utility systems, and inadequate public
services.
      (D)   The upgrading of the pedestrian environment within the project
area, particularly the downtown.
      (E)   The enhancement of the visual image of the project area, including
the provision of an environment with a positive image and sense of identity.
      (F)   The preservation and enhancement of any historic structures that
may be identified.
      (G)   The encouragement of the participation of project area residents in
the formation, refinement and implementation of this plan in order to ensure
that plan proposals included herein are directly beneficial to the people who
live and work within the project area.
      (H)   The encouragement, promotion and assistance in the development and
expansion of local commerce, needed commercial and industrial facilities and
increased employment opportunities within the project area.
      (I)   The retention, relocation, and expansion of any businesses and
industries impacted by the freeway realignment.
      (J)   The creation of a more cohesive and unified Livingston community by
strengthening the physical, social and economic ties between residential,
commercial, industrial, recreational and public land uses within the project
area.
      (K)   The provision of a procedural and financial mechanism by which the
agency can assist, complement and coordinate public and private development,
redevelopment, revitalization and enhancement of the Livingston community.
   Section 2: The Council hereby finds and determines that:
      (A)   The project area is a blighted area, the redevelopment of which is
necessary to effectuate the public purposes declared in the California
community redevelopment law (Cal. Health and Safety Code §§ 33000 et seq.).
This finding is based upon the following conditions which characterize the
project area:
         (1)   The existence of unfit or unsafe buildings and structures due to
age, obsolescence, faulty interior arrangements or exterior spacing and mixed
character and shifting of uses;
         (2)   The existence of properties which suffer from deterioration and
disuse because of: inadequate public improvements, facilities, utilities and
open spaces, including inadequate and insufficient traffic circulation, parking
and street lights which cannot be remedied with private or governmental action
without redevelopment;
         (3)   The existence of properties which suffer from economic
dislocation, deterioration and disuse resulting from faulty planning;
         (4)   A lack of proper utilization of property, resulting in a
stagnant and unproductive condition of land potentially useful and valuable;
and
         (5)   A prevalence of economic maladjustment and impaired investment
evidenced by an increase in the number of vacant commercial buildings.
      (B)   It is further found and determined that such conditions are causing
and will increasingly cause a reduction and lack of proper utilization of the
area to such an extent that it constitutes a serious physical, social and
economic burden on the city, which cannot reasonably be expected to be reversed
or alleviated by private enterprise acting alone, requiring redevelopment in
the interest of the health, safety and general welfare of the people of the
city and the state. This finding is based on the fact that governmental action
available to the city without redevelopment would be insufficient to cause any
significant correction of the blighting conditions and that the nature and
costs of the public improvements and facilities required to correct the
blighting conditions are beyond the capacity of the city and cannot be
undertaken or borne by private enterprise acting alone or in concert with
available governmental action.
      (C)   The redevelopment plan will redevelop the project area in
conformity with the community redevelopment law and in the interests of the
public peace, health, safety and welfare. This finding is based upon the fact
that redevelopment of the project area will implement the objectives of the
community redevelopment law by aiding in the elimination and correction of the
conditions of blight, providing for planning, development, redesign, clearance,
reconstruction or rehabilitation of properties which need improvement and
providing for higher economic utilization of potentially useful land.
      (D)   The adoption and carrying out of the redevelopment plan is
economically sound and feasible. This finding is based on the fact that under
the redevelopment plan no public redevelopment activity will be undertaken
unless the agency can demonstrate that it has adequate revenue to finance the
activity.
      (E)   The redevelopment plan conforms to the general plan of the City of
Livingston. This finding is based on the finding of the Planning Commission
that the redevelopment plan conforms to the general plan for the City of
Livingston.
      (F)   The carrying out of the redevelopment plan will promote the public
peace, health, safety and welfare of the City of Livingston and will effectuate
the purposes and policy of the community redevelopment law. The finding is
based on the fact that redevelopment will benefit the project area by
correcting conditions of blight and by coordinating public and private actions
to stimulate development and improve the economic, social and physical
conditions of the project area.
      (G)   The condemnation of real property, as provided for in the
redevelopment plan, is necessary to the execution of the redevelopment plan,
and adequate provisions have been made for the payment for property to be
acquired as provided by law. This finding is based upon the need to ensure that
the provisions of the redevelopment plan will be carried out and to prevent the
recurrence of blight.
      (H)   The agency has a feasible method and plan for the relocation of
families and persons who might be displaced, temporarily or permanently, from
housing facilities in the project area. This finding is based upon the fact
that the redevelopment plan provides for relocation assistance according to
law.
      (I)   There are, or are being provided, within the project area or within
other areas not generally less desirable with regard to public utilities and
public and commercial facilities and at rents or prices within the financial
means of the families and persons who might be displaced from the project area,
decent, safe and sanitary dwellings equal in number to the number of and
available to such displaced families and persons and reasonably accessible to
their places of employment. This finding is based upon the fact that no person
or family will be required to move from any dwelling unit until suitable
replacement housing is available.
      (J)   Inclusion of any lands, buildings or improvements which are not
detrimental to the public health, safety or welfare is necessary for the
effective redevelopment of the entire area of which they are a part, and any
such area is not included for the purpose of obtaining the allocation of tax
increment revenues from such area pursuant to Cal. Health and Safety Code §
33670 of the community redevelopment law without other substantial
justification for its inclusion. This finding is based upon the fact that the
boundaries of the project area were chosen as a unified and consistent whole to
include lands that were underutilized because of blighting influences, or
affected by the existence of blighting influences, and land uses significantly
contributing to the conditions of blight, whose inclusion is necessary to
accomplish the objectives and benefits of the redevelopment plan.
      (K)   The elimination of blight and the redevelopment of the project area
could not reasonably be expected to be accomplished by private enterprise
acting alone without the aid and assistance of the agency. This finding is
based upon the existence of blighting influences, including the lack of
adequate public improvements and facilities, and the inability of individual
developers to economically remove these blighting influences without
substantial public assistance in providing adequate public improvements and
facilities, and the inadequacy of other governmental programs and financing
mechanisms to eliminate blight, including the provision of necessary public
improvements and facilities.
      (L)   The redevelopment plan for the project area will afford the maximum
opportunity, consistent with the sound needs of the city as a whole, for the
redevelopment of such area by private enterprise.
      (M)   The redevelopment plan contains adequate safeguards so that the
work of redevelopment will be carried out pursuant to the redevelopment plan,
and it provides for the retention of controls and the establishment of
restrictions and covenants running with the land sold or leased for private use
for periods of time and under conditions specified in the redevelopment plan,
which this Council deems necessary to effectuate the purposes of the community
redevelopment law.
   Section 3: The Council is satisfied that permanent housing facilities will
be available within three years from the time occupants of the project area are
displaced, if any, and that pending the development of such facilities, there
will be available to any such displaced occupants temporary housing facilities
at rents comparable to those in the City of Livingston at the time of their
displacement. No persons or families of low or moderate income shall be
displaced from residences unless and until there is a suitable housing unit
available and ready for occupancy by such displaced persons or families at
rents comparable to those at the time of their displacement. Such housing units
shall be suitable to the needs of such displaced persons or families and must
be decent, safe, sanitary and otherwise standard dwellings. The agency shall
not displace any such persons or families until such housing units are
available and ready for occupancy.
   Section 4: The Council is convinced that the effect of tax increment
financing will not cause a severe financial burden or detriment on any taxing
agency deriving revenues from the project area.
   Section 5: Written objections to the redevelopment plan filed with the City
Clerk before the hour set for hearing and all oral objections presented to the
Council at the hearing having been considered are hereby overruled.
   Section 6: That certain document entitled “redevelopment plan for the
Livingston community redevelopment project”, the maps contained therein and
such other reports as are incorporated therein by reference, a copy of which is
on file in the office of the City Clerk, having been duly reviewed and
considered is hereby incorporated in this ordinance by reference and made a
part hereof, and as so incorporated is hereby designated, approved and adopted
as the official “redevelopment plan for the Livingston community redevelopment
project”.
   Section 7: In order to implement and facilitate the effectuation of the
redevelopment plan hereby approved, this Council hereby:
      (A)   Pledges its cooperation in helping to carry out the redevelopment
plan;
      (B)   Requests the various officials, departments, boards and agencies of
the city having administrative responsibilities in the project area likewise to
cooperate to such end and to exercise their respective functions and powers in
a manner consistent with the redevelopment of the project area;
      (C)   Stands ready to consider and take appropriate action upon proposals
and measures designed to effectuate the redevelopment plan; and
      (D)   Declares its intention to undertake and complete any proceeding
necessary to be carried out by the city under the provisions of the
redevelopment plan.
   Section 8: The City Clerk is hereby directed to send a certified copy of
this ordinance to the agency, whereupon the agency is vested with the
responsibility for carrying out the redevelopment plan.
   Section 9: The City Clerk is hereby directed to record with the County
Recorder of Merced County a description of the land within the project area and
a statement that proceedings for the redevelopment of the project area have
been instituted under the community redevelopment law.
   Section 10: The City Clerk is hereby directed to transmit a copy of the
description and statement recorded by the Clerk pursuant to Section 9 of this
ordinance, a copy of this ordinance and a map or plat indicating the boundaries
of the project area, to the Auditor and Assessor of the County of Merced, to
the governing body of each of the taxing agencies which receives taxes from
property in the project area and to the state board of equalization.
(Ord. 288, passed 9-12-1985, eff. 10-12-1985)
§ 1-16-2 AMENDMENT NUMBER ONE.
   Section 1: The purposes and intent of the City Council with respect to the
amended project area as it relates to the amendment is to accomplish the
following:
      (A)   Encourage employment opportunities through environmental and
economic improvements resulting from the redevelopment activities.
      (B)   Provide for the rehabilitation of commercial and industrial
structures and residential dwelling units.
      (C)   Provide for participation in the redevelopment of property in the
amended project area by owners who agree to so participate in conformity with
the amendment.
      (D)   Provide for the management of property owned or acquired by the
agency.
      (E)   Comply with the requirements of all applicable laws in providing
relocation assistance where agency activities result in displacement.
      (F)   Provide public infrastructure improvements and community
facilities, such as the installation, construction and/or reconstruction of
streets, overpasses, interchanges, utilities, public buildings, facilities,
structures, streetlighting, landscaping and other improvements which are
necessary for the effective redevelopment of the amended project area.
      (G)   Increase, improve and preserve the community’s supply of affordable
housing.
      (H)   Acquire real property.
      (I)   Dispose of real property acquired by the agency except property
conveyed to it by the city or any other public body.
      (J)   Encourage the redevelopment of the amended project area through the
cooperation of private enterprise and public agencies.
      (K)   Facilitate the retention, relocation, and expansion of any business
and industry impacted by the freeway realignment.
      (L)   Preserve and/or enhance historic structures that may be identified
within the amended project area.
   Section 2: The City Council hereby finds and determines, based on the
evidence in the record, including, but not limited to, the agency’s report to
the City Council on the proposed amendment, and all documents referenced
therein, and evidence and testimony received at the joint public hearing on
adoption of the amendment commencing on December 2, 1997, and the 1985
ordinance that:
      (A)   The added territory is a blighted area, the redevelopment of which
is necessary to effectuate the public purposes declared in the California
Community Redevelopment Law ([CCRL] Cal. Health and Safety Code §§ 33000 et
seq.).
         This finding is based on the following physical conditions of blight
which characterize the added territory:
         (1)   The existence of buildings in which it is unsafe or unhealthy
for persons to live or work, including buildings which exhibit dilapidation and
deterioration, defective design or physical construction, and other similar
factors such as age, adequate utilities and vacancy; and
         (2)   The existence of factors that prevent or substantially hinder
the economically viable use or capacity of buildings or lots, such as
substandard design, inadequately sized structures given present standards and
market conditions and other similar factors such as inadequate infrastructure,
inadequate freeway access, and obsolescence; and
         (3)   Adjacent or nearby uses that are incompatible with each other
and which prevent the economic development of those parcels or other portions
of the amended project area; and
         (4)   The existence of subdivided lots of irregular form and shape and
of inadequate size for proper usefulness and development that are in multiple
ownership.
         This finding is further based on the following economic conditions of
blight which characterize the added territory:
         (1)   Depreciated or stagnant values or impaired investments; and
         (2)   Abnormally high business vacancies, abnormally low lease rates,
high turnover rates, abandoned buildings and excessive vacant lots within an
area developed for urban use and served by utilities.
         (3)   Lack of necessary commercial facilities.
         This finding is further based on the condition of blight characterized
by the existence of inadequate public improvements, parking facilities or
utilities.
         Such conditions of physical and economic blight are so prevalent and
so substantial that they are now causing and will increasingly cause a
reduction and lack of proper utilization of the added territory to such an
extent that it constitutes a serious physical and economic burden on the city
which cannot reasonably be expected to be reversed or alleviated by private
enterprise or governmental action, or both, without redevelopment. This finding
is based on the fact that governmental action available to the city without
redevelopment would be insufficient to cause any significant correction of the
blighting conditions, and that the nature and costs of the public improvements
and facilities and other actions required to correct the blighting conditions
are beyond the capacity of the city and cannot be undertaken or borne by
private enterprise acting alone or in concert with available governmental
action.
      (B)   Significant blight remains within the original project area, and
such blight cannot be eliminated without the extension of the time limits for
the establishment of debt by the agency. Blight remaining within the original
project area has been documented by the agency within the agency’s report to
the City Council.
         Such conditions are so prevalent and so substantial that they are now
causing, have caused and continue to cause, and will increasingly cause a
reduction and lack of proper utilization of the original project area to such
an extent that it constitutes a serious physical and economic burden on the
city which cannot reasonably be expected to be reversed or alleviated by
private enterprise or governmental action, or both, without redevelopment. This
finding is based on the fact that governmental action available to the city
without redevelopment would be insufficient to cause any significant correction
of the blighting conditions, and that the nature and costs of the public
improvements and facilities and other actions required to correct the blighting
conditions are beyond the capacity of the city and cannot be undertaken or
borne by private enterprise acting alone or in concert with available
governmental action.
         This finding is further based on the City Council’s findings contained
in Section 2 of the 1985 ordinance, which found significant conditions of
blight within the original project area.
         Since the adoption of the ordinance, the agency has made efforts to
eliminate such conditions of blight by funding needed infrastructure, providing
housing and housing rehabilitation, public facilities, assisting existing
businesses and providing incentives for new development. However, the majority
of conditions described in the agency’s report to the City Council prepared for
the original project have not changed, and there continues to be a substantial
need to eliminate deficient public facilities and blighting conditions within
the original project area. Such conditions are causing and will increasingly
cause a reduction and lack of proper utilization of the original project area
to such an extent that it constitutes a serious physical and economic burden on
the city which cannot reasonably be expected to be reversed or alleviated by
private enterprise acting alone, requiring redevelopment in the interest of
health, safety and general welfare of the people of the city and the state.
This finding is based on the fact that governmental action available to the
city without redevelopment would be insufficient to cause any significant
correction of the blighting conditions, and that the nature and costs of the
public improvements and facilities and other actions required to correct the
blighting conditions are beyond the capacity of the city and cannot be
undertaken or borne by private enterprise acting alone or in concert with
available governmental action. Therefore, the agency has increased the time
limit on the establishing of loans, advances and indebtedness to finance, in
whole or in part, the original project for an additional period of time as
permitted in Cal. Health and Safety Code (CCRL) § 33333.6.
      (C)   The added territory is a predominantly urbanized area. This finding
is based upon the agency’s report to the City Council, which demonstrates that
not less than 80% of the land in the added territory has been or is developed
for urban uses. In addition, as demonstrated by the agency’s report to City
Council, the added territory is part of an area developed for urban uses.
      (D)   The amendment will redevelop the amended project area in conformity
with the CCRL and in the interests of the public peace, health and welfare.
This finding is based upon the fact that the purposes of the CCRL would be
attained by implementing the original plan, as amended by the amendment through
the following actions: by the elimination of areas suffering from economic
dislocation or disuse; by the replanning, redesign and/or redevelopment of
areas which are stagnant or improperly utilized, and which could not be
accomplished by private enterprise acting alone without public participation
and assistance; by protecting and promoting sound development and redevelopment
of blighted areas and the general welfare of the citizens of the city by
remedying such injurious conditions through appropriate means; and through the
installation of new or replacement of existing public improvements, facilities
and utilities in areas which are currently inadequately served with regard to
such improvements, facilities and utilities.
      (E)   The adoption and carrying out of the amendment is economically
sound and feasible. This finding is based on the fact that under the amendment
the agency will be authorized to seek and utilize a variety of potential
financing resources, including property tax increment; that the nature and
timing of public redevelopment assistance will depend on the amount and
availability of such financing resources, including tax increment, generated by
new investment in the amended project area; that under the amendment no public
redevelopment activity in the amended project area can be undertaken unless the
agency can demonstrate that it has adequate revenue to finance the activity;
and that the financing plan included within the agency’s report to the City
Council demonstrates that sufficient financial resources will be available to
carry out the amendment.
      (F)   The amendment is consistent with the general plan of the city,
including, but not limited to, the housing element of the general plan. This
finding is based on the finding of the Planning Commission that the amendment
conforms to the general plan for the city.
      (G)   The carrying out of the amendment will promote the public peace,
health, safety and welfare of the city and will effectuate the purposes and
policies of the CCRL. This finding is based on the fact that redevelopment will
benefit the amended project area by correcting conditions of blight and by
coordinating public and private actions to stimulate development and improve
the economic and physical conditions of the amended project area, and by
increasing employment opportunities within the city.
      (H)   The condemnation of real property, other than property on which any
persons reside, as provided for in the amendment, is necessary to the execution
of the amendment, and adequate provisions have been made for the payment for
property to be acquired as provided by law. This finding is based upon the need
to ensure that the provisions of the amendment will be carried out in part
through acquisition of property, other than property on which any persons
reside, by eminent domain if necessary, to prevent the recurrence of blight,
and the fact that no property will be acquired until adequate funds are
available to pay full compensation therefor.
      (I)   The agency has a feasible method and plan for the relocation of
families and persons who might be displaced, temporarily or permanently, from
housing facilities by agency actions other than eminent domain in the amended
project area. The agency also has a feasible method and plan for relocation of
businesses. This finding is based upon the fact that the agency has adopted a
plan for relocation of families, persons and businesses who may be displaced by
agency projects, the fact that the amendment provides for relocation assistance
according to law, and the fact that such assistance, including relocation
payments, constitutes a feasible method for relocation.
      (J)   There are, or are being provided, within the amended project area
or within other areas not generally less desirable with regard to public
utilities and public and commercial facilities and at rents or prices within
the financial means of the families and persons who might be displaced from the
amended project area, decent, safe and sanitary dwellings equal in number to
the number of and available to such displaced families and persons and
reasonably accessible to their places of employment. This finding is based upon
the provisions of the amendment which require that families and persons shall
not be displaced prior to the adoption of a relocation plan pursuant to Cal.
Health and Safety Code (CCRL) §§ 33411 and 33411.1, and that dwelling units
housing persons and families of low or moderate-income shall not be removed or
destroyed prior to the adoption of a replacement housing plan pursuant to Cal.
Health and Safety Code (CCRL) §§ 33334.5, 33413 and 33413.5.
      (K)   All noncontiguous areas of the amended project area are either
blighted or necessary for effective redevelopment and are not included for the
purpose of obtaining the allocation of taxes from the area pursuant to Cal.
Health and Safety Code (CCRL) § 33670 without other substantial justification
for their inclusion.
      (L)   Inclusion of any lands, buildings, or improvements which are not
detrimental to the public health, safety or welfare is necessary for the
effective redevelopment of the entire area of which they are a part, and any
such area is not included solely for the purpose of obtaining the allocation of
tax increment revenues from such area pursuant to Cal. Health and Safety Code
(CCRL) § 33670 without other substantial justification for its inclusion. This
finding is based on the fact that all properties within amended project area
boundaries were included because they were underutilized because of blighting
influences, or were affected by the existence of blighting influences, or were
necessary either to accomplish the objectives and benefits of the amendment or
because of the need to impose uniform requirements on the amended project area
as a whole. Such properties will share in the benefits of the amendment.
      (M)   The elimination of blight and the redevelopment of the amended
project area could not reasonably be expected to be accomplished by private
enterprise acting alone, or by governmental action, or both, without the aid
and assistance of the agency. This finding is based upon the existence of
blighting influences, including the lack of adequate public improvements and
facilities, and the inability of individual owners and developers to
economically remove these blighting influences without substantial public
assistance available pursuant to the CCRL.
      (N)   The City Council is satisfied that the time limitation and the
number of dollars to be allocated to the agency from the amended project area
are reasonably related to the successful implementation of the proposed
projects and programs, included as attachment G of the amended redevelopment
plan, and that implementation of the said projects and programs will enable the
agency to achieve its goals and objectives to eliminate blight within the
amended project area.
   Section 3: The City Council is satisfied that permanent housing facilities
will be available within three years from the time residential occupants of the
amended project area, if any, are displaced, and that pending the development
of such facilities, there will be available to any such displaced residential
occupants temporary housing facilities at rents comparable to those in the city
at the time of their displacement. This finding is based upon the City
Council’s finding that no persons or families of low and moderate income shall
be displaced from residences unless and until there are suitable housing units
available and ready for occupancy by such displaced persons or families at
rents comparable to those at the time of their displacement. Such housing units
shall be suitable to the needs of such displaced persons or families and must
be decent, safe, sanitary and otherwise standard dwellings.
   Section 4: Written objections to the amendment filed with the City Clerk
before the hour set for hearing and all written and oral objections presented
to the City Council at the hearing having been considered and, in the case of
written objections received from amended project area property owners and
affected taxing agencies having been responded to in writing all such
objections are hereby overruled.
   Section 5: The final EIR for the amendment, a copy of which is on file in
the office of the agency and in the office of the City Clerk, having been duly
reviewed and considered, is hereby incorporated into this ordinance by
reference and made a part hereof. All activities undertaken by the agency and/
or the city pursuant to or in implementation of the amendment shall be
undertaken in accordance with the mitigation measures and monitoring program
set forth in the final EIR, and the agency shall undertake such additional
environmental review or assessment as necessary under law at the time of the
proposed implementation of such activities.
   Section 6: That certain “amended redevelopment plan prepared for amendment
no. one to the redevelopment plan for the Livingston community redevelopment
project”, the map contained therein, and such other reports as are incorporated
therein by reference, a copy of which is on file in the office of the agency
and the office of the City Clerk, having been duly reviewed and considered, is
hereby incorporated into this ordinance by reference and made a part hereof,
and so as incorporated is hereby designated, approved, and adopted as the
official redevelopment plan for the amended project area.
   Section 7: In order to implement and facilitate the effectuation of the
amendment hereby approved, this City Council hereby:
         (A)   Pledges its cooperation in helping to carry out the amendment;
         (B)   Authorizes and directs the various officials, departments,
boards, and agencies of the city having administrative responsibilities in the
amended project area likewise to cooperate to such end and to exercise their
respective functions and powers in a manner consistent with redevelopment of
the amended project area;
         (C)   Stands ready to consider and take appropriate action upon
proposals and measures designed to effectuate the amendment; and
         (D)   Declares its intention to undertake and complete any proceeding,
including the expenditure of monies, necessary to be carried out by the city
under the provisions of the amendment.
   Section 8: The City Clerk is hereby directed to send a certified copy of
this ordinance to the agency, whereupon the agency is vested with the
responsibility for carrying out the amendment.
   Section 9: The City Clerk is hereby directed to record with the County
Recorder of Merced County a description(s) of the land within the amended
project area and a statement that proceedings for the redevelopment of the
amended project area have been instituted under the CCRL.
   Section 10: The building official of the city is hereby directed for a
period of two years after the effective date of this ordinance to advise all
applicants for building permits within the added territory that the site for
which a building permit is sought for the construction of buildings or for
other improvements is within a redevelopment project area.
   Section 11: The City Clerk is hereby directed to transmit a copy of the
description and statement recorded by the City Clerk pursuant to Section 9 of
this ordinance, a copy of this ordinance, and a map(s) or plat(s) indicating
the boundaries of the amended project area, to the Auditor-Controller and
Assessor of the County of Merced, to the governing body of each of the taxing
agencies which receives taxes from property in the amended project area, and to
the state board of equalization, within 30 days following the adoption of the
amendment.
(Ord. 474, passed 12-16-1997)
CHAPTER 17: NOTICE OF PUBLIC NUISANCE AND ORDER TO ABATE
Section
1-17-1 Notice and order
1-17-2 Time period within which to correct or remedy violations
1-17-3 Form and contents of notice and order
1-17-4 Persons entitled to service
1-17-5 Service of notice and order
1-17-6 Completion of service
1-17-7 Appeal of notice and order
1-17-8 Form for filing of appeal
1-17-9 Time in which to file appeal
1-17-10 Fee for filing of appeal
1-17-11 Hardship waiver
1-17-12 Incomplete filing
1-17-13 Failure to file appeal
1-17-14 Processing and conducting of appeal
1-17-15 Refund of fee for filing of successful appeal
1-17-16 Recordation of notice and order
1-17-17 Recordation of notice of compliance
1-17-18 Other abatement procedures
§ 1-17-1 NOTICE AND ORDER.
   When an enforcement officer has inspected any real property or premises and
has found and determined that conditions, uses or activities at or upon such
property or premises constitute a public nuisance pursuant to any provision of
this code and/or applicable statute, rule, code and regulation, the enforcement
officer may issue or cause the issuance of a notice of public nuisance and
order to abate (“notice and order”) pursuant to this chapter.
(Ord. 551, passed 8-15-2006)
§ 1-17-2 TIME PERIOD WITHIN WHICH TO CORRECT OR REMEDY VIOLATIONS.
   Any party to whom a notice and order has been issued for violations
pertaining to building, plumbing, electrical or other similar structural or
zoning issues that do not create an immediate danger to health or safety, shall
be provided not less than five calendar days in which to correct or otherwise
remedy the violation.
(Ord. 551, passed 8-15-2006)
§ 1-17-3 FORM AND CONTENTS OF NOTICE AND ORDER.
   The notice and order shall include all of the following information:
   (A)   The name of the property’s record owner, the occupant, if any, and/or
the agent, if any, having charge or control of the property;
   (B)   The street address or a definite description of the location where the
violation occurred;
   (C)   The code section(s) violated;
   (D)   A description of the property’s condition which violated the
applicable codes;
   (E)   The actions necessary to correct the subject violations;
   (F)   The deadline or specific date by which to correct the violations; an
order prohibiting the continuation or repeated occurrence of the code violation
described in the notice and order;
   (G)   A notification that the notice and order may be recorded with the
office of the County Recorder;
   (H)   A description of the administrative appeal process for a person’s
appeal of the citing officer’s determination of violation, including the time
within which an appeal must be filed; and
   (I)   The name and signature of the citing officer.
(Ord. 551, passed 8-15-2006)
§ 1-17-4 PERSONS ENTITLED TO SERVICE.
   (A)   The notice and order, and any amended or supplemental notice and
order, shall be served upon the record owner, the tenant or occupant, if any is
known to the citing officer, and the agent having charge or control of the
property, if any is known to the citing officer.
   (B)   The failure of the enforcement officer to serve any person required
herein to be served shall not invalidate any proceedings hereunder as to any
other person duly served or relieve any such person from any duty or obligation
imposed by the provisions of this code.
(Ord. 551, passed 8-15-2006)
§ 1-17-5 SERVICE OF NOTICE AND ORDER.
   (A)   Service of a copy of the notice and order shall be made upon all
persons entitled thereto in one of the following manners:
      1.   Personal service;
      2.   Certified mail, postage prepaid, return receipt requested at their
address as it appears on the last equalized assessment roll of the county or as
otherwise known to the citing officer. Concurrently, the same notice should be
sent by regular mail. If a notice that is sent by certified mail is returned
unsigned, then service will be deemed effective by regular mail, provided that
notice is not returned. Service by mail will be effective on the date of
mailing; or
      3.   Posting the notice conspicuously on or in front of the affected
property or any other real property within the city in which the city has
knowledge that the responsible person has a legal interest.
   (B)   The failure of any interested person to receive any notice served in
accordance with this section will not affect the validity of any proceedings
taken under this chapter.
(Ord. 551, passed 8-15-2006)
§ 1-17-6 COMPLETION OF SERVICE.
   Service of a notice and order that is personally served shall be deemed
completed at the time of such personal service. Service of a notice and order
which is served by mail is deemed completed on the date said notice and order
is deposited in the mail. Service of the notice and order that is served by
posting is deemed complete on the date of posting of said notice and order.
(Ord. 551, passed 8-15-2006)
§ 1-17-7 APPEAL OF NOTICE AND ORDER.
   Any person subject to the provisions of a notice and order may contest that
there was a violation or that he or she is the party responsible for committing
the violation by filing a complete and proper appeal of a notice and order with
the City Clerk.
(Ord. 551, passed 8-15-2006)
§ 1-17-8 FORM FOR FILING OF APPEAL.
   (A)   All appeals from any notice and order shall be in writing and shall
contain the following information:
      1.   Name(s) of each appellant and their legal or equitable interest in
the appeal;
      2.   A brief statement in ordinary and concise language of the specific
items protested, together with any material facts claimed to support the
contentions of the appellant;
      3.   A brief statement in ordinary and concise language of the relief
sought and the reasons why the notice and order should be reversed, modified or
otherwise set aside; and
      4.   The signatures of all parties named as appellants and their official
mailing addresses.
   (B)   Any appeal filed that fails to provide all of this required
information shall be deemed incomplete.
(Ord. 551, passed 8-15-2006)
§ 1-17-9 TIME IN WHICH TO FILE APPEAL.
   A complete and proper appeal of a notice and order shall be filed with the
City Clerk within ten calendar days from the date that service of the notice
and order was completed. Any appeal not timely filed shall be rejected.
(Ord. 551, passed 8-15-2006)
§ 1-17-10 FEE FOR FILING OF APPEAL.
   A filing fee as established by City Council resolution or any amendments
thereto for an appeal of a notice and order must be paid to the city at or
prior to the time of the filing of such appeal. Any appeal of the notice and
order filed without payment of the filing fee shall be deemed incomplete unless
a hardship waiver is allowed.
(Ord. 551, passed 8-15-2006)
§ 1-17-11 HARDSHIP WAIVER.
   A person seeking to appeal a notice and order may request a hardship waiver
of the fine deposit by filing with the City Manager a completed city form,
which must be signed under penalty of perjury. The request must be submitted
along with the request for hearing. The person requesting the waiver bears the
burden of establishing that such person does not have the financial ability to
make the deposit. The request will be decided by the City Manager within three
business days from date the request is received, and the City Manager’s
decision is final. The applicant will be notified by telephone, facsimile or in
person of the decision on the request. The filing of a request for hardship
waiver does not extend the time to file for an appeal hearing. If the request
for hardship waiver is denied, an appeal hearing will not be scheduled unless
the appeal fee is paid within five business days following the City Manager’s
determination on the request for a hardship waiver.
(Ord. 551, passed 8-15-2006)
§ 1-17-12 INCOMPLETE FILING.
   Not later than five calendar days from the date the appeal is filed the City
Clerk or his or her designee shall determine whether the appeal is complete. If
the appeal is determined to be incomplete, the citing officer or his or her
designee shall immediately mail to the appellant a notice of incomplete filing
which shall provide a written explanation of each reason why the appeal has
been determined to be incomplete. If service of the notice of incomplete filing
is completed within five calendar days from the date the appeal is filed, the
ten calendar day time period within which to file a completed appeal of a
notice and order shall not be extended.
(Ord. 551, passed 8-15-2006)
§ 1-17-13 FAILURE TO FILE APPEAL.
   Failure to timely and properly file an appeal from a notice and order shall
constitute a waiver of all rights to an administrative appeal hearing and
adjudication of the notice and order or any portion thereof. The determination
that the violation occurred and that the violator was responsible for the
violation shall be deemed final on the date that service of the notice and
order is deemed completed.
(Ord. 551, passed 8-15-2006)
§ 1-17-14 PROCESSING AND CONDUCTING OF APPEAL.
   The appeal of any notice and order shall be processed and conducted in
accordance with the provisions of Chapter 18 of this title. Any decision of the
hearing officer in accordance with those provisions shall be filed within the
time provided and also processed and conducted as set forth in Chapter 18 of
this title.
(Ord. 551, passed 8-15-2006)
§ 1-17-15 REFUND OF FEE FOR FILING OF SUCCESSFUL APPEAL.
   Any filing fee collected pursuant to this chapter shall be refunded to the
appellant following the appellant’s reversal, modification or otherwise setting
aside of, the notice and order. The filing fee shall be refunded to the
appellant within 30 days of the notice of granting of the appeal.
(Ord. 551, passed 8-15-2006)
§ 1-17-16 RECORDATION OF NOTICE AND ORDER.
   If no appeal is filed in a timely manner, if the appeal is denied because it
is incomplete or if the notice and order is upheld following any appeal
hearing, the notice and order may be recorded against the property in the
office of the County Recorder to certify that:
   (A)   The subject property is being maintained in violation of this code
and/or applicable statute, rule, code and regulation; and
   (B)   The property owner and any other responsible person(s) have been so
notified.
(Ord. 551, passed 8-15-2006)
§ 1-17-17 RECORDATION OF NOTICE OF COMPLIANCE.
   Whenever it is determined that the corrections ordered by the notice and
order have been completed so that the premises no longer exists in a condition
that is in violation of this code and/or applicable statute, rule, code and
regulation and either that such abatement has been accomplished at no cost to
the city, or that such costs have been collected and paid in full, a notice of
compliance shall be recorded in the office of the County Recorder certifying
that all required corrections have been made and that the subject premises is
no longer being maintained as a public nuisance.
(Ord. 551, passed 8-15-2006)
§ 1-17-18 OTHER ABATEMENT PROCEDURES.
   The provisions of this chapter shall not in any manner limit or restrict the
city or the City Attorney from enforcing this code or abating public nuisances
in any other manner provided by law.
(Ord. 551, passed 8-15-2006)
CHAPTER 18: ADMINISTRATIVE CITATIONS
Section
1-18-1 Purpose
1-18-2 Definitions
1-18-3 General citation authority and applicability
1-18-4 Notice of violation
1-18-5 Service procedures
1-18-6 Administrative citation procedure
1-18-7 Assessment of administrative citation fine
1-18-8 Satisfaction of administrative citation
1-18-9 Collection of unpaid fines and penalties
1-18-10 Request for administrative hearing
1-18-11 Administrative hearing procedure
1-18-12 Administrative hearing decision
1-18-13 Right to judicial review
§ 1-18-1 PURPOSE.
   The enforcement of this code is vital to the protection of the public’s
health, safety and quality of life. Under Cal. Gov’t Code § 53069.4, the city
is authorized to adopt an administrative citation program, which program offers
an alternative method of enforcing code violations. The purpose of issuing
administrative citations pursuant to this chapter is to encourage compliance
with the provisions of this code and to provide a method of holding persons
responsible when they fail or refuse to comply with the provisions of this
code. The use of this chapter is also intended to minimize the expense and
delay associated with pursuing code violations through the civil or criminal
justice system.
(Ord. 550, passed 8-15-2006)
§ 1-18-2 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   ADMINISTRATIVE CITATION or CITATION. A written notice to a responsible
person that a violation of this code has occurred and an assessment of a civil
fine issued by an enforcement officer.
   CITY MANAGER. The City Manager of the City of Livingston or his or her
designee.
   CONTINUING VIOLATION. Either:
      1.   A particular violation of this code continuing for more than 24
hours without correction or abatement; or
      2.   A repeated, consecutive violation of the same offense without
intervening days.
   ENFORCEMENT OFFICER. Any person authorized to enforce certain provisions of
this code.
   LEGAL INTEREST. Any interest that is represented by a deed of trust,
quitclaim deed, mortgage, judgment lien, tax or assessment lien, mechanic’s
lien or other similar instrument, which is recorded with the County Recorder.
   NOTICE OF VIOLATION. A written notice to a responsible person that a
violation of this code has occurred and a warning that an administrative
citation assessing fines will be issued unless the violation is ceased and
abated.
   RESPONSIBLE PERSON. Any person or persons that an enforcement officer
determines is responsible for causing or maintaining a violation of this code.
The term RESPONSIBLE PERSON includes, but is not limited to, a property owner,
tenant, person with a legal interest in real or personal property, or person in
possession or control of real or personal property.
(Ord. 550, passed 8-15-2006)
§ 1-18-3 GENERAL CITATION AUTHORITY AND APPLICABILITY.
   (A)   This chapter authorizes use of administrative citations that are in
addition to all other legal remedies, criminal or civil, that the city may
pursue to address any violation of this code.
   (B)   The use of this chapter is at the sole discretion of the City Manager,
City Attorney and the city’s enforcement officers.
   (C)   Any enforcement officer, upon determining that a provision of this
code which such officer is charged to enforce has been violated, has the
authority to issue an administrative citation to any responsible person.
   (D)   Any responsible person violating any provision of this code, or
causing, permitting or maintaining a violation of any provision of this code
may be issued an administrative citation by an enforcement officer.
   (E)   Each and every day a violation of this code exists constitutes a
separate and distinct offense and will be subject to a separate fine. A single
citation may charge a violation for one or more days on which a violation
exists, and for the violation of one or more code sections. Continuing
violations will automatically accrue fines beginning on the date the citation
is issued until verification of abatement pursuant to this chapter.
   (F)   The owner of any property, building or structure within the city has
the responsibility for keeping such property, building or structure free of
violations related to its use or condition. The owner of such property,
building or structure is a responsible person and is separately liable for
violations committed by tenants or occupants relative to the use or condition
of the property.
(Ord. 550, passed 8-15-2006)
§ 1-18-4 NOTICE OF VIOLATION.
   (A)   Whenever an enforcement officer determines that a violation of this
code exists, the enforcement officer may issue a notice of violation to a
responsible person prior to issuing an administrative citation. The notice of
violation serves as a written warning of responsibility and requires immediate
action by the responsible person to cease and abate the violation. The notice
of violation must include the information set forth in this chapter and a date
by which the violation can reasonably be ceased and abated. If the violation is
not ceased or abated by the end of the correction period stated in the notice,
the enforcement officer may issue an administrative citation.
   (B)   In accordance with Cal. Gov’t Code § 53069.4, no responsible person
will be assessed an administrative fine under this chapter for a continuing
violation pertaining to a building, plumbing, electrical or similar structural
or zoning issue that does not create an immediate danger to the public health
or safety without first receiving a notice of violation and a reasonable
opportunity to correct or otherwise remedy the violation. In such circumstance,
the stated period available to correct the violation prior to the assessment of
a fine must be appropriate to the violation as determined by the enforcement
officer, but in no event less than five days. If, after the correction period
stated in the notice, the violation is not ceased or abated, the enforcement
officer may issue an administrative citation.
   (C)   Any responsible person receiving notice for a continuing violation may
petition the City Manager for an extension of time to correct the violation so
long as the petition is received before the end of the correction period. The
City Manager may grant an extension of time to correct the violation if the
responsible person has supplied sufficient evidence showing that the correction
cannot reasonably be made within the stated period.
   (D)   The requirement of a reasonable opportunity to cure a violation does
not apply in instances where, in the discretion of the City Manager, a code
violation poses an immediate danger to the public health or safety.
(Ord. 550, passed 8-15-2006)
§ 1-18-5 SERVICE PROCEDURES.
   (A)   Except as otherwise provided in this chapter, whenever notice is
required to be given under this chapter, it must be given in one of the
following ways:
      1.   Personal service;
      2.   Certified mail, postage prepaid, return receipt requested.
Concurrently, the same notice should be sent by regular mail. If a notice that
is sent by certified mail is returned unsigned, then service will be deemed
effective by regular mail, provided that notice is not returned. Service by
mail will be effective on the date of mailing; or
      3.   Posting the notice conspicuously on or in front of the affected
property or any other real property within the city in which the city has
knowledge that the responsible person has a legal interest.
   (B)   The failure of any interested person to receive any notice served in
accordance with this section will not affect the validity of any proceedings
taken under this chapter.
   (C)   The notice procedures in this section do not apply to an initial
notice of violation, which may be sent by regular mail or personally served.
Service of a notice of violation by mail is effective on the date of mailing.
(Ord. 550, passed 8-15-2006)
§ 1-18-6 ADMINISTRATIVE CITATION PROCEDURE.
   Upon determining that a violation of this code exists, an enforcement
officer may issue an administrative citation to any responsible person on a
form authorized by the City Attorney.
(Ord. 550, passed 8-15-2006)
§ 1-18-7 ASSESSMENT OF ADMINISTRATIVE CITATION FINE.
   (A)   The amount of the fine will be assessed according to a schedule of
fines adopted by City Council resolution. The schedule may include escalating
fine amounts for repeat violations occurring within specified periods of time,
and fines may vary depending on the particular code provision violated.
   (B)   Where no amount is specified by resolution of the City Council, the
following fines will apply:
      1.   A fine not exceeding $100 per day for a first violation;
      2.   A fine not exceeding $200 per day for a second violation of the same
code provision or permit within the previous 12 months; or
      3.   A fine not exceeding $500 per day for each additional violation of
the same code provision or permit within the previous 12 months.
   (C)   A penalty of 10% will be added on any delinquent fines on the last day
of each month after the due date.
   (D)   In addition to the late penalty provided by this section, delinquent
fines will accrue interest at the rate of 1% per month, exclusive of penalties,
from the due date.
(Ord. 550, passed 8-15-2006)
§ 1-18-8 SATISFACTION OF ADMINISTRATIVE CITATION.
   (A)   Upon receipt of a citation, the responsible person must do the
following:
      1.   Pay the fine within 30 days from the date of the administrative
citation. All fines assessed are payable to the city. Payment of a fine does
not excuse or discharge the failure to correct the violation nor will it bar
further enforcement action by the city; and
      2.   Cease and abate the violation. If the offense is a continuing
violation and the responsible person fails to properly cease and abate the
violation, fines will accrue for each day until the abatement is properly
verified. Additionally, subsequent administrative citations may be issued for
the same violation. The amount of the fine for failure to correct the violation
will increase at the rate specified in this chapter or as established by City
Council resolution.
   (B)   At any time following 30 days after the issuance of the citation, the
city may deliver a collection bill to the responsible person requiring payment
for all outstanding amounts owed for the violation, including the amount due
for the initial violation and any accrual of daily fines from the date the
citation was issued to the date the abatement of the offense is properly
verified (if applicable) plus any appropriate late payment charge, less any
amount remitted pursuant to subsection (A) of this section.
   (C)   The abatement of a continuing violation must be verified by an
enforcement officer. The responsible person must contact the phone number
designated on the citation and schedule an inspection by an enforcement
officer. Fines will accrue until the abatement is verified, less any days
delayed by action of the city in scheduling such inspection.
(Ord. 550, passed 8-15-2006)
§ 1-18-9 COLLECTION OF UNPAID FINES AND PENALTIES.
   (A)   The failure of any person to pay a fine or penalty assessed by
administrative citation within the time specified on the citation constitutes a
debt to the city. To enforce that debt, the city may file a civil action, lien
the subject property as set forth in Chapter 19 of this title, or pursue any
other legal remedy to collect such debt.
   (B)   A person who fails to pay any fine or other charge owed to the city
under this chapter is liable in any action brought by the city for all costs
incurred in securing payment of the delinquent amount, including, but not
limited to, administrative costs and attorney fees. Such collection costs are
in addition to any fines, interest and late charges.
(Ord. 550, passed 8-15-2006)
§ 1-18-10 REQUEST FOR ADMINISTRATIVE HEARING.
   (A)   Any person receiving an administrative citation may contest the
citation by completing a request for hearing form and returning it to the city
within ten business days after the issuance date of the administration
citation. Any request for hearing must be accompanied by an advance deposit of
the fine assessed by the citation for the initial violation, unless waived by
subsection (C) of this section. If it is determined, after a hearing, that
there was no violation as charged in the administrative citation, the advance
deposit will be refunded.
   (B)   A request for hearing will not postpone or avoid the requirement of a
responsible person to abate a violation nor toll the daily fines accruing for a
continuing violation until the abatement of the offense is properly verified.
In the event the hearing officer upholds the citation, the responsible person
will be liable for the total fines accrued from the issuance of the citation to
the date the abatement is properly verified.
   (C)   A person seeking an administrative hearing may request a hardship
waiver of the fine deposit by filing with the City Manager a completed city
form, which must be signed under penalty of perjury. The request must be
submitted along with the request for hearing. The person requesting the waiver
bears the burden of establishing that such person does not have the financial
ability to make the deposit. The request will be decided by the City Manager
within three business days from date the request is received, and the City
Manager’s decision is final. The applicant will be notified by telephone,
facsimile or in person of the decision on the request. The filing of a request
for hardship waiver does not extend the time to file for an administrative
hearing or pay the fine when due. If the request for hardship waiver is denied,
an administrative hearing will not be scheduled unless the fine deposit is paid
within five business days following the City Manager’s determination on the
request for a hardship waiver.
   (D)   The failure to submit a timely and complete request for hearing will
terminate a person’s right to contest the citation and result in a failure to
exhaust administrative remedies, and the order of the citation will serve as a
final determination and conclusive evidence of the named responsible person’s
liability for the citation.
   (E)   The City Manager shall set a hearing before a city hearing officer on
a date that is not less than 15 and not more than 60 days from the date that
the request for hearing is filed in accordance with the provisions of this
section. The city shall notify the person requesting the hearing by regular
mail of the date, time and place set for the hearing at least ten days prior to
the date of the hearing and give that person any additional written reports
filed concerning the violation that are provided to the hearing officer.
(Ord. 550, passed 8-15-2006)
§ 1-18-11 ADMINISTRATIVE HEARING PROCEDURE.
   (A)   A hearing officer, appointed by the City Manager, will conduct the
administrative citation hearing.
   (B)   No hearing to contest an administrative citation before a hearing
officer will be held until a request for hearing form has been completed and
submitted, and the fine has been deposited in advance, unless a hardship waiver
is granted in accordance with §
1-18-10(C) of this chapter.
   (C)   The hearing officer may only consider evidence that is relevant to
whether the violation occurred and whether the responsible person has caused or
maintained the violation of this code on the date specified in the
administrative citation. However, the formal rules of evidence shall not apply
to the hearing.
   (D)   At least ten days prior to the hearing, the city must provide the
recipient of an administrative citation with copies of the citation, reports
and other documents to be submitted to the hearing officer. No other discovery
is permitted. Formal rules of evidence will not apply.
   (E)   The person contesting the administrative citation will be given the
opportunity to testify and present witnesses and evidence concerning the
administrative citation.
   (F)   Unless requested in advance by the person contesting the
administrative citation, neither the code compliance officer nor any other
representative of the city is required to attend the hearing, provided that any
such appearance may be made at the discretion of the enforcement officer or
City Manager.
   (G)   The failure of any recipient of an administrative citation to appear
at the administrative citation hearing will constitute a forfeiture of the fine
and a failure to exhaust administrative remedies, and the order of the citation
will become the final determination.
   (H)   The administrative citation and any additional documents submitted by
the enforcement officer to the hearing officer will constitute prima facie
evidence of the violation and the respective facts contained in those
documents.
   (I)   The hearing officer may continue the hearing and request additional
information from the code compliance officer or the recipient of the
administrative citation prior to issuing a written decision.
(Ord. 550, passed 8-15-2006; Ord. 610, passed 2-18-2014)
§ 1-18-12 ADMINISTRATIVE HEARING DECISION.
   (A)   After considering all of the testimony and evidence submitted at the
hearing, the hearing officer must issue a written decision within a reasonable
time after the hearing to uphold or deny the administrative citation and must
list in the decision the reasons for that decision. The hearing officer will
use preponderance of evidence as the standard of evidence in deciding issues.
The decision of the hearing officer will be final.
   (B)   If the hearing officer determines that the administrative citation
should be upheld, then any applicable fine amount on deposit with the city will
be retained by the city. The hearing officer may also impose conditions and
deadlines to correct the violation or require payment of any outstanding fines,
penalties and interest.
   (C)   If the hearing officer determines that the administrative citation
should be canceled or reduced because of an error in calculating the fine, the
city will promptly refund the applicable amount of the deposited fine.
   (D)   The city shall serve the recipient of the administrative citation with
a copy of the hearing officer’s written decision by certified mail.
(Ord. 550, passed 8-15-2006)
§ 1-18-13 RIGHT TO JUDICIAL REVIEW.
   Any person aggrieved by an administrative decision of a hearing officer on
an administrative citation may obtain review of the administrative decision by
filing a petition for review with the Merced County Superior Court in
accordance with the time lines and provisions set forth in Cal. Gov’t Code §
53069.4.
(Ord. 550, passed 8-15-2006)
CHAPTER 19: ATTORNEY FEES AND COST RECOVERY FOR ENFORCEMENT ACTIONS
Section
1-19-1 Purpose
1-19-2 Definitions
1-19-3 Liability to city for enforcement costs
1-19-4 Determination, notification and methods of recovery
1-19-5 Recovery through lien
1-19-6 Recovery through special assessment
§ 1-19-1 PURPOSE.
   This chapter is adopted pursuant to the city’s police powers under the
California Constitution and the California Government Code for the purpose of
establishing procedures for recovering costs incurred by the city when
enforcing the provisions of this code related to code enforcement through
inspections, nuisance abatement, or other similar administrative or judicial
means.
(Ord. 553, passed 8-15-2006)
§ 1-19-2 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   CITY MANAGER. The City Manager of the City of Livingston or the City
Manager’s designee.
   CODE VIOLATION. Any violation of this code or any federal, state or local
law that the city may enforce pursuant to the City Council’s legislative action
or any other provision of law for which the city may recover its enforcement
costs. This term will include both singular and plural.
   ENFORCEMENT ACTION. Any action taken to correct a code violation.
   ENFORCEMENT COSTS. Includes all of the following:
      1.   Actual cost of preparing notices, correspondence, specifications and
contracts;
      2.   Costs incurred for property inspections;
      3.   Staff costs incurred for investigation of code violations;
      4.   Costs to repair or eliminate nuisance conditions;
      5.   Costs related to inspection and abatement warrants;
      6.   Costs related to office hearings or administrative adjudications;
      7.   Permit fees;
      8.   Interest at the legal rate;
      9.   Attorney fees and collection costs expended in enforcement actions
including, without limitation, any action to recover enforcement costs pursuant
to this chapter;
      10.   All costs or expenses for which the city may be liable under state
law arising from or related to an enforcement action; and
      11.   All costs or expenses to which the city may be entitled pursuant to
state law.
   ENFORCEMENT OFFICER. Any official or employee responsible for implementing
or assisting with enforcement actions.
   OWNER. The owner of record as shown on that last equalized assessment roll
of the county. For purposes of providing notice to an owner of any action under
this chapter, OWNER includes the actual owner of record, or such owner’s agent,
employee or other legal representative.
   PROPERTY. Real property, including any grounds, lot, parcel, tract or other
piece of land, and any building, structure or other appurtenance located
thereon, as well as personal property.
   RESPONSIBLE PARTY. Any person that an enforcement officer determines is
responsible for causing or maintaining a violation of this code. This includes,
but is not limited to, a property owner, lessee, occupant, tenant, a person
with a legal interest in any property, or a person in possession or control of
any property.
(Ord. 553, passed 8-15-2006)
§ 1-19-3 LIABILITY TO CITY FOR ENFORCEMENT COSTS.
   (A)   Any owner or responsible party in an enforcement action shall be
liable to the city for enforcement costs incurred by the city in an enforcement
action.
   (B)   The city may recover any enforcement costs incurred in the enforcement
of any provision of the zoning code, the housing code, building code,
electrical code, plumbing code, mechanical code or the uniform code for the
abatement of dangerous buildings as provided in this code. The amount of any
enforcement cost shall not exceed the actual cost incurred.
   (C)   Subsection (A) or (B) of this section shall not apply to any
enforcement action regarding a violation of any provision of sections of the
zoning code, the housing code, building code, electrical code, plumbing code,
mechanical code or the uniform code for the abatement of dangerous buildings as
provided in this code in which the violation was evident on the plans that
received the building permit.
   (D)   The prevailing party in any civil action, administrative proceeding or
special procedure to abate a public nuisance may recover its reasonable
attorney fees in those individual actions or proceedings wherein the city
elects, at the initiation of that individual action or proceeding, to seek
recovery of its own attorney fees. In no action, administrative proceeding or
special proceeding shall an award of attorney fees to any prevailing party
exceed the amount of reasonable attorney fees incurred by the city in the
action or proceeding.
(Ord. 553, passed 8-15-2006)
§ 1-19-4 DETERMINATION, NOTIFICATION AND METHODS OF RECOVERY.
   (A)   The enforcement officer, city personnel and any private contractor
authorized to abate a nuisance, must keep an account of enforcement costs
incurred and must render an itemized report in writing to the City Manager or
to the court of competent jurisdiction hearing an enforcement action.
   (B)   1.   Unless otherwise ordered or determined by the court in an
enforcement action, the City Manager will give notice by certified mail of the
costs of abatement to the owner and to any responsible person.
      2.   This cost notice will include a statement that the owner and any
responsible person have a right to a hearing before the City Manager regarding
the enforcement costs, if such hearing is requested in writing within ten days
of the date of the notice.
   (C)   1.   If a hearing is requested, the City Manager will set a date for
the hearing and cause notice of the hearing to be sent by certified mail to the
owner and to any responsible person at least ten days before the date of the
scheduled hearing.
      2.   The City Manager will either confirm or modify the enforcement costs
at such hearing. The City Manager must give notice of the decision on the
assessment of the costs of abatement by certified mail to the owner and to any
responsible person. The decision of the City Manager will be final.
   (D)   If the total enforcement costs, as confirmed by the City Manager or
the court, remains unpaid within 30 days of notice to the owner or the
responsible party, the City Manager may cause the abatement costs to be
collected by any of the following or any other lawful means:
      1.   Obtaining a court order stating that this reimbursement requirement
is a personal obligation of any person held responsible for creating, causing,
committing or maintaining a public nuisance, recoverable by the city in the
same manner as any civil judgment;
      2.   Recording a nuisance abatement lien pursuant to this code against
the parcel of land on which the nuisance is maintained; or
      3.   Imposing a special assessment pursuant to this code against the
parcel of land on which the nuisance is maintained.
(Ord. 553, passed 8-15-2006)
§ 1-19-5 RECOVERY THROUGH LIEN.
   (A)   Prior to recordation, a notice of lien must be served on the owner in
the same manner as a summons in a civil action in accordance with Cal. Code of
Civil Procedure § 415.10. If the owner after diligent search cannot be found,
the notice may be served by posting a copy thereof in a conspicuous place upon
the property for a period of ten days and publishing the notice in a newspaper
of general circulation in the city.
   (B)   The lien must specify:
      1.   The amount of the lien;
      2.   That the lien is imposed on behalf of the city;
      3.   The date of the city’s abatement order or other order related to the
enforcement action;
      4.   The street address, legal description and assessor parcel number of
the parcel on which the lien is imposed; and
      5.   The name and address of the owner of the property.
   (C)   The lien will be recorded in the County Recorder’s office and from the
date of recording will have the force, effect and priority of a judgment lien
and may be foreclosed by an action brought by the city for a money judgment.
   (D)   The city may recover from the property owner any costs incurred
regarding the processing and recording of the lien and providing notice to the
property owner as part of its foreclosure action to enforce the lien.
   (E)   In the event the lien is satisfied, the city will cause a notice of
release of the lien to be recorded in the County Recorder’s office.
(Ord. 553, passed 8-15-2006)
§ 1-19-6 RECOVERY THROUGH SPECIAL ASSESSMENT.
   (A)   In addition to the matters set forth in §
1-19-5 of this chapter, the notice of lien must specify that the lien will
constitute a special assessment that will be collected at the same time and in
the same manner as ordinary municipal taxes are collected and will be subject
to the same penalties and the same procedure for foreclosure and sale in case
of delinquency as provided for ordinary municipal taxes. If payments are
permitted to be made in annual installments, the rate of interest on the unpaid
balance must be specified.
   (B)   After confirmation and recordation, a copy of the notice of lien will
be turned over to the tax collector to add the amount of the assessment to the
next regular tax bill levied against the respective parcels of land. Any costs
incurred by the city in connection with recording the lien may be added to the
assessment.
   (C)   The City Manager may determine that in lieu of collecting the entire
assessment at the time and in the manner of ordinary municipal taxes, the
assessment may be paid in annual installments over a period not to exceed five
years. If any installment is delinquent, the amount thereof will be subject to
the same penalties and procedure for foreclosure and sale provided for ordinary
municipal taxes. Any assessments so deferred will bear interest on the unpaid
balance at the rate of 6% per year.
   (D)   In the event the lien is satisfied, the city will cause a notice of
release of the lien to be recorded in the County Recorder’s office.
(Ord. 553, passed 8-15-2006)
CHAPTER 20: DISASTER PREPAREDNESS AND RESPONSE MANAGEMENT AND COORDINATION
Section
1-20-1 Purposes
1-20-2 Definitions
1-20-3 Duties of City Council
1-20-4 Disaster Council created
1-20-5 Proclamation of local emergency
1-20-6 Disaster Council meetings
1-20-7 Disaster Council; powers and duties
1-20-8 Emergency plan
1-20-9 Director; powers and duties
1-20-10 Director of Emergency Services; powers and duties
1-20-11 Emergency organization
1-20-12 Application of chapter; conflict with state law
1-20-13 Volunteers
1-20-14 Standardized emergency management systems (SEMS)
1-20-15 Expenditures
1-20-16 Imposition of curfew, prohibition of certain sales and suspension of
certain business activities
1-20-17 Announcement and applicability of curfew
1-20-18 Penalty for violations during area curfew
1-20-19 Termination of curfew
1-20-20 Permission to perform essential public services
1-20-21 Continuity of government; emergency interim successors
1-20-22 Status, qualifications and term of emergency interim successors
1-20-23 Assumption of powers and duties of emergency interim successor
1-20-24 Temporary officers
1-20-25 Recording and publication
1-20-26 Violations
§ 1-20-1 PURPOSES.
   The declared purposes of this chapter are to empower certain city officials
to promulgate orders and regulations necessary to provide for the protection of
life and property or to preserve public order and safety, to provide for the
preparation and carrying out of plans for the protection of persons and
property within the city in the event of a disaster or emergency, and to
provide for coordination of the emergency services functions of the city and
all other public agencies and affected private persons, corporations and
organizations.
(Ord. 568, passed 5-6-2008)
§ 1-20-2 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   EMERGENCY INCIDENT INJURY OR SICKNESS. Events or series of events which have
occurred, or have threatened to occur, involving one or more key legislative,
executive or administrative officials, who falls victim to an individual,
concurrent or common injury or sickness from disasters caused by such
conditions as enemy attack, riot, sabotage or other hostile actions; air
pollution, fire, flood, storm, earthquake, epidemic or drought; sudden and
severe energy shortage; plant or animal infestation; disease or other natural
causes, which has or could disturb the usual and normal continuity of the
city’s government.
   EMERGENCY INTERIM SUCCESSOR. Person designated pursuant to this chapter for
temporary succession to the powers and duties, but not the office, of a city
officer in the event that such officer or any duly authorized deputy is
unavailable which could disturb the usual and normal continuity of the city’s
government.
   LOCAL EMERGENCY. The duly proclaimed existence of conditions of disaster or
of extreme peril to the safety of persons and property within the territorial
limits of the county or the city, caused by such conditions as air pollution,
fire, flood, storm, epidemic, riot, drought, sudden and severe energy shortage,
plant or animal infestation or disease, the Governor’s warning of an earthquake
or volcanic prediction, or an earthquake, or other conditions other than
conditions resulting from a labor controversy, which conditions are or are
likely to be beyond the control of the services, personnel, equipment and
facilities of that political subdivision and require the combined forces of
other political subdivisions to combat, or with respect to regulated energy
utilities, a sudden and severe energy shortage that requires extraordinary
measures beyond the authority vested in the California Public Utilities
Commission.
   STATE OF EMERGENCY. The duly proclaimed existence of conditions of disaster
or of extreme peril to the safety of persons and property within the state
caused by such conditions as air pollution, fire, flood, storm, epidemic, riot,
drought, sudden and severe energy shortage, plant or animal infestation or
disease, the Governor’s warning of an earthquake or volcanic prediction, or an
earthquake, or other conditions, other than conditions resulting from a labor
controversy or conditions causing a state of war emergency, which conditions,
by reason of their magnitude, are or are likely to be beyond the control of the
services, personnel, equipment and facilities of any single county, city and
county, or city and require the combined forces of a mutual aid region or
regions to combat, or with respect to regulated energy utilities, a sudden and
severe energy shortage that requires extraordinary measures beyond the
authority vested in the California Public Utilities Commission.
   STATE OF WAR EMERGENCY. The condition, which exists immediately with or
without a proclamation thereof by the Governor, whenever the state or nation is
attacked by an enemy of the United States, or upon receipt by the state of a
warning from the federal government indicating that such an enemy attack is
probable or imminent.
   UNAVAILABLE. Means either that a vacancy in the office exists and there is
no deputy authorized to exercise all of the powers and discharge the duties of
the office, or that the lawful incumbent of the office (including any deputy
exercising the powers and discharging the duties of an office because of
vacancy) and his or her duly authorized deputy are either killed, missing or
unable, for physical, mental or legal reasons, to attend meetings and otherwise
exercise the powers or discharge the duties of the office. Any questions as to
whether a particular officer is unavailable shall be settled by the City
Council or any remaining members of said body (including those appointed as
interim successors).
(Ord. 568, passed 5-6-2008)
§ 1-20-3 DUTIES OF CITY COUNCIL.
   (A)   Whenever a state of war emergency, a state of emergency or a local
emergency exists, the City Council shall meet as soon as possible. The place of
meeting need not be within the political subdivision. The meeting may be called
by the Mayor or by a majority of the members of the governing body. Should
there be only one member of the City Council, he or she may call and hold said
meeting and perform acts necessary to reconstitute the governing body.
   (B)   During a state of war emergency, a state of emergency or a local
emergency that affects the city, the City Council shall:
      1.   Ascertain the damage to the political subdivision and its personnel
and property. For this purpose it shall have the power to issue subpoenas to
compel the attendance of witnesses and the production of records;
      2.   Proceed to reconstitute itself by filling vacancies until there are
sufficient officers to form the largest quorum required by the law applicable
to that political subdivision. Should only one member of the governing body or
only one standby officer be available, that one member shall have power to
reconstitute the governing body;
      3.   Proceed to reconstitute itself by appointment of qualified persons
to fill vacancies; and
      4.   Proceed to perform its functions in the preservation of law and
order and in the furnishing of local services.
(Ord. 568, passed 5-6-2008)
§ 1-20-4 DISASTER COUNCIL CREATED.
   The Disaster Council is hereby created and shall consist of the following:
   (A)   City Manager, who shall be Chairperson and “Director” of the Disaster
Council. All subsequent references to the “Director” shall mean the Chairperson
and Director of the Disaster Council;
   (B)   Assistant City Manager, who shall be the Vice Chairperson and
“Assistant Director” of the Disaster Council. All subsequent references to the
“Assistant Director” shall mean the Vice Chairperson and Assistant Director of
the Disaster Council. The Assistant Director shall act as the Director of the
Disaster Council in the absence of the Director;
   (C)   The Chief of Police, who shall be the Director of Emergency Services;
   (D)   Cal fire captain;
   (E)   Public Works Director;
   (F)   City Attorney;
   (G)   Such officers, section chiefs of emergency services as are provided
for in the current emergency plan of the city, adopted pursuant to this
chapter; and
   (H)   Such representatives of civic, business, labor, veteran, professional
or other organizations, having an official emergency responsibility as may be
appointed by the Director of the Disaster Council.
(Ord. 568, passed 5-6-2008)
§ 1-20-5 PROCLAMATION OF LOCAL EMERGENCY.
   (A)   1.   A local emergency may be proclaimed by the City Council or, if
the City Council cannot be convened into session, by the Mayor, Director of the
Disaster Council or Director of the Emergency Services.
      2.   If any person other than the City Council proclaims a local
emergency, the proclamation shall expire unless ratified by the City Council
within seven days.
   (B)   The City Council shall review, at its regularly scheduled meetings,
but in no event more than 21 days after the previous review, the need for
continuing the local emergency, until the local emergency is terminated. In
order to continue the local emergency, the City Council shall ratify the
continuing existence of the local emergency.
   (C)   If the City Council meets weekly, it shall review the need for
continuing the emergency, at least every 14 days until the local emergency is
terminated.
   (D)   The City Council shall proclaim the termination of the local emergency
at the earliest possible date that conditions warrant.
(Ord. 568, passed 5-6-2008)
§ 1-20-6 DISASTER COUNCIL MEETINGS.
   The Disaster Council shall meet upon the call of the Director or in the
event that the Director is unavailable or unable to call such meeting, upon the
call of the Assistant Director.
(Ord. 568, passed 5-6-2008)
§ 1-20-7 DISASTER COUNCIL; POWERS AND DUTIES.
   (A)   It shall be the duty of the city’s Disaster Council, and it is hereby
empowered, to develop and recommend for adoption by the City Council the city’s
emergency plan (see §
1-20-8 of this chapter) and to supply a copy of any plans developed pursuant to
this section to the office of emergency services.
   (B)   The Disaster Council is hereby empowered to:
      1.   Develop and recommend for adoption by the City Council such
ordinances, resolutions, rules and regulations as are necessary to implement
the emergency plan;
      2.   Develop and recommend for adoption by the City Council additional
emergency and mutual aid plans and agreements which may benefit the city during
an emergency or assist in its response to an emergency;
      3.   Recommend to the Director of the Emergency Services rules and
regulations for dealing with local emergencies that can be adequately dealt
with locally;
      4.   Act to carry out mutual aid on a voluntary basis; and
      5.   Supervise and register volunteers of the emergency organization.
(Ord. 568, passed 5-6-2008)
§ 1-20-8 EMERGENCY PLAN.
   The Disaster Council shall be responsible for the development of the city’s
emergency plan, which plan shall provide for the effective mobilization of all
resources of the city, both public and private, to meet any condition
constituting a local emergency, state of emergency, or state of war emergency;
and shall provide for the organization, powers and duties, services and staff
of the emergency organization. Such plan shall take effect upon adoption by
resolution of the City Council.
(Ord. 568, passed 5-6-2008)
§ 1-20-9 DIRECTOR; POWERS AND DUTIES.
   (A)   The Director of the Disaster Council is empowered to:
      1.   Request the City Council to proclaim the existence or threatened
existence of a “local emergency” if the City Council is in session, or to issue
such proclamation if the City Council is not in session. Whenever a local
emergency is proclaimed by the Director, the City Council shall take action to
ratify the proclamation within seven days thereafter or the proclamation shall
have no further force or effect;
      2.   Request the Mayor to suggest that the Governor proclaim a state of
emergency when, in the opinion of the Director of the Disaster Council, the
locally available resources are inadequate to cope with the disaster or
emergency;
      3.   Control and direct the effort of the emergency organization of the
city for the accomplishment of the purposes of this chapter;
      4.   Direct cooperation between, and coordination of, divisions, services
and staff of the emergency organization of the city, and to resolve questions
of authority and responsibility that may arise; and
      5.   Represent the city, or designate representatives for the city, in
all dealings with public or private agencies pertaining to emergencies as
defined in this chapter.
   (B)   In the event of the proclamation of a “local emergency” as provided by
§
1-20-5 of this chapter, the proclamation of a “state of emergency” by the
President, Governor or the Director of the State Office of Emergency Services,
or the existence of a “state of war emergency”, the Director of the Disaster
Council or his or her designees, including the Director of the Emergency
Services, are empowered to:
      1.   Make, issue and enforce orders, rules and regulations reasonably
related to the protection of life and/or property, or the preservation of
public order and safety, as affected by such disaster or emergency; provided,
however, such rules and regulations must be confirmed at the earliest
practicable time by the City Council;
      2.   Obtain requisition services, materials, vital supplies, equipment
and such other properties as are found lacking and needed for the protection of
the life and property of the people, and bind the city for the fair market
value thereof, and if required immediately, to commandeer the same for public
use;
      3.   Call upon appropriate county, state and federal officers for
assistance;
      4.   Require emergency services of any city officer or employee and
require any city official or employee to remain available on a standby basis
for regular and emergency service;
      5.   Recruit, retain, deputize and direct temporary personnel for the
duration of the emergency, for the purpose of mitigating the emergency, solely
on the basis of the recruit’s ostensible ability to mitigate the emergency;
      6.   Command in the event of the proclamation of extreme emergency by the
Governor for the region in which the city is located, the aid of as many
citizens of this community as the Governor deems necessary in the execution of
these duties. In the execution of these duties, such persons shall be entitled
to all the privileges, benefits and immunities as are provided by state law for
registered disaster services workers;
      7.   Requisition necessary personnel or material of any city department
or agency;
      8.   Represent the city in dealings with public or private agencies on
matters pertaining to disasters or emergencies; and
      9.   Exercise all ordinary powers of the City Manager, all of the special
powers conferred by this chapter, by any provision of state or local law, by
any agreement approved by the City Council, or by resolution or emergency plan
adopted pursuant hereto by the City Council, and by any other lawful authority.
(Ord. 568, passed 5-6-2008)
§ 1-20-10 DIRECTOR OF EMERGENCY SERVICES; POWERS AND DUTIES.
   The Director of the Emergency Services is hereby empowered, and shall under
the supervision of the Director:
   (A)   Develop and recommend for adoption by the City Council emergency and
mutual aid plans and such ordinances, resolutions, rules and regulations as are
necessary to implement such plans and agreements, and to manage the emergency
programs of the city;
   (B)   Be responsible for routine disaster preparedness activation including
emergency management training for city personnel, coordination of emergency
planning, maintenance of emergency management equipment and facilities, and
public education in the area of disaster and emergency preparedness;
   (C)   Represent the city in all dealings with public or private agencies on
matters pertaining to disasters or emergencies as defined in this chapter when
requested to do so by the Director;
   (D)   Control and direct the efforts of the emergency organization of the
city to accomplish the purposes of this chapter; and
   (E)   Direct cooperation between, and coordination of, services and staff of
the emergency organization of the city, and resolve questions of authority and
responsibility that may arise.
(Ord. 568, passed 5-6-2008)
§ 1-20-11 EMERGENCY ORGANIZATION.
   All officers and employees of the city, together with those volunteer forces
enrolled to aid them during a disaster or emergency, and all groups,
organizations and persons who may by agreement or operation of law, including
persons impressed into service under the provisions of this chapter, be charged
with duties incident to the protection of life and property in the city during
such emergency, shall constitute the emergency organization of the city.
(Ord. 568, passed 5-6-2008)
§ 1-20-12 APPLICATION OF CHAPTER; CONFLICT WITH STATE LAW.
   The following general provisions apply to proclamations, rules, orders or
regulations made and issued pursuant to this chapter.
   (A)   Rules, orders and regulations issued pursuant to this chapter shall
remain in effect for the period specified in the declaration of emergency, but
no rule, order or regulation shall remain in effect for more than seven days
unless confirmed and ratified by the City Council.
   (B)   All rules, orders and regulations made and issued pursuant to this
chapter, and any amendment or rescission thereof, shall be in writing, shall be
available for inspection at the place and during hours fixed by the Director,
and shall be given widespread publicity and notice as follows:
      1.   By publication in a newspaper of general circulation or, where
publication is not necessary by posting on the three official bulletin boards
of the city;
      2.   By posting in a conspicuous place near the city limits at each
public street into the city; and
      3.   By such other means determined by the Director.
   (C)   This chapter shall not be construed so as to conflict with any state
or federal statute, rule, regulation or order relating to conditions in the
city during the effectiveness of such proclamations or orders.
(Ord. 568, passed 5-6-2008)
§ 1-20-13 VOLUNTEERS.
   (A)   All persons, other than officers and employees of the city,
volunteering services pursuant to the provisions of this chapter, shall serve
without compensation from the city.
   (B)   While engaged in such services, they shall enjoy the same immunities
as officers and employees performing similar emergency duties.
(Ord. 568, passed 5-6-2008)
§ 1-20-14 STANDARDIZED EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT SYSTEMS (SEMS).
   The city hereby adopts the state’s standardized emergency management system
(SEMS) to manage emergency response and recovery activities.
(Ord. 568, passed 5-6-2008)
§ 1-20-15 EXPENDITURES.
   Any lawful expenditures made in connection with emergency activities,
including mutual aid activities, shall be deemed conclusively to be for the
direct protection and benefit of the inhabitants and property of the city.
(Ord. 568, passed 5-6-2008)
§ 1-20-16 IMPOSITION OF CURFEW, PROHIBITION OF CERTAIN SALES AND SUSPENSION OF
CERTAIN BUSINESS ACTIVITIES.
   Where necessary to prevent activity that may imperil lives or property or
prevent, hinder or delay defense or protection of the city, the City Council,
Mayor, Director of the Disaster Council or Director of the Emergency Services
shall have the power and authority to make, issue and enforce rules, orders or
regulations reasonably related to the protection of life and/or property, or
the preservation of public order and safety, during all or any portion of the
day in the area where the disaster or emergency exists, or throughout all or
any part of the city, including, but not limited to, the following:
   (A)   An order imposing curfew;
   (B)   An order prohibiting or restricting the sale of any alcoholic beverage
in or from any business in all or a portion of the city;
   (C)   An order suspending the operation of all or any part of a business
establishment where there is sold any alcoholic beverage, firearm, dangerous
weapons, ammunition, explosive, gasoline, or flammable material or liquid; as
well as suspend the operation of any other activity which in the opinion of the
Mayor, Director of the Disaster Council or Director of the Emergency Services
would hinder, hamper or impede efforts to control and terminate the emergency;
and
   (D)   An order prohibiting access to, travel along, or egress from any
public or private street, highway or road within the city.
(Ord. 568, passed 5-6-2008)
§ 1-20-17 ANNOUNCEMENT AND APPLICABILITY OF CURFEW.
   (A)   The Mayor, Director of the Disaster Council or Director of the
Emergency Services, for and on behalf of the city, shall announce that an
emergency has been declared and that a curfew has been imposed. The
announcement shall state the type of curfew imposed, whether total or not, and
shall give a description of the area, or areas, of the city which it affects.
If the sale or distribution of any material has been prohibited pursuant to
this chapter or if the operation of any business establishment has been
suspended pursuant to this chapter, the announcement shall also describe the
materials and businesses and the area, or areas of the city immediately
affected thereby. Announcement shall be given the widest possible dissemination
through all the information media of press, television and radio, as well as by
sound trucks and police vehicles.
   (B)   Persons going to or coming from attending to any public utility,
health or emergency service or duly authorized by any news service, newspaper,
radio or television, or network to gather or report the news shall not be
subject to any curfew ordered under this chapter.
(Ord. 568, passed 5-6-2008)
§ 1-20-18 PENALTY FOR VIOLATIONS DURING AREA CURFEW.
   (A)   During the time and times in the area or areas that a curfew has been
imposed and is in force, it shall be an infraction for any unauthorized person
to willfully and knowingly be or remain in an area closed or engage in any
activity prohibited by the curfew.
   (B)   Any unauthorized person who willfully and knowingly engages in an
activity prohibited by the curfew or enters an area closed pursuant to this
chapter and who willfully remains within the area after receiving notice to
evacuate or leave and/or willfully engages in an activity prohibited by the
curfew after receiving notice to stop the activity, shall be guilty of a
misdemeanor.
(Ord. 568, passed 5-6-2008)
§ 1-20-19 TERMINATION OF CURFEW.
   When the City Council, Mayor, Director of the Disaster Council or Director
of the Emergency Services has determined that conditions permit, he or she
shall terminate any curfew imposed and rescind any other orders issued pursuant
to this chapter. The curfew may be terminated or rescinded totally or
partially. The termination, either total or partial, may apply to any part or
all of an area affected by a curfew order.
(Ord. 568, passed 5-6-2008)
§ 1-20-20 PERMISSION TO PERFORM ESSENTIAL PUBLIC SERVICES.
   The Director of the Disaster Council, Director of the Emergency Services or
their designees may grant permission to any person to engage in activities
otherwise prohibited in accordance with this chapter in order to perform or do
anything necessary to the preservation of life or property, to the maintenance
of law and order, or to the maintenance of essential public facilities or
services.
(Ord. 568, passed 5-6-2008)
§ 1-20-21 CONTINUITY OF GOVERNMENT; EMERGENCY INTERIM SUCCESSORS.
   (A)   Management employees. The City Manager shall designate for appointive
officers an interim emergency successor for each management position.
   (B)   Legislative officials. The normal succession of office for legislative
officials shall be:
      1.   Mayor to Mayor Pro Tempore;
      2.   Mayor Pro Tempore to the remainder of the City Council in the order
of longest to least tenure. Longest tenure is to be calculated as the total
length of consecutive service as a City Council member;
      3.   In the event of two or more members having equal tenure, the order
of succession shall be determined on the basis of the largest number of votes
received at the most recent municipal election; and
      4.   Should the Mayor and all members of the City Council be
incapacitated or otherwise unable to perform their duties for any reason, and
until such time as they are able to resume their duties, or until a normal
process of appointment or election can provide successors in order to assure
the continuity and availability of governmental services, the succession for
administrative purposes shall continue to the City Manager, Assistant City
Manager and administrative heads of departments or their successors. The order
of succession shall continue as follows:
         (a)   City Manager;
         (b)   Assistant City Manager;
         (c)   Police Chief;
         (d)   Public Works Director; and
         (e)   Community Development Director.
(Ord. 568, passed 5-6-2008)
§ 1-20-22 STATUS, QUALIFICATIONS AND TERM OF EMERGENCY INTERIM SUCCESSORS.
   (A)   Qualifications.
      1.   No person shall be designated to serve as an emergency interim
successor unless he or she may under the Constitution and statutes of this
state and the ordinances of the city, hold the office of the person to whose
powers and duties he or she is designated to succeed, but no provision of any
ordinance prohibiting an officer or employee of this city from holding another
office shall be applicable to an emergency interim successor.
      2.   No person shall serve as an emergency interim successor unless and
until he or she has taken an oath of office required for the officer occupying
the office for which he or she stands by.
   (B)   Status of emergency interim successor. A person designated as an
emergency interim successor holds that designation at the pleasure of the
designator and may be removed and replaced at any time with or without cause;
provided, that he or she must be replaced if removed. He or she retains this
designation as emergency interim successor until replaced by another appointed
by the authorized designator.
(Ord. 568, passed 5-6-2008)
§ 1-20-23 ASSUMPTION OF POWERS AND DUTIES OF EMERGENCY INTERIM SUCCESSOR.
   (A)   In the event that any official named in §
1-20-21 of this chapter is unavailable due to a state of emergency, war
emergency, local emergency or emergency incident or sickness, his or her
emergency interim successor highest in rank in order of succession who is
available shall fill the post for which he or she has been appointed and shall
exercise the powers and discharge the duties of such officer until a successor
is appointed to fill such vacancy, until the regular officer becomes available,
or until the election or appointment of a new regular officer.
   (B)   Each interim successor shall have the following duties:
      1.   To inform himself or herself, with the assistance of the officers
and employees of the city, of the duties of the office for which the officer
stands by;
      2.   To keep informed of the business and affairs of the city to the
extent necessary to fill his or her post competently; and
      3.   To immediately report himself or herself ready for duty in the event
of a state of war emergency, or in the event of a state of emergency, or a
local emergency at the place and in the method previously designated by the
city.
(Ord. 568, passed 5-6-2008)
§ 1-20-24 TEMPORARY OFFICERS.
   Should all members of the governing body, including all standby members, be
unavailable, temporary officers shall be appointed to serve until a regular
member or a standby member becomes available or until the election or
appointment of a new regular or standby member. Temporary officers shall be
appointed as follows:
   (A)   By the Chairperson of the Board of Supervisors of the county in which
the political subdivision is located, and if he or she is unavailable;
   (B)   By the Chairperson of the Board of Supervisors of any other county
within 150 miles of the political subdivision, beginning with the nearest and
most populated county and going to the farthest and least populated, and if he
or she is unavailable; and
   (C)   By the Mayor of any city within 150 miles of the political
subdivision, beginning with the nearest and most populated city and going to
the farthest and least populated.
(Ord. 568, passed 5-6-2008)
§ 1-20-25 RECORDING AND PUBLICATION.
   (A)   The name, address and position of each duly authorized emergency
interim successor shall be filed with the City Clerk.
   (B)   The City Clerk shall keep on file all such data regarding duly
authorized emergency interim successors and it shall be open to public
inspection.
(Ord. 568, passed 5-6-2008)
§ 1-20-26 VIOLATIONS.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person, during an emergency, to:
      1.   Willfully obstruct, hinder or delay any member of the emergency
organization in the enforcement of any lawful order, rule or regulation issued
pursuant to this chapter, or in the performance of any duty imposed upon him or
her by virtue of this chapter;
      2.   Perform any act forbidden by any lawful rule or regulation issued
pursuant to this chapter, if such act is of such a nature as to give or be
likely to give assistance to the enemy or to imperil the lives or property of
inhabitants of the city, or to prevent, hinder or delay the defense or
protection of lives or property of inhabitants of the city; and
      3.   Wear, carry or display, without authority, any means of
identification specified by the emergency agency of the state or the city.
   (B)   Each violation of this chapter is a misdemeanor, unless otherwise
specified as an infraction, punishable as set forth in this code. A violation
which also constitutes a public nuisance, may be abated in accordance with the
provisions of this code.
(Ord. 568, passed 5-6-2008)
CHAPTER 21: PUBLIC WORKS CONTRACTING PROCEDURES
UNDER THE UNIFORM PUBLIC COST ACCOUNTING ACT
Section
1-21-1 Adoption and purpose
1-21-2 Definitions
1-21-3 Authority and responsibilities
1-21-4 Project delivery methods, force account limits, and bidding thresholds
1-21-5 Change orders
1-21-6 Award and rejection of bids (informal and formal bidding only)
1-21-7 Contractor disqualification and suspension
1-21-8 Bid protest procedures
1-21-9 Required bonds and insurance
§ 1-21-1 ADOPTION AND PURPOSE.
   This chapter adopts and implements the California Uniform Public
Construction Cost Accounting Act (“UPSSAA”; Public Contract Code §§ 22000 et
seq.), as amended from time to time. The city elects to become subject to and
utilize the uniform construction cost accounting procedures for all public
projects and, to the extent authorized by UPCCAA, for maintenance work.
(Ord. 662, passed 1-6-2026)
§ 1-21-2 DEFINITIONS.
   The definitions contained in public contract code § 22002 and those
promulgated by the California Uniform Construction Cost Accounting Commission
will apply to this chapter.
(Ord. 662, passed 1-6-2026)
§ 1-21-3 AUTHORITY AND RESPONSIBILITIES.
   (A)   The city manager, or designee, will administer all bidding and
contract award procedures under this chapter, consistent with UPCCAA.
   (B)   All bidding, contract award, and accounting must comply with UPCCAA,
the California Uniform Construction Cost Accounting Commission’s Cost
Accounting policies and procedures manual, and all applicable city regulations.
(Ord. 662, passed 1-6-2026)
§ 1-21-4 PROJECT DELIVERY METHODS, FORCE ACCOUNT LIMITS, AND BIDDING
THRESHOLDS.
   (A)   No competitive bidding required. Unless limited by city council
resolution, public projects of up to the maximum threshold set by public
contract code § 22032(a), as amended, may be performed by city employees by
force account, or by negotiated contract or purchase order, without competitive
bidding.
   (B)   Informal bidding. Public projects exceeding the threshold in public
contract code § 22032 (a), but not exceeding the limit in public contract code
§ 22032 (b), may be let to contract by informal bidding as provided in public
contract code § 22034 et seq. A notice inviting informal bids must be
circulated using one (1) or both of the following alternatives.
      (1)   Notices inviting informal bids may be mailed, faxes, or emailed to
all contractors for the category of work to be bid, as shown on the list
developed in accordance with public contract code § 22034 (a).
      (2)   Notices inviting informal bids may be mailed to all construction
trade journals as specified by the California Uniform Construction Cost.
Additional contractors and/or construction trade journals may be notified at
the discretion of the department/agency soliciting bids, provided, however: If
the product or service is proprietary in nature such that it can be obtained
only from a certain contractor or contractors, the notice inviting informal
bids may be sent exclusively to such contractor or contractors.
   (C)   Formal bidding. Public projects exceeding the limit in Public Contract
Code § 22032(b) must be awarded using formal bidding procedures as specified in
Public Contract Code § 22032(c), with public notice and sealed bids, consistent
with UPCCAA and this chapter.
(Ord. 662, passed 1-6-2026)
§ 1-21-4 CHANGE ORDERS.
   The city council may delegate authority for approval of contract change
orders by resolution, minute order adopted at a regular meeting, or as provided
in the contract approved by the council. Any change order exceeding such
authorization limits must be approved by the city council by resolution, minute
order, or as otherwise provided by applicable city regulations.
(Ord. 662, passed 1-6-2026)
§ 1-21-6 AWARD AND REJECTION OF BIDS (INFORMAL AND FORMAL BIDDING ONLY).
   (A)   For projects subject to the informal or formal bidding requirements of
Public Contract Code §§ 22032(b) and 22032(c), contracts must be awarded to the
lowest responsive, responsible bidder pursuant to UPCCAA procedures.
   (B)   The city Manager or designee may reject any or all bids and waive
minor irregularities or informalities, in accordance with law.
(Ord. 662, passed 1-6-2026)
§ 1-21-7 CONTRACTOR DISQUALIFICATION AND SUSPENSION.
   (A)   Contractors may be disqualified, temporarily suspended, or removed
from the qualified contractor list or barred from bidding pursuant to
procedures established by administrative regulation, which may include but are
not limited to: failure to perform satisfactorily on previous contracts,
violations of bidding procedures or laws, fraud, or other grounds permitted by
law.
   (B)   Notice and an opportunity to be heard must be provided before any
suspension or removal in non-emergency circumstances.
(Ord. 662, passed 1-6-2026)
§ 1-21-8 BID PROTEST PROCEDURES.
   (A)   Right to protest. Any bidder or contractor who claims to be aggrieved
in connection with the solicitation, evaluation, or award of a contract subject
to this chapter may protest the matter as set forth below.
   (B)   Filing deadline. All protests must be submitted to the city in writing
no later than five business days after the city's issuance of notice of intent
to award or bid results. The protest must set forth the specific grounds,
supporting facts, and requested remedy.
   (C)   Content of protest. The written protest must include:
      (1)   The name and address of the protestor;
      (2)   The title and/or number of the solicitation;
      (3)   A detailed statement of the factual and legal grounds for the
protest, including copies of relevant documents and evidence;
      (4)   The specific ruling or relief requested.
   (D)   Stay of award. If the protest is timely and presents substantial
issues, the award of the contract will be stayed until the protest is resolved,
unless the city determines that proceeding with award is necessary for the
protection of the city's interests.
   (E)   Response and review. The city manager or designee will review the
protest, may request and review responses from relevant staff and other
interested parties, and may request a meeting with the protestor to clarify
issues.
   (F)   Decision. The city manager or designee must issue a written decision
on the protest, stating the reasons for the action taken. The decision will be
final and binding.
   (G)   Non-exclusive remedy. The procedures herein are not intended to limit
the remedies otherwise available to the city under applicable law or contract.
(Ord. 662, passed 1-6-2026)
§ 1-21-9 REQUIRED BONDS AND INSURANCE.
   (A)   For all public works contracts awarded pursuant to this chapter
through informal or formal bidding, the contractor must furnish both a payment
bond and a performance bond in amounts not less than required by applicable law
(including Civil Code § 9550 and Public Contract Code § 20129, as may be
amended).
   (B)   The contractor must procure and maintain such insurance (including
workers' compensation, general liability, and automobile liability, as
applicable) as specified in city administrative regulations and/or bid
documents for the duration of the contract.
   (C)   The city manager or designee may require additional bonds or insurance
coverage as deemed necessary and as set forth in bidding or contract documents.
   (D)   The required forms and documentation must be provided prior to
execution of the contract and commencement of work.
(Ord. 662, passed 1-6-2026)
§ 1-21-10 SUPPLEMENTAL ADMINISTRATIVE PROCEDURES; EXECUTION.
   (A)   The city manager may develop and maintain supplemental administrative
regulations, procedures, and forms to implement and maintain compliance with
this chapter and UPCCAA.
   (B)   The city manager is authorized to execute all contracts, purchase
orders, or other necessary documentation for procurement related to projects
under §
1-21-4(A) or contracts let and awarded by the city council under §
1-21-4(B) or §
1-21-4(C).
(Ord. 662, passed 1-6-2026)
§ 1-21-11 EMERGENCIES.
   In cases of emergency, as defined by Public Contract Code § 22035 and §
22050, the city may proceed without adopting plans, specifications, or giving
notice for bids, provided the action is subsequently ratified as required by
law.
(Ord. 662, passed 1-6-2026)
§ 1-21-12 AMENDMENTS.
   Any amendments to UPCCAA or implementing regulations will be deemed
incorporated into this chapter upon their effective date.
(Ord. 662, passed 1-6-2026)
TITLE 2: BOARDS AND COMMISSIONS
CHAPTER 1: POLICIES FOR ENTITIES CREATED BY THE CITY COUNCIL
Section
2-1-1 Purpose
2-1-2 General rules
2-1-3 Committee Chairperson
2-1-4 Committee meetings
2-1-5 Committee budget
§ 2-1-1 PURPOSE.
   The purpose of this chapter is to establish rules, regulations, policies and
procedures to govern city boards, commissions, committees, councils,
foundations or agencies created by the City Council.
(Ord. 561, passed 11-20-2007)
§ 2-1-2 GENERAL RULES.
   Unless otherwise provided by federal law, state law or city ordinances, the
following rules shall apply to all city boards, commissions, committees,
councils, foundations or agencies created by the City Council, all of which are
hereinafter referred to as a “committee”.
   (A)   Each committee shall be only an advisory board to the City Council,
unless otherwise provided for by city ordinance.
   (B)   Each committee shall consist of a number of members as the City
Council shall provide by ordinance or resolution.
   (C)   Committee members shall be appointed by resolution of the City
Council. The City Council may also appoint alternates to any committee, who
shall participate in all committee meetings, and may vote in the absence of a
regularly appointed committee member. In the case of an absence by a regularly
appointed committee member, alternates shall fill in for the absent member
based on their seniority.
   (D)   Committee members may be removed from office prior to the expiration
of their term with or without cause by majority vote of the City Council. A
committee member’s seat shall automatically be deemed vacant for failing to
attend any three meetings in any 12-month period, unless the absence is the
result of illness or family emergency, or removal of the committee member from
office would otherwise be prohibited by law. In the event that a committee
member is unable to attend a meeting due to illness or family emergency, the
committee member shall inform the City Manager or the department head working
with the committee at the earliest opportunity before the meeting in order for
the absence to be excused. The committee shall immediately inform the City
Council of such vacancy. Vacancies on the committee from whatever cause shall
be filled by the City Council for the unexpired term.
   (E)   Committee members receive no compensation for their services, unless
otherwise approved by the City Council by resolution. However, they may be
reimbursed for reasonable expenses incurred in the performance of their duties.
   (F)   Citizens generally may serve on only one advisory committee in order
to allow more people to be involved in city government.
   (G)   Each committee may adopt reasonable rules by which it conducts its
business.
   (H)   The City Manager will assign a staff member to each committee.
(Ord. 561, passed 11-20-2007; Ord. 579, passed 2-17-2009)
§ 2-1-3 COMMITTEE CHAIRPERSON.
   The City Council shall, by resolution, appoint a Chairperson for each
committee or provide for the committee to elect its own Chairperson.
(Ord. 561, passed 11-20-2007)
§ 2-1-4 COMMITTEE MEETINGS.
   Meetings of each committee may be called by the Chairperson, a majority of
the members of the committee, the City Council, City Manager or staff member
assigned to work with the committee.
(Ord. 561, passed 11-20-2007)
§ 2-1-5 COMMITTEE BUDGET.
   Each committee may receive funds by an annual appropriation in the city
budget, by government, corporate or private grants or donations, and from the
proceeds of city approved functions. All such funds shall be held and managed
as the City Council or City Manager may direct.
(Ord. 561, passed 11-20-2007)
CHAPTER 2: PLANNING COMMISSION
Section
2-2-1 Commission created
2-2-2 Membership and terms of office
2-2-3 Removal of members and vacancies
2-2-4 Meetings
2-2-5 Planning Commission duties and responsibilities
2-2-6 Adoption of rules
§ 2-2-1 COMMISSION CREATED.
   Pursuant to the provisions of Cal. Gov’t Code Title 7, Chapter 3 there is
established a planning agency which shall be known as the city’s Planning
Commission.
(Ord. 562, passed 11-20-2007)
§ 2-2-2 MEMBERSHIP AND TERMS OF OFFICE.
   (A)   Membership and compensation.
      1.   The Planning Commission shall consist of five members and two
alternates appointed by majority vote of the City Council. The alternate
members may participate, but may not vote on an item before the Planning
Commission unless a Planning Commissioner is absent or is disqualified due to
an expressed conflict of interest.
      2.   The members of the Planning Commission may be composed of qualified
electors of the City and a maximum of one member may reside outside the city
limits, as long as they reside within the boundaries of the Livingston Union
School District. The composition of the Planning Commission shall be
established by resolution of the City Council.
   (B)   Terms. Terms of office of the members of the Planning Commission are
for a period of four years or until their successors are appointed and such
terms are staggered with terms of one member of the Planning Commission
expiring each year, except that every fourth year the terms of two members
expire. Terms expire December 31 of each year.
   (C)   Chairperson and Vice Chairperson. The Planning Commission shall rotate
the positions of Chair and Vice Chairperson among the appointed members.
Officers hold offices for one year, or until their successors are appointed.
Terms expire on December 31 of each year.
(Ord. 637, passed 3-19-2019; Ord. 655, passed 6-4-2024)
§ 2-2-3 REMOVAL OF MEMBERS AND VACANCIES.
   (A)   Removal of members. Any member of the Commission may be removed from
the Commission prior to the expiration of term by majority vote of the City
Council. Vacancies on the Planning Commission from whatever cause shall be
filled by the City Council for the unexpired term.
   (B)   Resignation of members. A member of the Commission may resign from the
Commission by filing a written statement with the City Clerk stating he or she
resigns from the Commission. Upon filing the written statement with the City
Clerk, the resignation shall become effective at the time of the filing and
said member shall cease to be a member of said Commission and a vacancy shall
then exist.
   (C)   Absence with/without cause. Any Commissioner’s seat shall
automatically be deemed vacant for failing to attend any three meetings in any
12-month period, unless the absence is the result of illness or family
emergency, or removal of the Commissioner from office would otherwise be
prohibited by law. In the event that a Commissioner is unable to attend a
meeting due to illness or family emergency, the Commissioner shall inform the
City Manager or the Community Development Director at the earliest opportunity
before the meeting in order for the absence to be excused. The Commission shall
immediately inform the City Council of such vacancy. Vacancies on the Planning
Commission from whatever cause shall be filled by the City Council for the
unexpired term.
(Ord. 562, passed 11-20-2007; Ord. 579, passed 2-17-2009)
§ 2-2-4 MEETINGS.
   (A)   Regular meetings.
      1.   The regular meetings of the Planning Commission shall be held on the
second Tuesday of each month at the hour of 7:00 p.m. If at any time a regular
meeting falls on a holiday, the regular meeting shall be held on the next
business day.The regular meeting shall be held at City Hall, 1416 C Street,
Livingston, California.
      2.   Three members constitute a quorum. At least three members must
approve any action or recommendation to the City Council regarding rezonings,
amendments to the general plan or zoning title, conditional use permits,
tentative parcel and subdivision maps and variances from ordinances as may be
acted upon by the Planning Commission.
   (B)   Special meetings. Special meetings of the Commission may be called at
any time by the Chairperson or by any three or more members of the Commission
upon written personal notice to be given all members of the Commission. If
personal notice cannot be given, written notice must be hand delivered to the
last known address to such members at least 24 hours prior to the meeting,
unless the notice requirement is waived, in writing, by the member.
(Ord. 562, passed 11-20-2007)
§ 2-2-5 PLANNING COMMISSION DUTIES AND RESPONSIBILITIES.
   (A)   The City Planning Commission shall perform the duties and shall have
all rights, powers and privileges specified and provided by state law or by
city ordinance or City Council resolution.
   (B)   The City Planning Commission shall also act in an advisory capacity to
the City Council on land use and development issues.
(Ord. 562, passed 11-20-2007)
§ 2-2-6 ADOPTION OF RULES.
   The Planning Commission adopts rules for the transaction of business and
keeps a public record of its transactions, resolutions, findings and
determinations.
(Ord. 562, passed 11-20-2007)
CHAPTER 3: CITIZEN’S SERVICE COMMITTEE
Section
2-3-1 Citizens’ Service Committee created
2-3-2 Membership and terms of office
2-3-3 Removal of members and vacancies
2-3-4 Meetings
2-3-5 Adoption of rules
2-3-6 Duties and responsibilities
§ 2-3-1 CITIZENS’ SERVICE COMMITTEE CREATED.
   There shall be and there is hereby created and established a Citizens’
Service Committee.
(Ord. 585, passed 2-2-2010)
§ 2-3-2 MEMBERSHIP AND TERMS OF OFFICE.
   (A)   Membership and compensation. The Citizens’ Service Committee shall
consist of an odd number not to exceed eleven voting members. Two members may
be selected from people living outside the city limits. All members shall be
appointed by a majority vote of the City Council. Members of the City Council
shall not be eligible to serve as Committee members, but may be appointed by
the majority of the City Council to attend Committee meetings as liaisons to
the City Council. Committee members may not generally serve on any other
advisory panels at the same time. Members shall receive no compensation.
   (B)   Terms. Terms of office of members of the Citizens’ Service Committee
shall be four years; provided, that such members first appointed shall be
classified by the City Council by resolution so that a minority of the members
shall terminate their office on January 1, 2012, and the majority of the
members shall terminate their office on January 1, 2014. A member of the
Citizens’ Service Committee may be reappointed to any number of successive
terms. Should a vacancy occur through means other than term expiration, the
appointment of the new member shall be for the remainder of the vacated term.
   (C)   Chairperson. The Citizens’ Service Committee shall appoint a
Chairperson and Secretary from among the appointed members. The Citizens’
Service Committee shall also have an option to appoint a Vice Chairperson.
These officers shall hold office for one year, or until their successors are
appointed and may hold the office for any number of successive terms. This
member, in addition to the usual Chairperson duties, shall be the official
contact between the Committee and the City Council.
   (D)   Youth members. In addition to the voting members, the City Council may
appoint to the Citizens’ Service Committee up to seven nonvoting youth members
living within the city limits or unincorporated Merced County, ages 12 to 19,
from the student body of Livingston High School and Livingston Middle School.
(Ord. 585, passed 2-2-2010)
§ 2-3-3 REMOVAL OF MEMBERS AND VACANCIES.
   (A)   Removal from the Committee. Any member of the Committee may be removed
from the Committee by a majority vote of the City Council. Vacancies on the
Committee from whatever cause will be filled by the City Council for the
unexpired term.
   (B)   Resignation of members. A member of the Committee may resign from the
Committee and said member shall cease to be a member of said Committee and a
vacancy shall then exist.
   (C)   Absence with/without cause. Any Committee member’s seat shall
automatically be deemed vacant for failing to attend any three meetings in any
12-month period, unless the absence is the result of illness or family
emergency or removal of the Committee member from office would otherwise be
prohibited by law. In the event that a Committee member is unable to attend a
meeting due to illness or family emergency, the Committee member shall inform
the City Manager or the department head working with the Committee at the
earliest opportunity before the meeting in order for the absence to be excused.
The Committee shall immediately inform the City Council of such vacancy.
Vacancies of the Committee from whatever cause shall be filled by the City
Council for the unexpired term.
(Ord. 585, passed 2-2-2010)
§ 2-3-4 MEETINGS.
   The Citizens’ Service Committee will meet on a monthly basis. The meeting
time and location will be agreed upon by a majority of the members and the City
Manager. Sixty percent of the voting Committee members shall constitute a
quorum for the transaction of business.
(Ord. 585, passed 2-2-2010)
§ 2-3-5 ADOPTION OF RULES.
   The Citizens’ Service Committee may adopt rules for the transaction of
business and shall keep a public record of its transactions, findings,
determinations and recommendations.
(Ord. 585, passed 2-2-2010)
§ 2-3-6 DUTIES AND RESPONSIBILITIES.
   (A)   Recommend, plan, organize and carry out projects, programs and
activities that enhance the beauty of the community, promote wholesome
community activities, improve the quality of life of the residents, protect
public safety and assist community members from all walks of life including
youth, senior citizens, disabled residents and the economic disadvantaged;
   (B)   Plan, organize, promote and carry out community wide activities and
celebrations including, but not limited to, national holidays, dramatic events,
parades, exhibits, pageants, tournaments, contests, games, races, meals served
to the public, and any reasonably safe form of entertainment or recreation open
to all residents of the city;
   (C)   Plan, organize, promote and carry out education community campaigns
and activities that promote good physical and mental health, proper nutrition,
immunization, disease prevention, exercise and healthy lifestyles;
   (D)   Plan, organize, promote and carry out public safety education
campaigns in cooperation with the Police Department and Fire Department to
enhance public safety, prevent crime and keep residents safe from fire;
   (E)   Work in partnership with the Livingston Historical Museum Foundation
to preserve the history of the city and collect appropriate writings, pictures,
artifacts and other items of historical interest;
   (F)   Promote, produce and encourage performances or displays by local,
regional and national artists;
   (G)   Disseminate news and information regarding the community within the
city and conduct public relations activities as are consistent with the purpose
of the Committee;
   (H)   Initiate, sponsor and promote involvement, activities and
contributions by the private sector; and
   (I)   Carry out other projects, programs, events and activities as directed
by the City Council.
(Ord. 585, passed 2-2-2010)
CHAPTER 4: PARKS, RECREATION AND ARTS COMMISSION
Section
2-4-1 Parks, Recreation and Arts Commission created
2-4-2 Membership and terms of office
2-4-3 Removal of members and vacancies
2-4-4 Meetings
2-4-5 Adoption of rules
2-4-6 Duties and responsibilities
§ 2-4-1 PARKS, RECREATION AND ARTS COMMISSION CREATED.
   There shall be and there is hereby created and established a Parks,
Recreation and Arts Commission for the city.
(Ord. 633, passed 2-20-2018)
§ 2-4-2 MEMBERSHIP AND TERMS OF OFFICE.
   (A)   Membership and compensation. The Parks, Recreation and Arts Commission
shall consist of seven members over the age of 18, to be appointed by a
majority vote of the City Council from the residents of the city. A maximum of
one member may reside outside the city limits, as long as they reside within
the boundaries of the Livingston Union School District. Members of the City
Council shall not be eligible to serve as Commission members, but may be
appointed by the City Council to attend Commission meetings as liaisons to the
City Council. Parks, Recreation and Arts Commissioners may not generally serve
on any other advisory committees at the same time.
   (B)   Terms. Each member of the Parks, Recreation and Arts Commission shall
be appointed for four years. Terms expire on January 31 of the fourth year of a
member’s term, or until their successors are appointed. Terms will be staggered
with three members’ terms ending on the same year and the terms of the
remaining four members ending two years later. A member of the Parks,
Recreation and Arts Commission may be reappointed to any number of successive
terms. Should a vacancy occur through means other than term expiration, the
appointment of the new member shall be for the remainder of the vacated term.
   (C)   Chairperson. The Parks, Recreation and Arts Commission shall appoint a
Chairperson and Secretary from among the appointed members. The Parks,
Recreation and Arts Commission shall also have an option to appoint a Vice
Chairperson. These officers shall hold office for one year, or until their
successors are appointed, and may hold the office for any number of successive
terms. This member, in addition to the usual chairpersonship duties, shall be
the official contact between the Commission and the City Council.
(Ord. 633, passed 2-20-2018; Ord. 640, passed 9-3-2019)
§ 2-4-3 REMOVAL OF MEMBERS AND VACANCIES.
   (A)   Removal from the Parks, Recreation and Arts Commission. Any member of
the Commission may be removed from the Commission by the Mayor, subject to the
approval of the City Council, or by a majority vote of the City Council.
   (B)   Resignation of members. A member of the Parks, Recreation and Arts
Commission may resign from the Commission by filing a written statement with
the City Manager. Upon filing the written statement with the City Manager, the
resignation shall become effective at the time of the filing and said member
shall cease to be a member of the Commission and a vacancy shall then exist.
   (C)   Absence with/without cause. Any member of the Commission shall
automatically be deemed to have vacated his or her seat if the Commissioner
fails to attend any three meetings in any 12-month period, unless the absence
is the result of illness or family emergency. In the event that a Commissioner
is unable to attend a meeting due to illness or family emergency, the
Commissioner shall inform the City Manager, or the department head working with
the Commission, at the earliest opportunity before the meeting in order for the
absence to be excused. In the event that a Commissioner is deemed to have
vacated his or her seat, the Commission or City Manager shall immediately
inform the City Council of such vacancy. Vacancies on the Parks, Recreation and
Arts Commission for whatever cause shall be filled by the City Council for the
unexpired term.
(Ord. 633, passed 2-20-2018)
§ 2-4-4 MEETINGS.
   The Parks, Recreation and Arts Commission will meet on a monthly basis. The
meeting time and location will be agreed upon by a majority of the members and
the City Manager. A majority of the Commission, not counting vacant seats,
shall constitute a quorum for the transaction of business.
(Ord. 633, passed 2-20-2018)
§ 2-4-5 ADOPTION OF RULES.
   The Parks, Recreation and Arts Commission may adopt rules for the
transaction of business and shall keep a public record of its transactions,
findings, determinations and recommendations.
(Ord. 633, passed 2-20-2018)
§ 2-4-6 DUTIES AND RESPONSIBILITIES.
   It shall be the duty and responsibility of the Parks, Recreation and Arts
Commission to act in an advisory and volunteer capacity in the development of
parks, recreation and art opportunities for the city’s residents. In their
capacity, the Parks, Recreation and Arts Commission shall:
   (A)   Recommend to the City Council a parks and recreation master plan. If
directed by the City Council, the Commission shall recommend to the City
Council a parks, recreation and arts master plan, either in lieu of or in
addition to, the parks and recreation master plan. After any initial master
plan has been adopted by the City Council, the Commission shall periodically
review the master plan and make appropriate recommendations to the City
Council;
   (B)   Recommend to the City Council individual park master plans for each
park in the city;
   (C)   Constructively encourage public recreational and art activities in the
city;
   (D)   Recommend projects, legislation, policies, funding allocations and
other measures, programs or activities for the development of park, recreation
and art opportunities in the city;
   (E)   Act in an advisory capacity to the City Council in all matters
pertaining to recreation;
   (F)   Act in an advisory capacity to the City Council in all matters
pertaining to art or art programs within the city;
   (G)   Carry out projects, programs or activities as directed by the City
Council;
   (H)   Consider the annual budget for recreation during the annual budget
process and make recommendations with respect thereto to the City Council;
   (I)   Initiate, sponsor and promote involvement, activities and
contributions by the private sector for the development of parks, recreational
and art activities in the city; and
   (J)   Assist in the planning of a recreation program for city residents,
promote and stimulate public interest therein, and solicit the cooperation of
school authorities and other public and private agencies interested therein.
(Ord. 633, passed 2-20-2018)
TITLE 3: BUSINESS REGULATIONS
CHAPTER 1: GENERAL LICENSING PROVISIONS
Section
3-1-1 Person defined
3-1-2 Preparation of blank licenses, quarters defined
3-1-3 Records of licenses
3-1-4 Duty to obtain and pay fee
3-1-5 Authority under license
3-1-6 Separate license required for each place of business
3-1-7 Quarterly licenses, proration of fee
3-1-8 Finance Officer ascertains who pays
3-1-9 Prior quarter statement necessary when fee based on receipts
3-1-10 Prorated quarterly license tax
3-1-11 Failure to make or falsification of statement, misdemeanor
3-1-12 No license without statement
3-1-13 Authority of Finance Officer to administer oaths
3-1-14 Procedure when truth of statement doubted
3-1-15 Deposit of money into city treasury
3-1-16 Quarterly statement required to be shown by Finance Officer
3-1-17 License assignation restricted
3-1-18 Exhibition of license
3-1-19 Charitable institutions and organizations
3-1-20 Exclusions
3-1-21 Information confidential
3-1-22 Appeal
3-1-23 Transfer of licenses
3-1-24 Fees, collection by civil action
3-1-25 Fees, payable in lawful money of United States
3-1-26 Fees, when due
3-1-27 Business taxes; payment, delinquencies and penalties
3-1-28 Enforcement, duties of Finance Officer and City Attorney
3-1-29 Compliance with other codes before license issued
3-1-30 Enforcement, penalty
§ 3-1-1 PERSON DEFINED.
   As used in this chapter, the word PERSON includes a corporation,
association, syndicate, partnership, club, California business or common law
trust, society and individual.
(Ord. 284, passed 6-13-1985)
§ 3-1-2 PREPARATION OF BLANK LICENSES, QUARTERS DEFINED.
   The Finance Officer shall prepare and have printed blank licenses for all
classes of businesses mentioned in this chapter for the terms of three months,
or equal quarters, beginning and ending as July 1 to September 30, October 1 to
December 31, January 1 to March 31, and April 1 to June 30, or for shorter or
longer periods as authorized in this chapter, or for a period of one year;
provided, that such license fee is the same for each quarter of the yearly
period. Printed blank licenses shall provide for the signature of the Finance
Officer.
(Ord. 284, passed 6-13-1985)
§ 3-1-3 RECORDS OF LICENSES.
   The Finance Officer shall keep in his or her office a ledger or record in
which he or she shall keep the account of all licenses sold or unsold by him or
her.
(Ord. 284, passed 6-13-1985)
§ 3-1-4 DUTY TO OBTAIN AND PAY FEE.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person, club or association to commence,
carry on, engage in or continue in, in the city, any business, trade,
occupation or employment upon which a license tax is imposed by the terms and
provisions of this chapter and for which a license tax is required to be
procured by the terms and provisions of this chapter, without first paying such
license tax and procuring such license as provided in this chapter.
   (B)   Any person doing business with the city shall obtain a license.
(Ord. 530, passed 6-21-2005)
§ 3-1-5 AUTHORITY UNDER LICENSE.
   A license shall authorize the party obtaining the same to transact the
business described in such license in a particular locality in the city;
provided, that the party complies with all other provisions of this code, and
other ordinances and regulations of the city.
(Ord. 284, passed 6-13-1985)
§ 3-1-6 SEPARATE LICENSE REQUIRED FOR EACH PLACE OF BUSINESS.
   A separate license must be obtained on each branch establishment or separate
place of business.
(Ord. 284, passed 6-13-1985)
§ 3-1-7 QUARTERLY LICENSES, PRORATION OF FEE.
   A license, when payable quarterly, must be taken out in the quarter
commencing on July 1, October 1, January 1 and April 1 of each year; provided,
that the person taking out a license under the provisions of this chapter after
the beginning of any quarter shall pay only a prorated amount, on a monthly
basis, a portion of a month to be considered as one month, of such sum for the
balance of the time of the quarter, unless otherwise specified in this chapter.
(Ord. 284, passed 6-13-1985)
§ 3-1-8 FINANCE OFFICER ASCERTAINS WHO PAYS.
   The Finance Officer shall make diligent inquiry as to all persons in the
city liable to pay a license as provided in this chapter.
(Ord. 284, passed 6-13-1985)
§ 3-1-9 PRIOR QUARTER STATEMENT NECESSARY WHEN FEE BASED ON RECEIPTS.
   In all cases where the amount of the license fee is based upon the amount of
receipts, or sales affected, or business transacted, the Finance Officer must
require such person to state under oath the average amount of business which he
or she, or the firm of which he or she is a member, or of which he or she is an
agent or attorney, or the association or corporation of which he or she is a
president, secretary or managing agent or other officer, transacted in the
quarter next preceding the commencement of the quarter for which the license is
asked. Thereupon, such person, agent, president, secretary or other officer
must procure a license from the Finance Officer for the term desired and for
the class of business for which such person is liable in accordance with such
statement.
(Ord. 284, passed 6-13-1985)
§ 3-1-10 PRORATED QUARTERLY LICENSE TAX.
   In the event that any person engaged in a business within the city requiring
an annual license makes application for a license after the beginning date of
the year, such person shall pay on a prorated quarterly basis until the end of
the year, but under no circumstances will the proration be less than the
minimum quarterly license tax.
(Ord. 405, passed 6-2-1992)
§ 3-1-11 FAILURE TO MAKE OR FALSIFICATION OF STATEMENT, MISDEMEANOR.
   Any person failing, neglecting or refusing to make a statement, or willfully
making an incorrect statement, required by this chapter, shall be guilty of a
misdemeanor and shall be required to pay for a license for the next quarter or
term doubled the amount otherwise required.
(Ord. 284, passed 6-13-1985)
§ 3-1-12 NO LICENSE WITHOUT STATEMENT.
   Whenever a statement is provided for in this chapter, no license shall be
issued or shall be renewed until such statement is made, sworn to and presented
to the Finance Officer as provided in this chapter.
(Ord. 284, passed 6-13-1985)
§ 3-1-13 AUTHORITY OF FINANCE OFFICER TO ADMINISTER OATHS.
   The Finance Officer is authorized to administer all oaths required by this
chapter.
(Ord. 284, passed 6-13-1985)
§ 3-1-14 PROCEDURE WHEN TRUTH OF STATEMENT DOUBTED.
   (A)   Whenever the Finance Officer shall be of the opinion that the
statement returned by the person applying for the license is not a true
statement of the quarterly sales, he or she shall report to the City Clerk, who
shall inform the City Council that in his or her opinion the statement or the
return is not true.
   (B)   1.   Upon such report being received, or on its own motion, the City
Council shall cite the person applying for such license to appear and show
cause why the license of such person should not be fixed at an amount greater
than the statement or return would indicate the person is liable for.
      2.   Such citation shall be served by the Chief of Police or by
registered mail at least five days prior to the time of the hearing of the
matter by the City Council.
   (C)   If, upon the date set for the hearing of the citation, the person
rendering a statement complained of by the Finance Officer shall produce his or
her books and verify the statement furnished the Finance Officer, the City
Council shall direct the Finance Officer to issue a license to such person in
conformity to the statement furnished by the person; but, if such person shall
refuse to verify the statement so furnished, or if it shall develop that the
statement furnished is not a true statement, the City Council shall fix upon an
amount to be paid for the license by the person equal to twice the amount which
the City Council shall conclude the person would be liable for under the
provisions of this chapter.
(Ord. 284, passed 6-13-1985)
§ 3-1-15 DEPOSIT OF MONEY INTO CITY TREASURY.
   The Finance Officer shall periodically deposit into the city treasury for
the benefit of the General Fund all money collected for licenses under this
chapter.
(Ord 284, passed 6-13-1985)
§ 3-1-16 QUARTERLY STATEMENT REQUIRED TO BE SHOWN BY FINANCE OFFICER.
   The Finance Officer shall have on file at the end of each quarter a record
showing the names, occupations and residences of all persons within the city
liable under this chapter to pay a license and showing what has been paid
during the preceding quarter, the amount of their liability and the amount
actually paid by them, and where the amount paid is considered insufficient.
The Finance Officer shall estimate or determine what should have been paid.
(Ord. 284, passed 6-13-1985)
§ 3-1-17 LICENSE ASSIGNATION RESTRICTED.
   No license issued shall be in any manner assignable or authorize any person
other than therein mentioned or named to transact or carry on such business or
authorize any other business than is therein mentioned or named to be continued
or transacted thereunder or at any place other than therein mentioned or named.
(Ord. 284, passed 6-13-1985)
§ 3-1-18 EXHIBITION OF LICENSE.
   Every person having a license under the provisions of this chapter shall
conspicuously exhibit the same in his or her place of business, or carry same
on his or her person when he or she has no fixed place of business, and produce
the same when applying for a renewal or when requested to do so by the Finance
Officer or Chief of Police.
(Ord. 284, passed 6-13-1985)
§ 3-1-19 CHARITABLE INSTITUTIONS AND ORGANIZATIONS.
   The securing of a business license under this chapter shall not apply to any
institution or organization which is conducted, managed or carried on wholly
for the benefit of a charitable purpose, or from which profit is not derived
either directly or indirectly by any person; nor shall any license be required
for the conducting of any entertainment, concert, exhibition or lecture on
scientific, historical, literary, religious or moral subjects, whenever the
receipts of such function are to be appropriated to any church, school or to
any religious or benevolent purpose within the city; nor shall any license be
required for the conducting of any entertainment, dance, concert, exhibition or
lecture by any religious, charitable, fraternal, educational, military, state,
county or municipal organization or association whenever the receipts of any
such entertainment, dance, concert, exhibition or lecture are to be
appropriated for the purposes and objects for which such association or
organization was formed, and from which profit is not derived either directly
or indirectly by any individual; provided, that nothing contained in this
section shall be deemed to exempt any such institution or organization from
complying with the provisions of any law or regulation of the city requiring
such institution or organization to obtain permission from the City Council;
provided further, that whenever any venture or activity to be sponsored by any
institution or organization which does not meet or deviates from the intent or
provisions of this section or when any institution or organization sponsors or
is connected with a commercial, profitmaking venture or activity for the
benefit of an individual or individuals, if such individual or individuals in
any way control or conduct the advertising, promotion, ticket sales or any part
of such venture or activity other than the actual performance, prior permission
must be obtained from the City Council.
(Ord. 284, passed 6-13-1985)
§ 3-1-20 EXCLUSIONS.
   (A)   Except as may be otherwise specifically provided in this code, the
provisions in this section shall not be deemed or construed to apply to any of
the following persons or firms:
      1.   Any public utility which pays to the city a tax under a franchise or
similar agreement or any publicly owned public utility;
      2.   Banks, including national banking associations, to the extent that a
city may not levy a license tax upon them under the provisions set forth under
Article XIII, Section 27 of the State Constitution;
      3.   Insurance companies and associations to the extent that a city may
not levy a license tax upon them under the provisions as set forth in Article
XIII, Section 28 of the State Constitution;
      4.   Any person or firm who the city is not authorized to license under
the law or Constitution of the United States or this state; and
      5.   Any person whose annual gross income from any such business is less
than $2,000 annually.
   (B)   The Finance Officer may require the filing of a verified statement
from any person or firm claiming to be excluded by the provisions of this
section, which statement shall set forth all the facts upon which the exclusion
is claimed.
(Ord. 284, passed 6-13-1985; Ord. 405, passed 6-2-1992)
§ 3-1-21 INFORMATION CONFIDENTIAL.
   It is unlawful for the collector or any person having an administrative duty
under the provisions of this chapter to make known in any manner whatever the
business affairs, operations or information obtained by an investigation of
records and equipment of any person required to obtain a license, or pay a
license tax, or any other person visited or examined in the discharge of
official duty, or the amount or source of income, profits, losses,
expenditures, or any particular thereof, set forth in any statement or
application, or to permit any statement or application, or copy of either, or
any book containing any abstract or particulars thereof to be seen or examined
by any person. Provided that nothing in this section shall be construed to
prevent:
   (A)   The disclosure to, or the examination of records and equipment by,
another city official, employee or agent for collection of taxes for the sole
purpose of administering or enforcing any provisions of this chapter or
collecting taxes imposed hereunder;
   (B)   The disclosure of information to, or the examination of records by,
federal or state officials, or the tax officials of another city or county, or
city and county, if a reciprocal arrangement exists, or to a grand jury or
court of law, upon subpoena;
   (C)   The disclosure of information and results of examination of records of
particular taxpayers, or relating to particular taxpayers, to a court of law in
a proceeding brought to determine the existence or amount of any license tax
liability of the particular taxpayers to the city;
   (D)   The disclosure after the filing of a written request to that effect,
to the taxpayer himself or herself, or to his or her successors, receivers,
trustees, executors, administrators, assignees and guarantors, if directly
interested, of information as to the items included in the measure of any paid
tax, any unpaid tax or amounts of tax required to be collected, interest and
penalties; further provided, however, that the City Attorney approves each such
disclosure and that the collector may refuse to make any disclosure referred to
in this subsection (D) when in his or her opinion the public interest would
suffer thereby;
   (E)   The disclosure of the names and addresses of persons to whom licenses
have been issued and the general type or nature of their business;
   (F)   The disclosure by way of public meeting or otherwise of such
information as may be necessary to the City Council in order to permit it to be
fully advised as to the facts when a taxpayer files a claim for refund of
license tax, or submits an offer of compromise with regard to a claim asserted
against him or her by the city for license taxes, or when acting upon any other
matter; and
   (G)   The disclosure of general statistics regarding taxes collected or
business done in the city.
(Ord. 284, passed 6-13-1985)
§ 3-1-22 APPEAL.
   Any person aggrieved by any decision of the collector with respect to the
issuance or refusal to issue such license may appeal to the Council by filing a
notice of appeal with the Clerk of the Council. The Council shall thereupon fix
a time and place for hearing such appeal. The Clerk of the Council shall give
notice to such person of the time and place of hearing by serving it personally
or by depositing it in the United States Post Office at Livingston, California,
postage prepaid, addressed to such person at his or her last known address. The
Council shall have authority to determine all questions raised in such appeal.
No such determination shall conflict with any substantive provision of this
chapter.
(Ord. 284, passed 6-13-1985)
§ 3-1-23 TRANSFER OF LICENSES.
   No license issued pursuant to this chapter shall be transferred, except
under the following conditions:
   (A)   When a licensee transfers his or her business from one location to
another in the city, the license previously issued may be amended to authorize
the conduct of the business at the new location; and
   (B)   The license transfers authorized herein may be obtained upon
application therefor to the Director of Finance and payment of a fee of $5.
(Ord. 284, passed 6-13-1985; Ord. 405, passed 6-2-1992)
§ 3-1-24 FEES, COLLECTION BY CIVIL ACTION.
   The license tax imposed by this chapter shall be a debt due the city from
and against any person who maintains, carries on, engages in or conducts in the
city any business, occupation, trade, profession or employment, upon which a
license tax is imposed, or for the commencing, engaging in, carrying on or
conducting of which a license is required to be procured without first having
paid such license tax and procured such license according to the terms and
provisions of this chapter. Such persons shall be liable in a civil action in
the name of the city as plaintiff in any court of competent jurisdiction for
the amount of the license tax imposed by this chapter and for the cost of suit,
and for reasonable attorney fees.
(Ord. 284, passed 6-13-1985)
§ 3-1-25 FEES, PAYABLE IN LAWFUL MONEY OF UNITED STATES.
   The license tax imposed by this chapter shall become due and payable in
lawful money of the United States of America to the Finance Officer.
(Ord. 284, passed 6-13-1985)
§ 3-1-26 FEES, WHEN DUE.
   All license fees imposed by this chapter shall be payable in advance and
shall be deemed to be delinquent if not so paid. Penalties for the nonpayment
thereof shall be imposed as provided in §3-1-27 of this chapter.
(Ord. 284, passed 6-13-1985)
§ 3-1-27 BUSINESS TAXES; PAYMENT, DELINQUENCIES, AND PENALTIES.
   All business taxes due under the provisions of this chapter shall be payable
in advance of the applicable business tax period prescribed as follows:
   (A)   Daily business taxes shall be due on their effective date and
delinquent at 5:00 p.m. on that date;
   (B)   Monthly business taxes shall be due on the first day of each month for
which the business tax is sought and delinquent at 5:00 p.m. on the tenth day
of the month;
   (C)   Quarterly business taxes shall be due on July 1, October 1, January 1
and April 1 and delinquent at 5:00 p.m. on the twentieth day of the first month
in which the quarterly business tax is due; and
   (D)   Annual business taxes shall be due on July 1 and delinquent at 5:00
p.m. on July 31.
(Ord. 405, passed 6-2-1992)
§ 3-1-28 ENFORCEMENT, DUTIES OF FINANCE OFFICER AND CITY ATTORNEY.
   It shall be the duty of the Finance Officer to promptly notify the City
Council of matters requiring their action in the fixing of license fees to be
fixed by them as provided in this chapter and to currently notify the Council
of delinquent fees that are due the city, and it shall be the duty of the City
Attorney to promptly institute legal proceedings to effect the payment thereof
upon institutions received thereon from the City Council. All money collected
by the City Attorney by suit or otherwise under the terms and provisions of
this chapter shall be paid into the treasury of the city on the first day of
each month and every month after the collection thereof.
(Ord. 284, passed 6-13-1985)
§ 3-1-29 COMPLIANCE WITH OTHER CODES BEFORE LICENSE ISSUED.
   No license shall be issued under the provisions of this chapter until the
applicant has complied with all of the provisions of the building code, the
fire prevention code, and when applicable, the rules and regulations of the
Police and Health Departments.
(Ord. 284, passed 6-13-1985)
§ 3-1-30 ENFORCEMENT, PENALTY.
   Any person convicted of a violation of any section or provision of this
chapter, where no other penalty is set forth, is guilty of an infraction which
is punishable by:
   (A)   A fine of $50 for the first violation;
   (B)   A fine of $100 for a second violation during the same fiscal year; and
   (C)   A fine of $250 for each additional violation during the fiscal year.
(Ord. 284, passed 6-13-1985)
CHAPTER 2: LICENSE FEES FOR SPECIFIC BUSINESSES
Section
3-2-1 Generally
3-2-2 Gross receipts
3-2-3 License tax; flat fee
3-2-4 Itinerant vendors
3-2-4-1 Definitions
3-2-4-2 Permits
3-2-4-3 Permit application
3-2-4-4 Permit see
3-2-4-5 Permit - investigation and issuance
3-2-4-6 Permit - expiration
3-2-4-7 Permit - badges
3-2-4-8 Permit - transfer prohibited
3-2-4-9 Permit - exhibition
3-2-4-10 Entry upon signed premises unlawful
3-2-4-11 Hours of solicitation
3-2-4-12 Regulations concerning itinerant vendors
3-2-4-13 Enforcement authority
3-2-4-14 Records
3-2-4-15 Permit - revocation
3-2-4-16 Notice of hearing on revocation
3-2-4-17 Permit - appeal procedure
3-2-4-18 Claims of exemption
3-2-4-19 Penalty for violations
3-2-5 Regulation of vending vehicles and pushcarts
3-2-6 Business tax per unit
3-2-7 Outdoor display, sales and promotions
3-2-8 Restaurant on wheels
§ 3-2-1 GENERALLY.
   The rates of the license tax for the businesses, trades, occupations and
employments named in this chapter are, and the same are fixed in and for the
city, in accordance with this chapter and the same shall be paid by any person
engaged in or about to engage in, or carrying on or about to carry on the same
in the city. When a license can be measured by gross receipts as defined in §
3-2-2(B) of this chapter, the Finance Officer is authorized to license such
business under §
3-2-2 of this chapter, whether or not such business is specifically set forth
under a flat rate license section of this chapter.
(Ord. 284, passed 6-13-1985)
§ 3-2-2 GROSS RECEIPTS.
   (A)   Generally. Every person conducting, carrying on or managing a retail
business from a fixed place of business within the city shall pay an annual
registration tax of $60, and in addition thereto shall pay a business license
tax equal to one mil on each dollar of average monthly gross receipts, computed
quarterly and payable quarterly on forms provided by the city.
   (B)   Gross receipts defined. For the purpose of this chapter, the following
definition shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a
different meaning.
      GROSS RECEIPTS. The total amount of the sale price of all sales, the
total amount charged or received for the performance of an act, service or
employment of whatsoever nature it may be, whether such service, act or
employment is done as part of or in connection with the sale of goods, wares,
merchandise or not, for which a charge is made, including all receipts, cash
credits and property of any kind or nature, without any deduction therefrom on
account of the costs of the property sold, the costs of the material used,
labor or service costs, interests paid or payable, losses or any other expenses
whatsoever; provided, that cash discounts allowed or taken on sales shall not
be included and this section shall not be construed to impose any tax upon any
business or transaction which the city is not authorized to license or tax
under any law of the state or the United States. Any tax required by law to be
included in or added to the purchase price and collected from the consumer or
purchaser, and such part of the sales price of any property previously sold
returned by the purchaser to the seller which is refunded by the seller by way
of cash or credit allowances given or taken as part payment on any property so
accepted for resale, shall be deducted for the purpose of determining gross
receipts under this section.
(Ord. 284, passed 6-13-1985; Ord. 405, passed 6-2-1992)
§ 3-2-3 LICENSE TAX; FLAT FEE.
   (A)   The following businesses will pay a flat fee license tax of $60 per
year:
      1.   Amusement rides;
      2.   Auctioneer;
      3.   Auto or horse races or similar type events;
      4.   Barbershop;
      5.   Beauty parlor;
      6.   Billiard or pool hall;
      7.   Billposting;
      8.   Boarders;
      9.   Bowling alley or bocce alley or handball court;
      10.   Brokers;
      11.   Campground or trailer court;
      12.   Cannery, packing house, manufacturing plant;
      13.   Christmas related merchandise;
      14.   Coin operated sound motion picture machines;
      15.   Concrete pipe laying;
      16.   Convalescent home;
      17.   Creamery;
      18.   Dances;
      19.   Directories;
      20.   Dry cleaning, laundry;
      21.   Feats or performances;
      22.   Finance or lending agency;
      23.   Hauling;
      24.   Home occupation;
      25.   Hospital;
      26.   Junk dealer, secondhand store;
      27.   Livery or feed stable;
      28.   Minstrels;
      29.   Newspaper;
      30.   Nursery;
      31.   Nursing home;
      32.   Parking lot;
      33.   Pawnshop;
      34.   Peddling sewing machines, organs and office equipment;
      35.   Phonographs or mechanical musical instruments;
      36.   Photographic studio;
      37.   Professions;
      38.   Radio broadcasting;
      39.   Real estate office;
      40.   Service station;
      41.   Shoeshining;
      42.   Shooting gallery or skating rink;
      43.   Shuffleboard;
      44.   Sideshow signs;
      45.   Supplying or distributing milk;
      46.   Tailor shop;
      47.   Tobacco store;
      48.   Tombstones;
      49.   Trained animals;
      50.   Traveling merchant;
      51.   Traveling photographer;
      52.   Undertaker;
      53.   Vending machines; and
      54.   Warehouse.
   (B)   The following businesses will pay a flat fee license tax as follows:
 
Carnival                       $600 per week
Circus                         $120 per day
Contractors                    $120 per year or $40 per quarter
Fortune teller                 $100 per day
Restaurant on wheels           $25 per quarter
Theaters/shows                 $54 per quarter, $30 per day or $120 per week if
                               not a fixed place of business
Vending vehicles and pushcarts $15 per quarter per vehicle plus a $25
                               registration fee
 
(Ord. 405, passed 6-2-1992; Ord. 430, passed 2-15-1994)
§ 3-2-4 ITINERANT VENDORS.
§ 3-2-4-1 DEFINITIONS.
   The following words and phrases shall, for purposes of this chapter, have
the meanings respectively ascribed to them by this section, as follows:
   FIXED PLACE OF BUSINESS. A fixed business place, location, building, room,
stand or enclosure separate and distinct from any other business, in which
goods, wares, merchandise, fruit or vegetables are kept, displayed or offered
for sale to the public, regularly kept open with an agent in exclusive
attendance for at least six hours per day, for at least five days per week.
   ITINERANT VENDOR. Any person who sets up a temporary stand or place or uses
a portable cart or motor vehicle as defined in the California Vehicle Code for
the purpose of selling any goods, wares, merchandise, fruits or vegetables, or
one who solicits orders for the sale of such goods, wares, merchandise, fruits
or vegetables to be delivered at some future time or date. Itinerant vendor
does not include a merchant having a fixed place of business within the city,
or his or her employee, who sells or solicits orders for the sale of goods,
wares, merchandise, services, fruits or vegetables, after a prior approval,
either oral or written, from the vendee. Itinerant vendor does not include a
merchant who sets up a temporary stand or place as part of an approved farmers
market. Itinerant vendors who set up on private property must secure written
permission from the property owner or person having control of said property
and said written permission must be in the possession of the vendor. Further,
ITINERANT VENDOR includes the terms SIDEWALK VENDOR, ROAMING VENDOR, and
STATIONARY SIDEWALK VENDOR as defined within Government Code section 51036.
Lastly, ITINERANT VENDOR includes the terms MOBILE FOOD FACILITY as defined
within California Retail Food Code (Cal Code), Section 113831(a),which states
any vehicle used in conjunction with a commissary or other permanent food
facility upon which food is sold or distributed at retail. MOBILE FOOD FACILITY
does not include a "transporter" used to transport packaged food from a food
facility, or other approved source to the consumer.
   PEDDLER. Any person who goes upon the premises of any private residence in
the city, not having been requested or invited by the occupant thereof,
carrying or transporting goods, wares, merchandise, or personal property of any
nature and offering the same for sale. This definition also includes any person
who solicits orders and as a separate transaction makes deliveries to
purchasers as part of the scheme to evade the provisions of this chapter.
   PERSON. Any person, firm, corporation, association, club, society, or other
organization.
   SOLICITOR. Any person who goes upon the premises of any private residence in
the city, not having been requested or invited by the occupant thereof, for the
purpose of taking or soliciting orders for the sale of goods, wares,
merchandise, or personal property of any nature for future delivery, or for
services to be performed in the future.
   Wherever the terms SELLING or SALES are used herein, BUYING and PURCHASING
shall be deemed included.
(Ord. 656, passed 8-20-2024)
§ 3-2-4-2 PERMITS.
   It is unlawful for any solicitor, peddler or itinerant vendor to engage in
business within the city without first obtaining a business license and permit
which complies with the provisions of this chapter, unless the activities of
the solicitor, peddler or itinerant vendor are exempt from municipal regulation
by state, federal or local law.
(Ord. 656, passed 8-20-2024)
§ 3-2-4-3 PERMIT APPLICATION.
   (A)   Applicants for vendor permits under this chapter shall file with the
city clerk a sworn application in writing on a form to be furnished by the
city, so a background check can be performed by the city. The application shall
contain the following information:
      1.   Name, height, weight, eye color and hair color;
      2.   Date of birth, driver's license number, Social Security number, tax
identification number or state of California identification card;
      3.   Permanent home address and telephone number;
      4.   Local address and telephone number;
      5.   A brief description of the business or activity to be conducted;
      6.   If employed, the name, address and telephone number of the employer,
or if acting as agent, the name, address and telephone number of the principal
who is being represented, with credentials establishing the relationship and
the authority of the employee or agent to act for the employer or principal, as
the case may be;
      7.   The length of time for which the permit is desired;
      8.   Two photographs of the applicant, taken within 60 days immediately
prior to the date of filing of the application, measuring two inches by two
inches, and showing the head and shoulders of the applicant in a clear and
distinguishing manner;
      9.   A statement as to whether or not the applicant has been convicted of
any criminal offense, whether felony or misdemeanor within the last ten years.
Applicant shall provide information detailing any such offense, the date and
place of conviction, the nature of the offense, and the punishment or penalty
assessed therefore;
      10.   Proof of possession of any license or permit which, under federal,
state, or local laws or regulations, the applicant is required to have in order
to conduct the proposed business, or which, under any such law or regulation,
would exempt the applicant from the licensing requirements of this chapter.
      11.   If a vehicle is to be used, the application must include a
description of each vehicle to be used, with license number, make and model.
   (B)   Applicant shall be fingerprinted by the Livingston Police Department
or via the California Department of Justice LiveScan system and agree to a
criminal history records check conducted by the city based upon their
fingerprints.
   (C)   Applicant shall sign an authorization form for the city to seek
verification of the information contained within the application, including,
but not limited to, the prospective permittee's criminal history.
(Ord. 656, passed 8-20-2024)
§ 3-2-4-4 PERMIT FEE.
   At the time the application is filed with the city clerk, the applicant
shall provide the city with a non-refundable fee to process their application.
The fee shall include an amount to cover the costs of fingerprinting,
background checks as well as general review and processing of the application.
In the alternative, the applicant may provide the city clerk with a completed
background check performed by a third party vendor approved by the city. The
amount of the fee shall be established, and from time to time may be amended by
resolution of the city council.
(Ord. 656, passed 8-20-2024)
§ 3-2-4-5 PERMIT - INVESTIGATION AND ISSUANCE.
   (A)   The City Manager or his/her designee shall deny an application based
upon any of the following grounds:
      1.   The applicant has been issued a local or state permit or license to
conduct itinerant vendor, solicitor or peddler activities at any other location
within the state of California or another state and the permit or license was
suspended or revoked, or the applicant has had disciplinary action relating to
the permit or license.
      2.   The applicant has been convicted of a serious or violent offense as
listed within California Penal Code Sections 667.5 and 1192.7(c).
      3.   The applicant has been convicted of a misdemeanor involving theft,
dishonesty, fraud, narcotics sales or narcotic trafficking within the five
years preceding the date of the application.
      4.   The applicant has been convicted of a felony involving the illegal
use, possession, transportation, distribution or similar activities related to
controlled substances, as defined within the Federal Controlled Substance Act,
unless the applicant received a Certificate of Rehabilitation as defined in the
Act.
      5.   The applicant has engaged in unlawful, fraudulent, unfair, or
deceptive business practices as defined by the Livingston Municipal Code and/or
state or federal law.
      6.   The applicant is under the age of 18, or any age as may be set by
state law.
   (B)   Upon approval of an application, the city shall deliver the required
permit to the applicant. Such permit shall contain the signature and seal of
the city clerk and shall show the name, address and photograph of the
permittee, the class of vendor permit issued, the kind of goods or services to
be sold or delivered thereunder, the amount of the fee paid, the date of
issuance, and the length of time the permit shall be operative. It shall also
show the permit number and identifying description of any vehicle to be used in
carrying on the business for which the permit is issued. The city clerk shall
keep a record of all active permits.
(Ord. 656, passed 8-20-2024)
§ 3-2-4-6 PERMIT - EXPIRATION.
   All permits issued under the provisions of this chapter shall expire one
year from date of issuance, unless an earlier expiration date is noted on the
permit.
(Ord. 656, passed 8-20-2024)
§ 3-2-4-7 PERMIT - BADGES.
   The city clerk shall issue to each permittee, at the time of delivery of his
or her permit, a badge, which shall be worn continuously by the permittee in
such a way as to be conspicuous at all times while the permittee is conducting
business in the city pursuant to such permit. The badge shall bear the
appropriate words, e.g., "Permitted Vendor" or "Permitted Peddler," the period
for which the permit is issued and the number of the permit, in letters and
figures clearly discernible.
(Ord. 656, passed 8-20-2024)
§ 3-2-4-8 PERMIT - TRANSFER PROHIBITED.
   No permit issued under the provisions of this chapter shall be used or worn
at any time by any person other than the person to whom it was issued.
(Ord. 656, passed 8-20-2024)
§ 3-2-4-9 PERMIT - EXHIBITION.
   Every person required to be permitted under the provisions of this chapter
shall exhibit his or her permit when requested to do so by any prospective
customer or Livingston Police Department sworn officer or code enforcement
officer.
(Ord. 656, passed 8-20-2024)
§ 3-2-4-10 ENTRY UPON SIGNED PREMISES UNLAWFUL.
   It is unlawful for any person, while conducting the business of itinerant
vendor, solicitor or peddler, whether permitted or unpermitted, to enter upon
any residential premises in the city where the owner, occupant, or person
legally in charge of the premises has posted, at the entry to the premises, or
at the entry to the principal building on said premises, a non-illuminated flat
sign of not more than one square foot bearing the words "No Solicitors," or
words of similar import.
(Ord. 656, passed 8-20-2024)
§ 3-2-4-11 HOURS OF SOLICITATION.
   It is unlawful for any person, while conducting the business of itinerant
vendor, solicitor or peddler, whether permitted or unpermitted, to enter upon
any residential or public premises between the hours of 8:00 P.M and 8:00 A.M.
pacific standard time.
(Ord. 656, passed 8-20-2024)
§ 3-2-4-12 REGULATIONS CONCERNING ITINERANT VENDORS.
   The following regulations shall apply to itinerant vendors as defined in §
3-2-4-1:
   (A)   No itinerant vendor shall park or stand on a public sidewalk in a
manner which blocks or prevents pedestrian traffic or violates any of the
requirements of the Americans with Disability Act or California Disabled
Persons Act.
   (B)   Itinerant vendors shall not stand or park in any parking lot of any
public park in a manner which blocks or prevents vehicle traffic, pedestrian
traffic or violates any of the requirements of the Americans with Disability
Act or California Disabled Persons Act. Vendors within a park shall only park
their vehicle, including but not limited to personal vehicle or mobile food
truck, adjacent to a public park in spaces designated by signage. The
designations shall be made and posted from time to time by the city manager or
designee, who may limit the number of spaces for itinerant vendors. Vendor
vehicles, including but not limited to personal vehicle or mobile food truck,
not parked within the designated parking spaces shall constitute a public
nuisance and shall be subject to the provisions of the Livingston Municipal
Code.
   (C)   No chairs or tables are allowed to be placed on the sidewalk in a
manner which blocks or prevents pedestrian traffic or violates any of the
requirements of the Americans with Disability Act or California Disabled
Persons Act.
   (D)   Vendors shall remove any debris from the sales, ensure a receptacle is
available for the disposal of debris, and make sure that the area is kept
clean.
   (E)   School zones. No itinerant vendor shall stand or park within three
hundred feet of any school zone weekdays, Monday through Friday, from 8:00 A.M.
to 4:00 P.M. except for holidays and when school is not in session.
   (F)   Public streets. No itinerant vendor shall stand or park on any street
in a commercial zone any truck, trailer, wagon or push cart in a manner which
blocks or prevents vehicle traffic, pedestrian traffic or violates any of the
requirements of the Americans with Disability Act or California Disabled
Persons Act.
   (G)   Private property. Itinerant vendors shall be permitted on developed
private property only in commercial, industrial and open space zoning
districts. The area occupied by each itinerant vendor on private property shall
not exceed nine hundred square feet and shall be located on hard surface
paving. Itinerant vendors are prohibited in residential zoning districts.
   (H)   Mobile food facility and/or restaurant on wheels. Itinerant vendors
shall not be permitted to operate a mobile food facility and/or restaurant on
wheels which remains at the same location, property or parcel for more than
eight hours or two consecutive days.
(Ord. 656, passed 8-20-2024)
§ 3-2-4-13 ENFORCEMENT AUTHORITY.
   Any city police officer or code enforcement officer may require any
itinerant vendor, solicitor or peddler, who is not known to such officer to be
duly permitted to do so, to produce his or her permit, and to enforce the
provisions of this chapter against any person found to be violating the same.
(Ord. 656, passed 8-20-2024)
§ 3-2-4-14 RECORDS.
   City staff shall record any violations of this chapter on the permanent
record of said permit kept pursuant to the provisions of subsection (B) of §
3-2-4-5 of this chapter.
(Ord. 656, passed 8-20-2024)
§ 3-2-4-15 PERMIT - REVOCATION.
   Permits issued under the provisions of this chapter may be revoked by the
city, after notice and hearing, for any of the following causes:
   (A)   Fraud, misrepresentation, or false statement contained in the
application for permit;
   (B)   Fraud, misrepresentation, or false statement made by the permittee in
the course of carrying on the business of vendor, solicitor or peddler;
   (C)   The violation of any provision of this chapter or the Livingston
Municipal Code;
   (D)   Conviction of any crime involving theft, dishonesty, fraud, narcotics
sales, narcotic trafficking or as identified within California Penal Code
Sections 667.5 and 1192.7(c) and the Federal Controlled Substance Act.;
   (E)   Conducting the business of vendor, solicitor or peddler in such a
manner as to constitute a breach of the peace or create a threat to the health,
safety, or general welfare of the public.
(Ord. 656, passed 8-20-2024)
§ 3-2-4-16 NOTICE OF HEARING ON REVOCATION.
   Notice of the hearing for revocation of a license pursuant to the provisions
of §
3-2-4-15 of this chapter shall be given in writing and shall set forth
specifically the grounds for the proposed revocation and the time and place of
the hearing. Said notice shall be mailed, postage prepaid, to the permittee at
the address shown on the permit application or at the last known address of the
permittee.
(Ord. 656, passed 8-20-2024)
§ 3-2-4-17 PERMIT - APPEAL PROCEDURE.
   Any person denied a permit or had a permit revoked under the provisions of
this chapter shall have the right to appeal such action or decision to the city
manager or his/her designee. Such appeal shall be taken by filing with the city
clerk, within ten days after notice of the action or decision complained of has
been mailed to such person's address as shown on his or her permit application
form, or to such person's last known address, a written statement setting forth
the grounds for the appeal. The city clerk shall transmit the written statement
to the city manager or his/her designee and the city manager or his/her
designee shall set a time and place for a hearing on the appeal. Notice of the
time and place of such hearing shall be given to the appellant in the same
manner as is hereinabove in this section provided for the mailing of notice of
action or decision. The decision of the city manager or his/her designee on
such appeal shall be final and binding on all parties concerned. Unless the
governing ordinance or statute provides otherwise, if the appellant seeks
further relief, the appellant shall file a petition for writ of mandate in
superior court pursuant to Code of Civil Procedure Sections 1094.5 and 1094.6
within 90 calendar days of the date of the decision.
(Ord. 656, passed 8-20-2024)
§ 3-2-4-18 CLAIMS OF EXEMPTION.
   Any person claiming to be legally exempt from the regulations set forth in
this chapter, or from the payment of a permit fee as provided in §
3-2-4-4 of this chapter, shall cite to the city clerk in statute or other legal
authority under which exemption is claimed and shall present to the city clerk
proof of qualification for such exemption.
(Ord. 656, passed 8-20-2024)
§ 3-2-4-19 PENALTY FOR VIOLATIONS.
   Any person who violates any of the provisions of this chapter shall be
punished as follows:
   (A)   With a permit:
      1.   An administrative fine not exceeding $100 for a first violation.
      2.   An administrative fine not exceeding $200 for a second violation
within one year of the first violation.
      3.   An administrative fine not exceeding $500 for each additional
violation within one year of the first violation.
      4.   Upon a fourth violation of this chapter, the permit shall be
rescinded.
   (B)   Without a permit:
      1.   An administrative fine not exceeding $250 for a first violation.
      2.   An administrative fine not exceeding $500 for a second violation
within one year of the first violation.
      3.   An administrative fine not exceeding $1,000 for each additional
violation within one year of the first violation.
   (C)   Failure to pay an administrative fine pursuant to section shall not be
punishable as an infraction or misdemeanor.
   Any other violation(s) of the Livingston Municipal Code shall be subject to
the established enforcement and penalties of said municipal code.
(Ord. 656, passed 8-20-2024)
§ 3-2-5 REGULATION OF VENDING VEHICLES AND PUSHCARTS.
   Street vending vehicles and pushcarts shall be subject to the following
rules, regulations and requirements.
   (A)   Application.
      1.   Every applicant for a street food or beverage vendor’s permit shall
file with the Finance Director a written application on a form provided by the
Finance Director which shall contain the following:
         (a)   The name, address, telephone number, driver’s license or other
valid identification number, and Social Security number of the applicant and of
each person, if any, to be employed or retained by the applicant to sell food
or beverages from vending vehicles or pushcarts;
         (b)   The number of vending vehicles or pushcarts to be operated by
the applicant, either directly or through employees or subcontractors, and the
design of each vending vehicle or pushcart, including signage, and the location
of loading, unloading and overnight storage;
         (c)   The character, location and routing of vending vehicle or
pushcart operations; and
         (d)   Such other information as the Finance Director deems
appropriate.
      2.   Each application shall be accompanied by payment of a nonrefundable
fee of $25 to cover administration costs.
   (B)   Regulation of vending vehicles and pushcarts.
      1.   Each vending vehicle or pushcart shall have affixed to it in plain
view, the operator’s permit required by this chapter, and any other permit
required, including a health permit. Facsimiles are permissible.
      2.   Pushcarts shall not be stationed for purposes of offering foods,
beverages or products for sale in any location which creates an obstruction to
the normal flow of vehicular pedestrian access, within ten feet of any
intersection, driveway or building entrance, or in any space designed for
vehicular parking, nor shall more than three congregate at any location.
      3.   The maximum dimensions of any pushcart shall be six feet in length
and four feet in width.
      4.   The only signs used in conjunction with a vending vehicle or
pushcart shall be signs affixed to or painted on the vehicle or pushcart.
      5.   The operator of a vending vehicle or pushcart, if such a person is
an employee, contractee, lessee of a vendor shall be required to wear a uniform
on which the business is identified.
      6.   No artificial lighting of any pushcart is permitted.
      7.   A refuse bin of at least one cubic foot shall be provided in or on
the vending vehicle or pushcart.
      8.   No person shall park, stop or stand any vending vehicle or pushcart
upon any part of any street of the city and leave the same stopped, parked or
standing in any one location for a period of time longer than ten minutes for
the purposes of selling or delivering any food or drink from each vehicle and
no person shall make a second stop after moving from the last place of parking,
stopping or standing within a distance of 50 feet of the last place of parking,
stopping or standing; and no person shall park, stop or stand any vehicle or
pushcart upon any part of any street of the city for the purposes of selling
any food or drink within 300 feet of any school property line during school
between 8:00 a.m. and 4:00 p.m., on any school day or within 300 feet of any
church or temple property line where any services, functions or activities are
being conducted or at which attendees are arriving or leaving; or in any
commercial district.
      9.   No person shall use any musical or other sound emitting device
designed to attract customers while such vehicle or pushcart is parked, stopped
or standing in the manner and for the purposes described within this section.
      10.   No single street vending business shall be allowed to license more
than two vending vehicles or pushcarts.
      11.   (a)   For the safety of both the vendor and the general public, no
vending vehicle or pushcart (to include bicycle driven carts) will be allowed
to operate on any city street or sidewalk for the purpose of selling goods
during any hours of darkness.
         (b)   HOURS OF DARKNESS are defined as hours between one hour past
sunset and sunrise daily.
      12.   Any violation of this subsection (B) will be cause for individual
business licenses to receive a written warning for the first violation, a $25
fine for the second violation, a $50 fine for the third violation, and six-
month business license suspension for every violation thereafter. A violation
of this section will be considered an infraction per the penalty section of
this code.
   (C)   Liability insurance.
      1.   Every operator of vending vehicles or pushcarts must obtain and
maintain during the entire term of his or her license an unconditional public
general liability insurance policy that includes products and operations for
not less than the following sums:
         (a)   For the injury or death of any one person in any one accident:
$1,000,000;
         (b)   For the injury or death to two or more persons in any one
accident: $3,000,000; and
         (c)   For the damage or destruction of property in any one accident:
$25,000.
      2.   No license shall be issued or valid until the licensee shall have
furnished the City Finance Director with a certificate of insurance, for each
policy required, executed by the company issuing such policy, and approved as
to form by the City Attorney. Such policies shall contain a provision which
includes the city as also named insured and holding the city, its officers and
employees harmless from any and all claims for negligence by reason of granting
permission to use such public property.
(Ord. 405, passed 6-2-1992; Ord. 419, passed 6-1-1993; Ord. 511, passed 6-18-
2002)
§ 3-2-6 BUSINESS TAX PER UNIT.
   Every person transacting and carrying on the business or activities herein
enumerated shall pay a business tax as follows.
   (A)   Rental property.
      1.   Any person owning and conducting, operating, renting or leasing a
rooming house, boarding house, apartment house, lodging house, trailer park,
mobilehome court or commercial building, with the exception of hotels and
motels, shall pay annually the following business tax: $60 for the first six
units plus $5 for each additional unit over six. The provisions of this section
shall not apply to subleases.
      2.   The provisions of this section shall not apply to residential
premises owned, operated, rented or leased by one person having less than three
rental units. A RESIDENTIAL UNIT is defined as a living space in a multiple
dwelling or an individual house.
      3.   The provisions of this section shall apply to persons engaged in
renting or leasing real property to government entities.
      4.   The taxes provided for in this section shall be in addition to any
business tax which may be required to be paid by real estate brokers, agents or
other persons engaged in business and taxed pursuant to other provisions of
this chapter.
   (B)   Delivery vehicles.
      1.   Every person who collects, gathers, picks up or loads goods, wares
or merchandise within the city, or who delivers goods, wares or merchandise
within the city from or to a point inside or outside the city by means of a
motor vehicle four or more times within any 12-month period, is assessed a
license tax in the sum of $45 for the first vehicle plus $25 for each
additional vehicle.
      2.   A vehicle delivering to or for a licensed person with a fixed place
of business within the city shall be exempt from the provisions of this section
when such vehicle is the property of that person.
   (C)   Mechanical machines. Every person engaged in the business of
maintaining and operating mechanical games, rides, devices or instruments of
any kind shall pay a business tax of $10 per machine, but a minimum of $60 per
year.
(Ord. 405, passed 6-2-1992)
§ 3-2-7 OUTDOOR DISPLAY, SALES AND PROMOTIONS.
   The display or sale of goods, merchandise or service which are customarily
indoor uses shall be allowed outdoors, limited to specific days of the week and
shall meet the following conditions:
   (A)   All sales shall be conducted by a business located on the property;
   (B)   All merchandise or services displayed outdoors shall be of the same
types ordinarily sold indoors at the business conducting the sale;
   (C)   Each display or sale shall be limited to the following days of the
week only:
      1.   Friday, Saturday and Sunday;
      2.   There shall be no limitation as to the number of weekends per month;
      3.   There shall be no requirement on those days stated in subsection
(C)1. of this section, for businesses to obtain a permit from the Planning
Department; and
      4.   Restaurants are exempt from subsections (C)1., (C)2. and (C)3. of
this section.
   (D)   No display shall encroach on a public right-of-way; and
   (E)   Each display or sale shall be subject to the sign regulations of Title
4, Chapter 2 of this code.
(Ord. 485, passed 10-20-1998)
§ 3-2-8 RESTAURANT ON WHEELS.
   Restaurants on wheels shall be subject to the following rules, regulations
and requirements:
   (A)   Restaurants on wheels are subject to §
3-2-4 of this chapter, with the exception that one for every 5,000 population
is allowed at a fixed location upon obtaining a use permit; and
   (B)   Taco trucks are classified as restaurants on wheels.
(Ord. 429, passed 2-15-1994)
CHAPTER 3: SALE OF WEAPONS
Section
3-3-1 License, required
3-3-2 License, application
3-3-3 License, form prescribed by state
§ 3-3-1 LICENSE, REQUIRED.
   In addition to any other business license or fees required by this title,
every person proposing to engage in the business of selling at retail within
the city, pistols, revolvers or other firearms capable of being concealed upon
the person, shall apply for a license to conduct the business, and shall pay
the application fee therefor as established by ordinance or resolution. The
Chief of Police shall investigate or cause to be investigated the suitability
of the premises on which said business is to be conducted, and the character
and fitness of the person proposing to conduct the business and of each
partner, associate or employee of said person, if such partner, associate or
employee is to be authorized to sell such firearms at retail. The Chief of
Police may issue such license if, in his or her judgment, considering the
suitability of the premises and the character and fitness of each person who is
to be authorized to sell such firearms, the public safety and welfare will not
be adversely affected.
(Ord. 284, passed 6-13-1985)
§ 3-3-2 LICENSE, APPLICATION.
   The Chief of Police may prepare, use and modify such application form and
other documents as are reasonably necessary to provide information for such
investigation. The application fee in such amount as is determined by the City
Council shall be paid to the Chief of Police and transmitted by him or her to
the Finance Officer. Such application fee shall not be refunded in the event
that the license is not granted.
(Ord. 284, passed 6-13-1985)
§ 3-3-3 LICENSE, FORM PRESCRIBED BY STATE.
   Any license granted pursuant to this chapter shall be in the form prescribed
by the Attorney General of the state, and shall conform to the requirements of
Cal. Penal Code§§26700 et seq., as the same may be from time to time amended.
(Ord. 284, passed 6-13-1985)
CHAPTER 4: TAXICABS
Section
Article I. Generally
3-4-1 Definitions
3-4-2 Registration and license fee
3-4-3 Identification of cabs, display of telephone number
3-4-4 Police right of entry for purpose of enforcement
3-4-5 Unsafe cabs to be ordered out of service
3-4-6 Interior of cabs to be cleaned daily
3-4-7 Liability insurance
3-4-8 Taxicab stands, nontransferable
3-4-9 Taxicab stands, parking in other than stands
3-4-10 Taxicab stands, unattended cabs
3-4-11 Most direct route to be taken
3-4-12 Soliciting fares
3-4-13 Maximum number of passengers
3-4-14 Intoxicating liquor use not permitted by drivers on duty
3-4-15 Maximum daily hours of drivers
3-4-16 Record of operation, inspection by police
Article II. Certificate Of Public Convenience And Necessity
3-4-17 Required
3-4-18 Application, information to be shown
3-4-19 Declaration of necessity by Council
3-4-20 Determination and necessity, public hearing
3-4-21 Investigation of application
3-4-22 Conformance with chapter prerequisite to issuance
3-4-23 Inspection of vehicles prior to issuance
3-4-24 Granting of certificates
3-4-25 Surrender of certificate upon discontinuance of business
3-4-26 Sale or transfer of cabs, purchase of new cabs
3-4-27 Destruction of taxicab, issuance of new certificate
3-4-28 Suspension or revocation, grounds
3-4-29 Suspension or revocation, surrender of certificate
3-4-30 Surrender of certificate upon retirement of cab
3-4-31 Number of certificate to be designated on cab
Article III. Driver’s Permit
3-4-32 Required
3-4-33 Restricted to name of owner appearing on cab
3-4-34 Application, expiration
3-4-35 Permit to be in form of card, photograph and fingerprints to be shown
3-4-36 Permit card filed with police, displayed in cab
3-4-37 Permits to be filed as part of application for license
3-4-38 Issuance to certain persons restricted
3-4-39 Residence requirement, temporary permits
3-4-40 Examination by Chief of Police
3-4-41 Grounds for suspension, revocation or refusal to renew permit
Article IV. Rates Of Fare
3-4-42 Taximeter required
3-4-43 Duty of operator to keep taximeter in good condition
3-4-44 Inspection of taximeters by Chief of Police
3-4-45 Taximeters to register charge to nearest ten cents, requirements as to
flag
3-4-46 Illegal use of flag
3-4-47 Charges based on meter
3-4-48 Location of meter in cab
3-4-49 Name of owner, address and schedule of rates to be posted
3-4-50 Rates enumerated
3-4-51 Receipt upon payment of fare
3-4-52 Inspection of meters replacing broken or faulty meters
ARTICLE I. GENERALLY
§ 3-4-1 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   DRIVER. Every person in charge of or operating any passenger carrying or
motor propelled vehicle as herein defined, either as agent, employee or
otherwise, of owner, as owner or under the direction of the OWNER, as herein
defined.
   OWNER. Every person, firm or corporation having use or control of any
passenger carrying automobile or motor propelled vehicle as defined in this
section, whether as owner, lessee or otherwise.
   STREET. Any place commonly used for the purpose of public travel.
   TAXICAB. Every automobile or motor propelled vehicle of a distinctive color,
such as is in common usage in this country for taxicabs, or operated at rates
per mile, for waiting time or for both, and equipped with a taximeter used for
the transportation of passengers for hire over the public streets of the city
and not over a defined route, and irrespective of whether the operations extend
beyond the boundary limits of the city, and such vehicle is routed under the
direction of the passengers or of any persons hiring the same.
   TAXIMETER. Any mechanical instrument, appliance, device or machine by which
the charge for hire of a passenger carrying vehicle is mechanically calculated
and printed, either for distance traveled or time consumed, or both, and upon
such instrument, appliance, device or machine such charge is indicated by
figures and such figures imprinted upon a receipt which may be handed or
delivered to the patron of such passenger carrying vehicle.
(Ord. 284, passed 6-13-1985)
§ 3-4-2 REGISTRATION AND LICENSE FEE.
   Every person who, under this chapter, has been issued a certificate of
public convenience and necessity shall pay the following registration and
license fees to the city: a $120 registration fee for the first car and a $6
registration fee for each additional car, and a license fee of $6 per car per
quarter.
(Ord. 284, passed 6-13-1985)
§ 3-4-3 IDENTIFICATION OF CABS, DISPLAY OF TELEPHONE NUMBER.
   All taxicabs or other vehicles employed in the city for the purpose of
transporting passengers for hire, except vehicles operating from a fixed
terminal over regular routes, shall be equipped with and carry a sign in the
rear and on the front part of the vehicle bearing the word “TAXI”, the letters
of which may be either block or gothic type not less than five inches in height
and the stems of such letter shall not be less than three-fourths of an inch in
height, together with the telephone number of the concern, company, corporation
or association owning the taxicab, which telephone number shall be in the
numerals either block or gothic type not less than two inches in height, with
stems or lines one-fourth of an inch in height. In the event such taxicab is an
extra or spare cab not in regular use and being substituted for one of the
taxicabs regularly licensed by this chapter, such taxicab must be identified in
addition to the foregoing signs by a card, placard or sign affixed to the rear
and to the front of the taxicab in like letters of either block at least five
inches high containing the word “EXTRA” or “SPARE”.
(Ord. 284, passed 6-13-1985)
§ 3-4-4 POLICE RIGHT OF ENTRY FOR PURPOSE OF ENFORCEMENT.
   The Chief of Police, or any member of the Police Department under his or her
direction, shall have the right at any time after displaying proper
identification to enter into or upon any certified taxicab for the purpose of
ascertaining whether or not any of the provisions of this chapter are being
violated.
(Ord. 284, passed 6-13-1985)
§ 3-4-5 UNSAFE CABS TO BE ORDERED OUT OF SERVICE.
   Any taxicab which is found after any inspection by any member of the Police
Department to be unsafe or in any way unsuitable for taxicab service shall be
immediately ordered out of service. Before such taxicab shall again be placed
in service, it shall be placed in a safe condition.
(Ord. 284, passed 6-13-1985)
§ 3-4-6 INTERIOR OF CABS TO BE CLEANED DAILY.
   The interior of every taxicab shall be thoroughly cleaned at least once in
every 24 hours.
(Ord. 284, passed 6-13-1985)
§ 3-4-7 LIABILITY INSURANCE.
   It shall be unlawful to operate any vehicle in this city as a taxicab unless
and until the following conditions have been fulfilled:
   (A)   There shall have been issued by a company or companies duly authorized
to transact insurance business in the state, and maintained in full force and
effect, a policy of automobile liability insurance covering taxicab operations
and insuring the financial responsibility of the owner and the operator of such
taxicab for claims, damages or causes of action arising out of the operation of
such taxicab in amounts not less than $100,000 for bodily injury or death of
any one person, and $300,000 for bodily injuries or deaths arising out of any
one occurrence, and $25,000 for property damage; and
   (B)   There shall be filed with the City Clerk a certificate issued by such
insurance company as evidence that such insurance has been issued and is in
effect, which certificate shall provide that the insurance evidenced shall not
be canceled for any cause without 30 days’ notice in writing to the City Clerk.
Upon request of the City Clerk, the original policy of such insurance shall be
made available for examination and review to determine compliance with the
above conditions.
(Ord. 284, passed 6-13-1985)
§ 3-4-8 TAXICAB STANDS, NONTRANSFERABLE.
   The City Council may locate and designate taxicab stands. Such stands when
so established shall be designated “Taxis Only”, or some other appropriate
designation. Such stands and the permits heretofore issued and hereinafter
issued to any person, individual, company or association are nontransferable.
One stand only shall be issued to each taxicab company operating within the
city.
(Ord. 284, passed 6-13-1985)
§ 3-4-9 TAXICAB STANDS, PARKING IN OTHER THAN STANDS.
   It is unlawful for the owner, driver or operator of any taxicab to park or
leave standing, or permit to leave standing his or her taxicab except in a
regularly established taxicab stand on such streets of the city as are provided
with parking spaces, or to stop or leave his or her taxicab along the curb or
portion of street for the parking of vehicles on such streets as have been
designated as the parking space for the parking of vehicles, for taking on or
discharging passengers, except in the regularly established taxicab stand;
provided, that between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 8:00 a.m. of the following
day, such taxicab may stop, stand or park in any place where the parking of
vehicles is otherwise permitted; provided however, that the right to park
during the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 8:00 a.m. of the following day shall not
relieve the person so parking the taxicab or causing the taxicab to be parked,
from liability under any other provision of this code or any ordinance of the
city now existing or which hereafter may be passed, referring to the parking of
vehicles between such hours.
(Ord. 284, passed 6-13-1985)
§ 3-4-10 TAXICAB STANDS, UNATTENDED CABS.
   It is unlawful for any taxicab to remain standing in any established taxicab
stand unless the taxicab is attended by a driver or operator, except when
assisting passengers to load or unload, or when answering his or her telephone.
(Ord. 284, passed 6-13-1985)
§ 3-4-11 MOST DIRECT ROUTE TO BE TAKEN.
   Any taxicab driver employed to transport passengers to a definite point
shall take the most direct route possible that will carry the passenger to his
or her destination safely and expeditiously.
(Ord. 284, passed 6-13-1985)
§ 3-4-12 SOLICITING FARES.
   Unoccupied taxicabs shall not be operated over public streets in search of,
or soliciting prospective passengers for hire.
(Ord. 284, passed 6-13-1985)
§ 3-4-13 MAXIMUM NUMBER OF PASSENGERS.
   No driver of any taxicab shall accept, take into his or her vehicle or
transport any larger number of passengers than the rated seating capacity of
his or her vehicle.
(Ord. 284, passed 6-13-1985)
§ 3-4-14 INTOXICATING LIQUOR USE NOT PERMITTED BY DRIVERS ON DUTY.
   No driver of any motor vehicle described in this chapter shall drink or use
any intoxicating liquor while he or she is on duty.
(Ord. 284, passed 6-13-1985)
§ 3-4-15 MAXIMUM DAILY HOURS OF DRIVERS.
   No driver shall work as a driver for more than a maximum of ten hours in any
24-hour period.
(Ord. 284, passed 6-13-1985)
§ 3-4-16 RECORD OF OPERATION, INSPECTION BY POLICE.
   Every person licensed to operate taxicabs under this chapter shall keep a
daily record of the operation of each taxicab in service. Such record shall be
open for inspection at all times by the Chief of Police or any person
designated by him or her or the City Council. The record shall contain the
following facts: month, day and year, location, and time of pick up,
destination and time reached and number of passengers carried. It shall be the
duty of the driver to record the foregoing facts upon the completion of each
trip or hiring.
(Ord. 284, passed 6-13-1985)
ARTICLE II. CERTIFICATE OF PUBLIC CONVENIENCE AND NECESSITY
§ 3-4-17 REQUIRED.
   No person shall engage in the business of operating any taxicab within the
city without first having obtained a certificate of public convenience and
necessity from the City Council.
(Ord. 284, passed 6-13-1985)
§ 3-4-18 APPLICATION, INFORMATION TO BE SHOWN.
   All persons applying to the City Council for a certificate of public
convenience and necessity for the operation of one or more taxicabs shall file
with the City Council a sworn application therefor on forms provided by the
City Council stating as follows:
   (A)   The name and address of the owner or person applying;
   (B)   The number of vehicles actually owned and the number of vehicles
actually operated by such owner on the date of application, if any;
   (C)   The number of vehicles for which a certificate of public convenience
and necessity is desired;
   (D)   The make, type, year of manufacture and passenger seating capacity of
each taxicab for which application for a certificate of public convenience and
necessity is made;
   (E)   The make and type of taximeter intended to be installed on each
taxicab for which application of a certificate is made;
   (F)   A description of the proposed color scheme, insignia, trade style and
any other distinguishing characteristics of the proposed taxicab design;
   (G)   Such other information as the City Council may require.
(Ord. 284, passed 6-13-1985)
§ 3-4-19 DECLARATION OF NECESSITY BY COUNCIL.
   No certificate of public convenience and necessity shall be granted until
the City Council shall, after hearing, declare by resolution that the public
convenience and necessity require the proposed taxicab service.
(Ord. 284, passed 6-13-1985)
§ 3-4-20 DETERMINATION AND NECESSITY, PUBLIC HEARING.
   In determining whether the public convenience and necessity require the
operation of a taxicab for which application is made, the City Council shall
hold a public hearing as may be necessary in its discretion to determine that
fact.
(Ord. 284, passed 6-13-1985)
§ 3-4-21 INVESTIGATION OF APPLICATION.
   Before any application under this article is acted upon, the Chief of Police
shall cause an investigation to be made and shall report his or her findings,
in writing, to the City Council on the following:
   (A)   The demand of the public for additional taxicab service;
   (B)   The adequacy of existing mass transportation and taxicab service;
   (C)   The financial responsibility and experience of the applicant;
   (D)   The number, kind and type of equipment and the color scheme to be
used;
   (E)   The effect which such additional taxicab service may have upon traffic
congestion and parking;
   (F)   Whether the additional taxicab service will result in a greater hazard
to the public; and
   (G)   Such other relevant facts as the City Council may deem advisable or
necessary.
(Ord. 284, passed 6-13-1985)
§ 3-4-22 CONFORMANCE WITH CHAPTER PREREQUISITE TO ISSUANCE.
   No taxicab shall be granted a certificate of public convenience and
necessity unless it conforms with all the provisions of this chapter, unless
the vehicle has been granted a license to operate as a taxicab in the city
prior to the effective date of this chapter.
(Ord. 284, passed 6-13-1985)
§ 3-4-23 INSPECTION OF VEHICLES PRIOR TO ISSUANCE.
   Before a certificate is issued to any owner, the taxicab, for which a
certificate of convenience and necessity is requested, shall be delivered to a
place designated by City Council for inspection. The City Council shall
designate agents to inspect such taxicab, equipment and taximeters, to
ascertain whether such taxicab complies with the provisions of this chapter.
(Ord. 284, passed 6-13-1985)
§ 3-4-24 GRANTING OF CERTIFICATES.
   Having declared that the public convenience and necessity require the
additional taxicab service, the City Council shall grant certificates of public
convenience and necessity to those persons applying therefor who in its opinion
are entitled thereto. The City Council shall in its discretion determine the
number of permits to be granted to any applicant. No certificate shall be
issued to any person who shall not have fully complied with all of the
requirements of this chapter necessary to be complied with before the
commencement of the operation of the proposed service.
(Ord. 284, passed 6-13-1985)
§ 3-4-25 SURRENDER OF CERTIFICATE UPON DISCONTINUANCE OF BUSINESS.
   After the service for which a certificate is granted is discontinued, or if
the person sells or discontinues his or her business for a period of 45 days,
the certificates granted under this article shall be automatically canceled and
shall be reissued only in accordance with the provisions of this chapter.
(Ord. 284, passed 6-13-1985)
§ 3-4-26 SALE OR TRANSFER OF CABS, PURCHASE OF NEW CABS.
   Whenever an owner sells or transfers the title to a taxicab for which a
certificate of public convenience and necessity has been granted and within 30
days after such sale or transfer purchases other taxicabs, the City Council
shall, as a matter of right, upon written request of the applicant within 30
days of such purchase, issue a new certificate for the operation of no greater
number of taxicabs than those sold or transferred; provided, that the owner has
complied with all the provisions of this chapter.
(Ord. 284, passed 6-13-1985)
§ 3-4-27 DESTRUCTION OF TAXICAB, ISSUANCE OF NEW CERTIFICATE.
   Any owner whose taxicab, for which a certificate of public convenience and
necessity has been granted, has been destroyed in any manner, will, as a matter
of right, upon written application to the City Council within 30 days after
such destruction, be issued a new certificate for the operation of no greater
number of taxicabs than those so destroyed; provided, that the owner has
complied with all the provisions of this chapter.
(Ord. 284, passed 6-13-1985)
§ 3-4-28 SUSPENSION OR REVOCATION, GROUNDS.
   Certificates may be suspended or revoked by the City Council at any time in
case:
   (A)   The City Council finds the owner’s past record to be unsatisfactory;
   (B)   The owner fails to operate the taxicab in accordance with the
provisions of this chapter;
   (C)   The owner shall cease to operate any taxicab for a period of 45
consecutive days without having first obtained permission for cessation of such
operation from the City Council; and
   (D)   The taxicab is operated at a rate of fare other than that approved by
the City Council.
(Ord. 284, passed 6-13-1985)
§ 3-4-29 SUSPENSION OR REVOCATION, SURRENDER OF CERTIFICATE.
   Certificates which have been suspended or revoked by the City Council shall
immediately be surrendered to the City Clerk and the operation of any taxicab
covered by such certificates shall cease and be unlawful.
(Ord. 284, passed 6-13-1985)
§ 3-4-30 SURRENDER OF CERTIFICATE UPON RETIREMENT OF CAB.
   Any owner who permanently retires any taxicab from service and does not
replace the same within 45 days thereof, shall immediately surrender any
certificate granted for certificates for the operation of any taxicab without
having first made application therefor in the manner provided in this chapter.
(Ord. 284, passed 6-13-1985)
§ 3-4-31 NUMBER OF CERTIFICATE TO BE DESIGNATED ON CAB.
   Each taxicab shall bear, at such places on the outside of the vehicle as
shall be prescribed by the City Council, the number of the certificate of
public convenience and necessity granted for its operation. Such designation
shall be of the type and design as shall be prescribed by the City Council.
(Ord. 284, passed 6-13-1985)
ARTICLE III. DRIVER’S PERMIT
§ 3-4-32 REQUIRED.
   It is unlawful for any person to drive or operate any of the vehicles
mentioned in §
3-4-1 of this chapter without first obtaining a permit in writing to do so from
the Chief of Police.
(Ord. 284, passed 6-13-1985)
§ 3-4-33 RESTRICTED TO NAME OF OWNER APPEARING ON CAB.
   Permits issued will entitle the driver to work for only that owner whose
name appears on the permit. A new permit will be required for each subsequent
employment.
(Ord. 284, passed 6-13-1985)
§ 3-4-34 APPLICATION, EXPIRATION.
   Applicants for taxicab driver’s permits shall file applications therefor
with the Chief of Police upon blanks to be furnished by the city. Each
applicant shall pay to the Chief of Police an application fee of $7. Each
permit shall expire one year from date of issuance and may be renewed on
application. Renewal fee shall be $1.
(Ord. 284, passed 6-13-1985)
§ 3-4-35 PERMIT TO BE IN FORM OF CARD, PHOTOGRAPH AND FINGERPRINTS TO BE SHOWN.
   The taxicab driver’s permit shall be in the form of a card which shall bear
signatures, photograph and fingerprints of the applicant. Such cards shall be
issued in duplicate.
(Ord. 284, passed 6-13-1985)
§ 3-4-36 PERMIT CARD FILED WITH POLICE, DISPLAYED IN CAB.
   One copy of the permit card referred to in the preceding section, with the
fingerprints, photograph and signature of the applicant, shall be placed on
file with the Police Department of the city. The other card shall be
conspicuously displayed in the taxicab of the permittee during all times such
taxicab is operated.
(Ord. 284, passed 6-13-1985)
§ 3-4-37 PERMITS TO BE FILED AS PART OF APPLICATION FOR LICENSE.
   Taxicab driver’s permits shall be filed with the Chief of Police as part of
the application for a license.
(Ord. 284, passed 6-13-1985)
§ 3-4-38 ISSUANCE TO CERTAIN PERSONS RESTRICTED.
   No taxicab driver’s permit shall be issued to any of the following persons:
   (A)   Any person under the age of 18 years;
   (B)   Any person not a citizen of the United States or who has not lawfully
declared his or her intention to become such;
   (C)   Any person who has been convicted of a felony or a crime involving
moral turpitude;
   (D)   Any person who has been convicted within five years previous to
issuance of a permit of driving recklessly or while under the influence of
intoxicating liquor or narcotics; and
   (E)   Any person not possessing a valid Class 1, Class 2, or Class 3
California driver’s license.
(Ord. 284, passed 6-13-1985)
§ 3-4-39 RESIDENCE REQUIREMENT, TEMPORARY PERMITS.
   No applicant may obtain a taxicab driver’s permit to drive or operate any of
the vehicles mentioned in §
3-4-1 of this chapter, unless and until he or she has been a continuous
resident of the city for at least 30 days immediately preceding the date of
such application; provided, however, that a temporary permit only may be
granted for a period not to exceed 60 days after which the license may be made
permanent, if, after investigation, the applicant is found to be a fit and
proper person.
(Ord. 284, passed 6-13-1985)
§ 3-4-40 EXAMINATION BY CHIEF OF POLICE.
   Each applicant for a taxicab driver’s permit shall be examined by a person
designated by the Chief of Police as to his or her knowledge of the provisions
of this chapter, the traffic regulations and the geography of the city. If the
result of the examination is unsatisfactory, the Chief of Police shall refuse
to issue a permit.
(Ord. 284, passed 6-13-1985)
§ 3-4-41 GROUNDS FOR SUSPENSION, REVOCATION OR REFUSAL TO RENEW PERMIT.
   A taxi driver’s permit may be suspended for any violation of laws relating
to the operation of a motor vehicle, including, but not limited to, reckless
driving, driving under the influence of alcohol or controlled substances, or
other violations indicating that a driver is not competent to operate a vehicle
for hire in a consistently safe manner.
(Ord. 284, passed 6-13-1985)
ARTICLE IV. RATES OF FARE
§ 3-4-42 TAXIMETER REQUIRED.
   It is unlawful for any owner or driver to operate any taxicab in the city
unless such vehicle is equipped with a taximeter of such type, style and design
as may be approved by the City Council.
(Ord. 284, passed 6-13-1985)
§ 3-4-43 DUTY OF OPERATOR TO KEEP TAXIMETER IN GOOD CONDITION.
   It shall be the duty of every owner operating a taxicab to keep the
taximeter in perfect condition so that it will at all times correctly and
accurately indicate the correct charge for distance traveled and waiting time.
(Ord. 284, passed 6-13-1985)
§ 3-4-44 INSPECTION OF TAXIMETERS BY CHIEF OF POLICE.
   Every taximeter shall be at all times subject to inspection by the Chief of
Police of the city. The Chief of Police is authorized at his or her instance,
or upon complaint by any person to investigate, or cause to be investigated,
any taximeter. Upon the discovery of any inaccuracy in the meter, the Chief of
Police shall remove, or cause to be removed, such vehicle equipped with such
taximeter from the streets of the city until such time as the taximeter has
been correctly adjusted.
(Ord. 284, passed 6-13-1985)
§ 3-4-45 TAXIMETERS TO REGISTER CHARGE TO NEAREST TEN CENTS, REQUIREMENTS AS TO
FLAG.
   Every taximeter shall register the charge to the nearest $0.10 and be
equipped with a flag or other mechanical device with the words “For Hire”
printed or stamped thereon. Such flag shall be so attached and connected to the
mechanism of the taximeter as to cause the mechanism to operate when the flag
is in a position other than upright and indicate that the taxicab is not for
hire. The flag shall, when moved forward or downward, start the operation of
the taximeter so that the same will operate in the manner defined in this
chapter.
(Ord. 284, passed 6-13-1985)
§ 3-4-46 ILLEGAL USE OF FLAG.
   It is unlawful for any driver of a taxicab while carrying passengers to
display the flag or device attached to a taximeter in such a position as to
denote that such vehicle is not for hire or is not employed, or to have such
flag or other attached device in such a position as to prevent the taximeter
from operating. It is unlawful for any driver to throw such flag or other
device of a taximeter into a position which causes the taximeter to record when
such vehicle is not actually employed, or fail to throw the flag or other
device of such taximeter into a nonrecording position at the termination of
each and every service.
(Ord. 284, passed 6-13-1985)
§ 3-4-47 CHARGES BASED ON METER.
   All charges for transportation of passengers in taxicabs operated in the
city must be based on the charges indicated on the taximeter. It is unlawful
for any owner, driver or operator of any taxicab to charge any passenger any
sum in excess of the sum indicated on the taximeter and on the receipt printed
thereby. It is unlawful to make any charge without delivering the receipt to
the passenger.
(Ord. 284, passed 6-13-1985)
§ 3-4-48 LOCATION OF METER IN CAB.
   The taximeter shall be so placed in a taxicab that the reading dial showing
the amount to be charged is well lighted and readily discernible by the
passenger riding in the taxicab.
(Ord. 284, passed 6-13-1985)
§ 3-4-49 NAME OF OWNER, ADDRESS AND SCHEDULE OF RATES TO BE POSTED.
   There shall be displayed in the passenger compartment of each taxicab in
full view of the passenger, a card not less than two inches by four inches in
size, which shall have plainly printed thereon the name of the owner or the
fictitious name under which the owner operates, the business address and
telephone number of the owner and a correct schedule of the rates to be charged
for conveyance in the vehicle.
(Ord. 284, passed 6-13-1985)
§ 3-4-50 RATES ENUMERATED.
   It is unlawful for the owner or driver of any taxicab as defined in §
3-4-1 of this chapter to fix, charge or collect a rate which is less than the
maximum as set forth in this section. Rates are fixed as follows:
   (A)   One dollar forty cents, plus $0.20 for the first one-sixteenth mile
and $0.20 for each additional one-ninth mile;
   (B)   Between the hours of 12:01 a.m. and 6:00 a.m., the fare charged,
computed as above, shall not be less than $2.00;
   (C)   No charge for extra passengers. This applies only to those passengers
whose point of pick up and point of destination are the same;
   (D)   When hauling passengers whose points of destination are different, the
meter shall be turned back to the “For Hire” position each time a passenger is
discharged and a fare collected;
   (E)   For waiting time at request of passenger, calculated on the basis of a
rate of $18 per hour; and
   (F)   For each piece of luggage in excess of 50 pounds, average size
traveling bag or the equivalent, $0.10 each.
(Ord. 284, passed 6-13-1985)
§ 3-4-51 RECEIPT UPON PAYMENT OF FARE.
   Each taxicab driver shall, if requested, give a correct receipt upon payment
of the correct fare.
(Ord. 284, passed 6-13-1985)
§ 3-4-52 INSPECTION OF METERS REPLACING BROKEN OR FAULTY METERS.
   Taximeters placed upon taxicabs, to replace broken or faulty meters shall,
under no condition, be operated more than 24 hours prior to being inspected,
tested, approved and sealed by an authorized representative of the City
Council.
(Ord. 284, passed 6-13-1985)
CHAPTER 5: BINGO
Section
3-5-1 Purpose
3-5-2 Definition
3-5-3 License required
3-5-4 Licenses
3-5-4-1 Content of application
3-5-4-2 Fees; investigations
3-5-4-3 Issuance or denial; license nontransferable
3-5-4-4 Summary suspension; hearing
3-5-4-5 License revocation, without summary suspension
3-5-4-6 Appeal of revocation to City Council
3-5-5 Keeping of records; right to inspect
3-5-6 Conduct of bingo games
3-5-7 City may enjoin
§ 3-5-1 PURPOSE.
   The purpose of this chapter is to authorize the licensing of bingo games
conducted by and for the benefit of nonprofit, charitable organizations in the
incorporated areas of the city pursuant to Section 19 of Article IV of the
State Constitution and Cal. Penal Code § 326.5.
(Ord. 284, passed 6-13-1985)
§ 3-5-2 DEFINITION.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definition shall apply unless
the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   BINGO or BINGO GAME. A game of chance in which prizes are awarded on the
basis of designated numbers or symbols on a card which conform to numbers or
symbols selected at random.
(Ord. 284, passed 6-13-1985)
§ 3-5-3 LICENSE REQUIRED.
   (A)   No bingo game shall be allowed, played or conducted without a license
first being obtained from the city.
   (B)   Licenses shall be effective only for a city fiscal year or part
thereon in which issued.
(Ord. 284, passed 6-13-1985)
§ 3-5-4 LICENSES.
§ 3-5-4-1 CONTENT OF APPLICATION.
   An application for a bingo license shall be filed in the office of the City
Manager. The application for such license shall be signed and verified by the
applicant and shall set forth the following information:
   (A)   The name and address of the organization to which the license will be
issued;
   (B)   The name, address and telephone number of the duly organized
representative of the applying organization, who shall be in charge of
operating the bingo games;
   (C)   The name, address and telephone number of the president or chief
officer of the organization which intends to conduct any bingo game;
   (D)   The person who has custody of the financial records of bingo games
which are required by the provisions of this chapter and the location of said
records;
   (E)   The location where the bingo game is intended to be held;
   (F)   The proposed days of the week and hours of the day for conduct of
bingo games;
   (G)   A schedule of fees or charges to be collected from players for each
bingo game, or different varieties of bingo games to be conducted;
   (H)   A statement that the place where the bingo games are to be conducted
is on property owned or leased by the organization conducting said games, and
which property is used by such organization for an office or for performance of
the purposes for which the organization is organized;
   (I)   Each application for a bingo license shall be accompanied by a written
resolution of the governing board or body of the organization which is to
conduct such games, said resolution being signed by the president or presiding
officer of said organization and its secretary, authorizing the application for
a bingo license;
   (J)   Each application for a bingo license shall be accompanied by a
certificate issued by the Franchise Tax Board of the State of California or by
the Internal Revenue Service certifying the tax exempt status of the
organization applying for said license;
   (K)   A statement that the applicant agrees to conduct bingo games in strict
accordance with the provisions of Cal. Penal Code § 326.5 and this chapter, as
they may be amended from time to time, and agrees that the license to conduct
bingo may be revoked by the City Manager upon violation of any such provisions;
and
   (L)   Said application shall be signed by the applicant under penalty of
perjury.
(Ord. 284, passed 6-13-1985)
§ 3-5-4-2 FEES; INVESTIGATIONS.
   (A)   All applications for a bingo license shall be accompanied by an
application fee of $25, one-half of which (the sum of $12.50) is refundable if
an application is denied.
   (B)   The City Manager shall verify the tax exempt status of the applying
organization and shall verify that the place where the bingo games are to be
conducted is on property owned or leased by the organization conducting said
games, and which property is used by such organization for an office or for
performance of the purposes for which the organization is organized.
   (C)   The City Manager shall forward the application to the Chief of Police,
who shall find and determine that:
      1.   The conduct of such bingo games at the times and at the place
indicated will not disturb the peace of the neighborhood and will not create
substantial traffic or parking problems; and
      2.   Neither the applying organization, nor any person listed in the
application, has violated any laws and regulations of the city regarding
building, fire, health or safety regulations of the city, and that the
applicant has not knowingly and with intent to deceive, made any false,
misleading or fraudulent statement of facts in his or her application or other
documents required by the city to be submitted in conjunction with the
application.
(Ord. 284, passed 6-13-1985)
§ 3-5-4-3 ISSUANCE OR DENIAL; LICENSE NONTRANSFERABLE.
   (A)   Licenses shall be granted only to organizations exempted from the
payment of bank and corporation tax by Cal. Revenue and Taxation Code §§
23701a, 23701b, 23701d, 23701e, 23701f and 23701g and to mobilehome park
associations and senior citizens organizations; provided, that the proceeds of
such license activity are used only for charitable purposes.
   (B)   The City Manager shall not issue a license to any applicant if he or
she or the Chief of Police cannot certify as to all findings required by this
chapter to be made, or if it appears from the application that the conduct of
such games would be in violation of any of the terms, conditions and
requirements of this chapter.
   (C)   No license shall be transferable.
(Ord. 284, passed 6-13-1985)
§ 3-5-4-4 SUMMARY SUSPENSION; HEARING.
   (A)   Whenever it appears to the City Manager that the licensee is
conducting a bingo game in violation of any of the provisions of this chapter,
the City Manager shall have the authority to summarily suspend the license and
order the licensee to immediately cease and desist any further operation of any
bingo game.
   (B)   Any person who continues to conduct a bingo game after summary
suspension thereof under subsection (A) of this section shall be deemed guilty
of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof, shall be punishable as provided
in §
1-4-1 of this code.
   (C)   The order issued under subsection (A) of this section shall also
notify the licensee that it shall have five days from the date of such order to
request a hearing to determine whether such license shall be revoked. Failure
to request, in writing, such hearing before the City Manager within said five-
day period shall result in a revocation of the license.
   (D)   Upon such request by the licensee, whose license has been suspended
under subsection (A) of this section, for a hearing to determine whether such
license shall be revoked, the City Manager shall provide such hearing within
ten days after receipt of such request, at which hearing the suspended licensee
may appear before the City Manager for the purpose of presenting evidence why
the license should not be revoked. No license shall be revoked under this
section unless notice of the time and place of such hearing shall have first
been given at least five days before the hearing thereof by depositing in the
United States mail a notice directed to said suspended licensee at the address
given in the application. The notice shall set forth a summary of the ground
advanced as the basis of the suspension and revocation.
   (E)   Any organization whose license is revoked under this section shall not
conduct any bingo game in the city until such time as the City Council, on the
appeal, determines to overrule the decision of the City Manager.
(Ord. 284, passed 6-13-1985)
§ 3-5-4-5 LICENSE REVOCATION, WITHOUT SUMMARY SUSPENSION.
   (A)   Whenever it appears to the City Manager that the licensee is
conducting bingo games in violation of any of the provisions of this chapter,
or that the license was obtained by fraudulent representation and no summary
suspension so ordered, under §
3-5-4-4 of this chapter, the license may be revoked; provided, however, the
licensee may appear before the City Manager at the time fixed by the City
Manager for the purpose of presenting evidence why the license should not be
revoked. No license shall be revoked under this section unless written notice
shall have first been given at least five days before the hearing thereof, by
depositing in the United States mail a notice directed to said licensee at the
address given in the application. The notice shall set forth a summary of the
ground advanced as the basis of the revocation.
   (B)   Any organization whose license is revoked under this section shall not
conduct any bingo game in the city until such time as the City Council, on the
appeal, determines to overrule the decision of the City Manager.
(Ord. 284, passed 6-13-1985)
§ 3-5-4-6 APPEAL OF REVOCATION TO CITY COUNCIL.
   (A)   Any holder of a license whose license is revoked under this chapter
shall have the right, within ten days after receiving notice in writing of the
revocation, to file a written appeal to the City Council. Such appeal shall set
forth the specific ground or grounds on which it is based. The City Council
shall hold a hearing on the appeal within 30 days after its receipt by the
city, or at a time thereafter agreed upon and shall cause the appellant to be
given at least ten days’ written notice of such hearing. At the hearing the
appellant or its authorized representative shall have the right to present
evidence and a written or oral argument, or both, in support of his or her
appeal. The determination of the City Council on the appeal shall be final.
   (B)   Any organization whose license is finally revoked may not again apply
for a period of one year from the date of such revocation; provided, however,
if the grounds for revocation is cancellation of the exemption granted under
Cal. Revenue and Taxation Code §§ 23701a, 23701b, 23701d, 23701e and 23701f,
such organization may again apply for a license upon proof of reinstatement of
said exemption.
(Ord. 284, passed 6-13-1985)
§ 3-5-5 KEEPING OF RECORDS; RIGHT TO INSPECT.
   Licensees shall keep and maintain full records and accountings and shall
detail the amount of money obtained from players, the amount of money or value
of prizes given for each game played, and the disposition of any funds
generated by the conduct of bingo games. All profit derived from a bingo game
shall be kept in a special fund or account and shall not be commingled with any
other fund or account. The city shall have the right to inspect such records at
any reasonable time. The City Manager may request said records when the
licensee applies to renew its annual license.
(Ord. 284, passed 6-13-1985)
§ 3-5-6 CONDUCT OF BINGO GAMES.
   All bingo games held within the city are subject to the following.
   (A)   It is a misdemeanor, punishable by a fine not to exceed $10,000, as
authorized by Cal. Penal Code § 326.5(c), for any person to receive a profit,
wage or salary from any bingo game.
   (B)   No minors shall be allowed to participate in any bingo games.
   (C)   No person who is obviously intoxicated shall be allowed to participate
in a bingo game.
   (D)   1.   A license shall be issued to conduct bingo games only on property
owned or leased by it, and which property is used by such organization for an
office or for performance of the purposes for which the organization is
organized; however, a licensee organization which regularly meets in a building
owned or controlled by a public entity, or an organization which has no
adequate regular meeting place and conducts a bingo game on the property of a
tax exempt organization, is exempted from this requirement.
      2.   No bingo game shall be conducted before 8:00 a.m. nor after 12:00
a.m. (midnight) of any day.
      3.   Nothing in this section shall be construed to require that the
property owned or leased by the organization be used or leased exclusively by
such licensee.
   (E)   All bingo games shall be open to the public, not just the members of
the nonprofit, charitable organization.
   (F)   A bingo game shall be operated and staffed only by the members of the
licensee organization. Such members shall not receive a profit, wage or salary
from any bingo game. Only the licensee organization shall operate such game, or
participate in the promotion, supervision or any other phase of such game.
   (G)   No individual corporation, partnership or other legal entity except
the licensee organization shall hold a financial interest in the conduct of any
bingo game.
   (H)   All profits derived from any bingo game shall be kept in a special
fund or account and shall not be commingled with any other fund or account.
   (I)   No person shall be allowed to participate in a bingo game, unless the
person is physically present at the time and place in which the bingo game is
being conducted.
   (J)   The total value of prizes awarded during the conduct of any bingo game
shall not exceed $250 in cash or kind, or both, for each separate game which is
held.
(Ord. 284, passed 6-13-1985)
§ 3-5-7 CITY MAY ENJOIN.
   The city may bring an action in a court of competent jurisdiction to enjoin
a violation of Cal. Penal Code § 326.5 or this chapter.
(Ord. 284, passed 6-13-1985)
CHAPTER 6: AUCTIONS
Section
3-6-1 Definitions
3-6-2 Permit, required
3-6-3 Permit, application, information to be shown
3-6-4 Permit, deposit and license fees
3-6-5 Permit, investigation of application, cost
3-6-6 Permit, approval of application, issuance
3-6-7 Permit, contents
3-6-8 Representative of City Manager at sales
3-6-9 Articles tagged with description and inventory number
3-6-10 Goods or items sold to have been on premises for 90 days
3-6-11 Stock on consignment not to be sold
3-6-12 Display of permit and duplicate stock list
3-6-13 Books and records to be kept by permittee
3-6-14 Stock list to be revised at end of each day
3-6-15 Exemptions, waivers
3-6-16 Days and hours of sale
§ 3-6-1 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   PERMIT. A permit issued pursuant to this chapter.
   PERMITTEE. Any person to whom a permit has been issued pursuant to this
chapter.
   PUBLISH, PUBLISHING, ADVERTISE, ADVERTISEMENT and ADVERTISING. Any and all
means of conveying to the public notice of sale or notice of intention to
conduct a sale, either by word of mouth, by newspaper advertising, by radio
advertising, by magazine advertising, by handbills, by written notice, by
printed notice and any and all means including oral, written or printed.
   SALE. The sale, or an offer to sell, by public auction or otherwise, to the
public, goods, wares and merchandise of any and all kinds and descriptions.
Such SALE shall include a sale in connection with a declared purpose as set
forth by advertising on the part of the seller that such sale is anticipatory
to the determination, closing liquidation, wind up discontinuance, conclusion
or abandonment of the business in connection with such sale, including, but not
limited to, sales advertised to be “retirement sale”, “forced out of business
sale”, “removal sale”, “loss of lease sale”, “bankrupt sale”, “fire sale”,
“sale of bankrupt stock”, “liquidation sale” and any and all sales advertised
in such manner as to reasonably convey to the public that, upon the disposal of
the stock of goods on hand, the business will cease and be discontinued.
Without limiting the generality of the term “sale by public auction”, such SALE
shall include a sale in which, instead of the bidders making increasingly
higher bids for an article or articles of merchandise, the seller or auctioneer
announces a price at which he or she will sell one or more articles of
merchandise and then, if no sale occurs, increasingly adds additional articles
of merchandise to those originally offered, with or without varying the
previously announced price, until a buyer is finally induced to buy the
accumulated articles at the price fixed.
(Ord. 284, passed 6-13-1985)
§ 3-6-2 PERMIT, REQUIRED.
   No person shall publish or conduct any sale without first obtaining a permit
therefor from the City Clerk in the manner provided in this chapter.
(Ord. 284, passed 6-13-1985)
§ 3-6-3 PERMIT, APPLICATION, INFORMATION TO BE SHOWN.
   Application for a permit to conduct a sale as required by §
3-6-2 shall be made to the City Clerk at least 60 days prior to the date of the
sale, upon forms to be supplied to the applicant for that purpose. The
application shall contain a statement subscribed to under oath or affirmation
by the person, or, if the applicant is a firm or corporation, a member of the
firm or officer of the corporation, applying for a permit to conduct such sale,
which statement shall contain:
   (A)   General information. Generally, the name and address of the applicant;
a description, by street location of the place where such sale is to be held;
the length of time of its expected duration; and, the dates between which it is
proposed to be conducted;
   (B)   Name of auctioneer. The name of the auctioneer, if any, who will
conduct the sale, and whether any items of stock in trade have been added in
expectation of such sale, and if so, a description of such items and when so
added;
   (C)   Nature of occupancy. The nature of the occupancy, whether by
ownership, lease or sublease and the effective date of termination of the
occupancy;
   (D)   Advertising. The means to be employed in publishing the sale, together
with the proposed language content in any advertisement; and
   (E)   Inventory of goods. An inventory of goods, wares and merchandise, item
by item, to be sold at such sale, the wholesale value or cost to the applicant
of each item and the quality and grade thereof, whether the article is new,
used or rebuilt, the date of acquisition of such goods, wares or merchandise,
and the persons from whom obtained and the place from which such goods were
last taken. Each item must be numbered separately in the inventory and the
number in the inventory must correspond to a number physically attached to such
item.
(Ord. 284, passed 6-13-1985)
§ 3-6-4 PERMIT, DEPOSIT AND LICENSE FEES.
   Upon filing an original application for a permit to conduct a sale, the
applicant shall pay to the City Clerk a deposit fee in the sum of $50, and in
addition thereto, such other business license fee as may be at that time or
thereafter become applicable.
(Ord. 284, passed 6-13-1985)
§ 3-6-5 PERMIT, INVESTIGATION OF APPLICATION, COST.
   (A)   Upon receipt of the application and deposit, under §§ 3-6-3 and 3-6-4,
the City Clerk shall refer such application to the City Manager, who shall
cause an investigation thereof to be made. The City Manager shall cause each
item of the inventory submitted to be checked with the actual item in the
applicant’s place of business, and shall cause an investigation to be made to
ascertain the truthfulness of the sworn statement submitted by the applicant,
and to determine whether the items described in the inventory are a bona fide
part of the applicant’s stock in trade. The applicant shall be charged the sum
of $20 for each day, or fraction thereof, required to make such investigation.
Such amount shall be deducted from the deposit made by the applicant with the
City Clerk and the amount that remains in the hands of the City Clerk after
such deduction shall be repaid to the applicant.
   (B)   If the deposit fee of $50 is insufficient to pay the cost of making
the investigation, the City Manager shall notify the applicant in writing of
that fact and shall set forth the estimated additional necessary expense for
completing such investigation and the applicant shall deposit with the City
Clerk such additional amount. If such additional amount is not deposited within
five days after the receipt of such notice, the application shall lapse and any
further proceedings for a permit must be pursuant to a new application.
(Ord. 284, passed 6-13-1985)
§ 3-6-6 PERMIT, APPROVAL OF APPLICATION, ISSUANCE.
   If the City Manager determines that a permit may be issued to the applicant,
he or she shall notify the City Clerk of the days for which such permit shall
be issued and the City Clerk shall then issue the permit.
(Ord. 284, passed 6-13-1985)
§ 3-6-7 PERMIT, CONTENTS.
   Every permit issued under this chapter shall give the name of the person to
whom it is issued, the name of the auctioneer who will conduct the sale, the
dates of the sale and the place where such sale may be conducted.
(Ord. 284, passed 6-13-1985)
§ 3-6-8 REPRESENTATIVE OF CITY MANAGER AT SALES.
   The City Manager shall be represented at every sale under this chapter and
shall cause each item offered for sale or sold to be checked with the inventory
filed by the applicant with the City Clerk and shall cause to be entered on
such inventory the date of the sale of each item and the price at which the
same is sold. The person obtaining such permit shall pay daily in advance to
the City Clerk an amount equal to the actual or prorated daily compensation
paid or to be paid by the city to the person representing the City Manager at
such sale, not exceeding the sum of $20 per day.
(Ord. 284, passed 6-13-1985)
§ 3-6-9 ARTICLES TAGGED WITH DESCRIPTION AND INVENTORY NUMBER.
   It is unlawful for any person conducting a public auction or sale of the
stock in trade of a wholesale or retail merchant to sell or offer for sale at
such auction or sale any item of such stock to which there is not attached a
tag, card, ticket or label containing a number referenced in the inventory as
set forth in §
3-6-3 of this chapter. Such tag, card, ticket or label shall remain securely
attached to such article and shall be delivered to the purchaser as a true and
correct description by such reference of the article sold, and shall be prima
facie evidence of intent to defraud in case such description referred to is not
a true and correct description and representation of such article sold.
(Ord. 284, passed 6-13-1985)
§ 3-6-10 GOODS OR ITEMS SOLD TO HAVE BEEN ON PREMISES FOR 90 DAYS.
   Under no circumstances shall the inventory for sale at any public auction or
sale include any goods or items which have not been on the premises for at
least 90 days immediately preceding the filing of the application.
(Ord. 284, passed 6-13-1985)
§ 3-6-11 STOCK ON CONSIGNMENT NOT TO BE SOLD.
   No stock held on consignment shall be offered for sale at any public auction
or sale.
(Ord. 284, passed 6-13-1985)
§ 3-6-12 DISPLAY OF PERMIT AND DUPLICATE STOCK LIST.
   Upon commencement and throughout the duration of any sale, the permit issued
shall be prominently displayed near the entrance to the premises. The duplicate
original of the application and stock list pursuant to which such permit was
issued shall also be posted.
(Ord. 284, passed 6-13-1985)
§ 3-6-13 BOOKS AND RECORDS TO BE KEPT BY PERMITTEE.
   Suitable books and records shall be kept by the permittee and shall at all
times be available for inspection.
(Ord. 284, passed 6-13-1985)
§ 3-6-14 STOCK LIST TO BE REVISED AT END OF EACH DAY.
   At the close of business each day, at a sale under this chapter, the stock
list attached to the application shall be revised, and those items disposed of
during such day shall be removed or stricken thereon, and no goods added to
such list.
(Ord. 284, passed 6-13-1985)
§ 3-6-15 EXEMPTIONS, WAIVERS.
   The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to nor affect sales conducted
by sheriffs, constables or other public or court officials, or to any person
acting under the direction or authority of any court, state or federal, selling
goods, wares and merchandise in the course of his or her official duties. Upon
application therefor to the City Council, and upon good cause being shown, the
City Council may waive any or all of the provisions of this chapter as to any
sale and may impose other or different reasonable conditions for the issuance
of a permit for conduct of such sale.
(Ord. 284, passed 6-13-1985)
§ 3-6-16 DAYS AND HOURS OF SALE.
   No sale for which a permit has been issued under this chapter shall be
conducted at any time, except between the hours of 9:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m., on
any day. No sale shall be conducted on Sundays and holidays. A permit shall not
be issued to any person to conduct a sale during the period of time from
December 1 to and including December 25 of any year. It is unlawful for any
person to conduct, or cause to be conducted, any such sale during such period
of time.
(Ord. 284, passed 6-13-1985)
CHAPTER 7: SECONDHAND DEALERS
Section
3-7-1 Furniture and household goods defined
3-7-2 Exemptions to chapter applicability
3-7-3 Permit, required
3-7-4 Permit, application, information to be shown
3-7-5 Permit, revocation
3-7-6 Record to be kept, inspection by police
§ 3-7-1 FURNITURE AND HOUSEHOLD GOODS DEFINED.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definition shall apply unless
the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   FURNITURE AND HOUSEHOLD GOODS. As used in this chapter, means and includes
beds, bedding, tables, desks, chairs, stoves, floor coverings, crockery,
glassware, kitchen and cooking utensils.
(Ord. 284, passed 6-13-1985)
§ 3-7-2 EXEMPTIONS TO CHAPTER APPLICABILITY.
   The provisions contained in this chapter shall not be deemed to apply to the
purchase or sale by junk dealers of rags, bottles, barrels or cans, or castoff
clothing or shoes.
(Ord. 284, passed 6-13-1985)
§ 3-7-3 PERMIT, REQUIRED.
   It is unlawful for any person to engage in, conduct, manage or carry on the
business of pawnbroker, secondhand dealer or junk dealer without first applying
for and receiving a permit therefor in writing from the City Council.
(Ord. 284, passed 6-13-1985)
§ 3-7-4 PERMIT, APPLICATION, INFORMATION TO BE SHOWN.
   Any person desiring to obtain a permit, as required by §
3-7-3, to conduct or carry on any business mentioned therein, shall file an
application in writing therefor with the City Clerk specifying by street
number, the place where such business is proposed to be conducted or carried
on, which application shall contain the name and address of the applicant.
(Ord. 284, passed 6-13-1985)
§ 3-7-5 PERMIT, REVOCATION.
   In the event that any person holding a permit to conduct or carry on any
business mentioned in §3-7-3 of this chapter shall violate or cause or permit
to be violated, any of the provisions of this chapter, or shall conduct or
carry on such business in an unlawful manner, the permit so granted shall be
revoked by the City Council after notice given to the permittee to appear
before the Council at a time and place to be fixed by it, to show cause why
such permit should not be revoked.
(Ord. 284, passed 6-13-1985)
§ 3-7-6 RECORD TO BE KEPT, INSPECTION BY POLICE.
   Every person dealing in secondhand goods, wares, merchandise or articles of
any description, other than furniture and household goods, either as
pawnbroker, junk dealer or otherwise, shall keep a record of all such articles
sold or purchased, which articles and record shall at all times during business
hours be opened to the inspection of the Chief of Police or any other police
officer in the city. Such record shall show the hour of the day when each
article was received on deposit, pledged or purchased, and the true name and
address, as nearly as the same is known to or can be ascertained by such
person, of the person by whom such article was left on deposit, pledged or
sold, together with a description of such person, which description shall show
the style of dress, height, age, sex, complexion, color of mustache or beard,
or both, where the same are worn, and if neither is worn, such fact shall be
noted. Such report shall also show the number of the pawn ticket, amount
loaned, amount purchased and a complete description of each article left on
deposit, pledged or purchased. If any article so left on deposit, pledged or
purchased has engraved thereon any number, word, initial or contains any
settings of any kind, the description of such article in such report shall
refer to the same. Blanks for such reports shall be obtained from the Chief of
Police and shall be so printed and subdivided as to contain spaces with proper
captions for the furnishing of the information required in this section.
(Ord. 284, passed 6-13-1985)
CHAPTER 8: WRECKING ESTABLISHMENTS
Section
3-8-1 Definitions
3-8-2 Compliance with Building Code, exception
3-8-3 Requirements where business carried on within fenced or walled area
3-8-4 Maintaining establishments partly in building and partly upon lot or plot
of land
3-8-5 Compliance prerequisite to license
3-8-6 Operating a business without compliance a misdemeanor
§ 3-8-1 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   AUTOMOBILE WRECKING ESTABLISHMENT. A place where used machinery or
automobiles are dismantled and the usable parts thereof are offered for sale.
   HOUSE WRECKING ESTABLISHMENT. A place where used lumber, used building
materials and used plumbing or electrical equipment of the type recovered from
dismantled houses or buildings are collected and kept or offered for sale.
   JUNK BUSINESS. A place where pieces of old metal, paper, glass, rubber and
other old materials commonly known as junk are collected and kept or offered
for sale.
(Ord. 284, passed 6-13-1985)
§ 3-8-2 COMPLIANCE WITH BUILDING CODE, EXCEPTION.
   No automobile wrecking establishment, junk business or house wrecking
establishment shall be conducted, carried on or maintained in the city unless
the same is conducted, carried on or maintained in a building conforming to the
requirements of the building code of the city for the zone or locality in which
such building may be situated; provided, however, that any such business may be
conducted, carried on or maintained upon a lot or plot of land where such lot
or plot of land is entirely surrounded by a solid, tight fence or wall at least
six feet in height.
(Ord. 284, passed 6-13-1985)
§ 3-8-3 REQUIREMENTS WHERE BUSINESS CARRIED ON WITHIN FENCED OR WALLED AREA.
   Any fence or wall used for the purpose referred to in §
3-8-2 must be painted with a fire retardant paint and shall not have more than
one opening upon any public street, and each opening shall be not more than 12
feet in width and shall be equipped: with a substantial, solid, tight gate or
door of the same height as such fence or wall, and the same shall be kept
securely closed at all times when such business or establishment is not open
for business. No more than one sign of any kind whatever shall be painted or
placed upon such fence or wall fronting on any street. Such sign shall not
exceed 40 feet in length.
(Ord. 284, passed 6-13-1985)
§ 3-8-4 MAINTAINING ESTABLISHMENTS PARTLY IN BUILDING AND PARTLY UPON LOT OR
PLOT OF LAND.
   It is permissible to conduct, carry on or maintain any business or
establishment partly in a building such as provided for in this chapter and
partly upon a contiguous lot or plot of land; provided, that such contiguous
lot or plot of land is enclosed by a fence or wall as provided in §§
3-8-2 and
3-8-3 of this chapter.
(Ord. 284, passed 6-13-1985)
§ 3-8-5 COMPLIANCE PREREQUISITE TO LICENSE.
   No license or permit shall be granted or issued to any person to conduct,
carry on or maintain in the city any of the businesses or establishments
defined in §
3-8-1 of this chapter unless the same is conducted, carried on or maintained in
or upon buildings or premises conforming to the requirements of §§
3-8-2 through
3-8-4 of this chapter.
(Ord. 284, passed 6-13-1985)
§ 3-8-6 OPERATING A BUSINESS WITHOUT COMPLIANCE A MISDEMEANOR.
   The conducting, maintaining or carrying on in the city of any automobile
wrecking establishment, junk business or house wrecking establishment without
securing a license or permit therefor from the city, or in or upon a building
or premises other than as required by this chapter is declared to be a
misdemeanor and punishable as such.
(Ord. 284, passed 6-13-1985)
CHAPTER 9: POOLROOMS AND BILLIARD ROOMS
Section
3-9-1 Definitions
3-9-2 Copy of chapter to be posted in billiard rooms
3-9-3 Hours of operation
3-9-4 Restrictions on attendance of minors
3-9-5 Family billiard rooms
3-9-6 Gambling prohibited
3-9-7 Manner of construction
3-9-8 Permit, required
3-9-9 Permit, posting and display
3-9-10 Permit, application, fee
3-9-11 Permit, issuance and denial
3-9-12 Permit, renewal
3-9-13 Permit, suspension and revocation
3-9-14 Permit, revocation, hearing
3-9-15 Permit, revocation, notice
3-9-16 Permit, transferability
§ 3-9-1 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   BILLIARD ROOM and POOLROOM. These terms are synonymous and mean any public
place wherein the game of billiards is permitted to be played and includes any
place where a fee is charged, which is directly or indirectly conditioned upon
or related to the playing of the game of billiards.
   BILLIARDS. As used in this chapter, means any of the several games played on
a table surrounded by an elastic ledge or cushions, with balls which are
impelled by cues and includes all forms of a game known as pool
(Ord. 284, passed 6-13-1985)
§ 3-9-2 COPY OF CHAPTER TO BE POSTED IN BILLIARD ROOMS.
   A copy of this chapter shall be posted and maintained in a conspicuous place
on the premises where the billiard room is conducted
(Ord. 284, passed 6-13-1985)
§ 3-9-3 HOURS OF OPERATION.
   No person shall operate a billiard room between the hours of 2:00 a.m. and
6:00 a.m., or permit or allow any person to remain in any billiard room between
the hours of 2:00 a.m. and 6:00 a.m. This section, however, shall not be
construed to prevent regular employees from performing necessary work within
the premises
(Ord. 284, passed 6-13-1985)
§ 3-9-4 RESTRICTIONS ON ATTENDANCE OF MINORS.
   (A)   No person under the age of 18 years shall be in, remain in, enter or
visit any billiard room unless accompanied by his or her parent or legal
guardian.
   (B)   No person having charge or control of any billiard room shall permit
or allow any such person under the age of 18 to be in, remain in, enter or
visit any such billiard room, unless such minor person is accompanied by his or
her parent or legal guardian.
   (C)   No person shall represent himself or herself to have reached the age
of 18 years in order to obtain admission to such billiard room or to be
permitted therein when such person in fact is under 18 years of age.
(Ord. 284, passed 6-13-1985)
§ 3-9-5 FAMILY BILLIARD ROOMS.
   The provisions of §§
3-9-1 through
3-9-4 of this chapter shall not apply to a family billiard room subject to each
and all of the following conditions.
   (A)   The applicant for a permit, or a permittee, shall apply in writing to
the Chief of Police for permission to allow minors in such billiard room, and
agrees to comply with the following additional rules and regulations applicable
to such billiard room.
      1.   No alcoholic beverages of any kind shall be sold, consumed, or
possessed by any person on the premises of the billiard room or on any other
premises having access other than by means of a public street to the premises
of the billiard room.
      2.   No gambling, betting or wagering of any kind shall be suffered,
allowed or permitted on the premises of the billiard room.
      3.   No profanity of any kind shall be used, suffered, allowed or
permitted on the premises of the billiard room.
      4.   The curfew hours for minors shall be strictly observed and enforced
on the premises of the billiard room.
      5.   The owners, managers and operators, and each of them, of the
billiard room, shall be strictly responsible for the enforcement of all rules
and regulations, and shall not permit any person violating any rule or
regulation to remain in such billiard room, and shall not permit any habitual
violator to enter such billiard room.
      6.   At least four signs shall be posted and maintained at conspicuous
places in and about the billiard room printed in one inch high letters placed
on a contrasting background, and setting forth the substance of the rules and
regulations of this section.
   (B)   The Chief of Police, after investigation, and after determining that
the premises of the billiard room are suitable for minors, may endorse the
permit issued under this chapter as follows: “Minors Allowed”.
   (C)   Whenever a permit has been endorsed, as provided in subsection (B) of
this section, the permit may be suspended or revoked for the violation of the
rules and regulations
(Ord. 284, passed 6-13-1985)
§ 3-9-6 GAMBLING PROHIBITED.
   No owner, proprietor, manager or employee of any billiard room shall permit
the use of a pea ball or dice, or the playing of games of chance in such
billiard room, or give any checks or tokens which can be redeemed for
merchandise or cash. No paraphernalia for playing pea ball, dice or any other
betting game will be allowed in any billiard room
(Ord. 284, passed 6-13-1985)
§ 3-9-7 MANNER OF CONSTRUCTION.
   A billiard room operating under the provisions of this chapter shall be so
constructed and maintained that a clear and unobstructed view of the entire
interior thereof may at all times be had from any entrance to such room.
Billiard rooms must provide a minimum general illumination of 50 foot-candles
in addition to any special lights over the table. No partitions forming rooms,
stalls or other enclosures where the public congregates shall be permitted.
This provision, however, shall not be construed to include the maintenance of
washrooms or toilet rooms for proper purposes or the maintenance of closets for
storing purposes exclusively. All billiard rooms shall be kept at all times in
a clean, healthful and sanitary condition
(Ord. 284, passed 6-13-1985)
§ 3-9-8 PERMIT, REQUIRED.
   No person shall conduct, manage, operate or maintain a billiard room in the
city without having first obtained a permit from the city so to do in the
manner provided in this chapter
(Ord. 284, passed 6-13-1985)
§ 3-9-9 PERMIT, POSTING AND DISPLAY.
   The permit required in the preceding section shall be posted and maintained
in a conspicuous place on the premises where such billiard room is locked
(Ord. 284, passed 6-13-1985)
§ 3-9-10 PERMIT, APPLICATION, FEE.
   (A)   Any person desiring to obtain the permit shall file a verified
application therefor with the Chief of Police. Such application shall set forth
the following information:
      1.   Name, age and residence address of the applicant if a natural
person;
      2.   If a corporation, its name, date and place of incorporation, address
of its principal place of business and the names of all its officers, together
with their respective addresses;
      3.   If a partnership, association or unincorporated company, the names
of partners, or persons comprising the association, together with the
respective addresses;
      4.   Name, age and residence address of the person who is to manage the
billiard room, if other than applicant;
      5.   The address at which the billiard room is to be conducted; and
      6.   A statement as to whether or not an application for similar permit
has been refused, suspended or canceled by this or any other public agency in
the state and, if so, a full statement of the reason therefor.
   (B)   At the time of filing such an application, the applicant or person
making application upon behalf of any firm or corporation, and the person who
is to manage the billiard room, if other than applicant, shall be photographed
and fingerprinted and such photographs and fingerprints shall be made a part of
the application provided for in this chapter.
   (C)   The application shall be accompanied by a fee in the sum of $5 to
defray the expense of acting upon such application. Such fee shall be in
addition to any permit or license fee which is now or may hereafter be required
to be paid
(Ord. 284, passed 6-13-1985)
§ 3-9-11 PERMIT, ISSUANCE AND DENIAL.
   The Chief of Police shall cause an investigation to be made. After
investigation, the Chief of Police shall issue a permit, which shall be
effective for a period of one year from date of issuance, unless he or she
finds that the applicant is not a fit and proper person to conduct a billiard
room or that the conduct of such billiard room at the location specified in the
application would be detrimental to the public peace, morals, health or safety,
in which event he or she shall deny the application; provided, that any person
aggrieved by the action of the Chief of Police may appeal to the City Council
by filing a written notice thereof with the City Clerk within five days from
the date of notice of such action. The decision of the City Council after a
public hearing on the appeal, shall be final. No permit shall be issued until
the permit fee has been paid
(Ord. 284, passed 6-13-1985)
§ 3-9-12 PERMIT, RENEWAL.
   Any permit issued under the provisions of this chapter may be renewed from
year to year upon application, as presently required by this code. If not made
within 30 days of expiration of this permit, the permit shall be null and void
and not renewable. A fee of $5 shall be charged for any application for a
change of location of the billiard room for which a permit has been granted
(Ord. 284, passed 6-13-1985)
§ 3-9-13 PERMIT, SUSPENSION AND REVOCATION.
   Any permit granted under the provisions of this chapter may be suspended or
revoked by the Chief of Police when it shall appear that the billiard room for
which the permit was granted is conducted in a disorderly or improper manner or
in violation of any statute of the state or ordinance of the city or regulation
adopted pursuant to this chapter, or that the person conducting the billiard
room is of an unfit character to conduct the same or the purpose for which the
permit has been issued is being used to the detriment of the public or is being
used for a purpose wholly foreign to that for which the permit was issued
(Ord. 284, passed 6-13-1985)
§ 3-9-14 PERMIT, REVOCATION, HEARING.
   A permit granted under the provisions of this chapter shall not by virtue of
this section, be revoked, canceled or suspended until a public hearing has been
had by the Chief of Police relative to so doing. Written notice of the time and
place of such hearing shall be served upon the permittee at least five days
prior to the date set for such hearing. Such notice shall also contain a brief
statement of the grounds to be relied upon for revoking, canceling or
suspending such permit
(Ord. 284, passed 6-13-1985)
§ 3-9-15 PERMIT, REVOCATION, NOTICE.
   Notice may be given either by personal delivery thereof to the person to be
notified or by a deposit in the United States mail in a sealed envelope,
postage prepaid, addressed to such person to be notified at the business
address appearing upon the application for such permit; provided, that any
person aggrieved by the action of the Chief of Police may appeal to the City
Council by filing a written notice thereof with the City Clerk within five days
of the date of the notice of such action. The decision of the City Council,
after a public hearing on such appeal, shall be final
(Ord. 284, passed 6-13-1985)
§ 3-9-16 PERMIT, TRANSFERABILITY.
   No permit granted or issued under the provisions of this chapter shall be in
any manner transferred or assigned, nor shall it authorize any person other
than is therein mentioned or named, to carry on the billiard room for which the
permit was granted.
(Ord. 284, passed 6-13-1985)
CHAPTER 10: PRIVATE PATROL
Section
3-10-1 Patrol service defined
3-10-2 Certificate of public convenience and necessity required
3-10-3 Application to Council, information to be shown
3-10-4 Investigation of application, report to Council
3-10-5 Hearing on application by Council
3-10-6 Application not granted until after resolution
3-10-7 Granting of certificate of public convenience and necessity
3-10-8 Sale, assignment or transfer of certificate
3-10-9 Grounds for refusal to issue certificate
3-10-10 State license prerequisite to issuance of certificate
3-10-11 Supervision and regulation by Chief of Police
3-10-12 City license required
3-10-13 Filing certificate of valid bond
3-10-14 Revocation or suspension of permit
§ 3-10-1 PATROL SERVICE DEFINED.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definition shall apply unless
the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   PATROL SERVICE. Any service or system which furnishes to members,
subscribers or private individuals or residents, for a consideration, any
patrolman, guard or watchman, either uniformed or otherwise, to patrol or guard
any district, or to act to salvage, guard or protect any property from theft,
damage, fire or other hazard.
(Ord. 284, passed 6-13-1985)
§ 3-10-2 CERTIFICATE OF PUBLIC CONVENIENCE AND NECESSITY REQUIRED.
   It is unlawful for any person, either as principal or agent, or otherwise,
to engage in the business of operating a private patrol service or to engage in
employment as a patrolman of such private patrol service, unless there has been
issued to such person engaged in such business a certificate of public
convenience and necessity by the City Council.
(Ord. 284, passed 6-13-1985)
§ 3-10-3 APPLICATION TO COUNCIL, INFORMATION TO BE SHOWN.
   Any person desiring to engage in the business of operating a private patrol
service shall make an application in writing for a certificate of public
convenience and necessity addressed to the City Council, signed personally by
each individual possessing any interest in the proposed private patrol service.
The application shall set forth the following information:
   (A)   The business or occupation for the five years last past of each person
signing the application, giving the name and address of each employer, the date
of the commencement and termination of employment and the nature of the
services performed by each such person;
   (B)   The territory of the city in which it is desired to operate the
proposed private patrol service;
   (C)   The hours during which it is proposed to patrol such territory or
render guard or watchman service;
   (D)   The address of the principal place of business of the applicant, or
the proposed principal place of business and all existing or proposed branch
offices;
   (E)   Whether or not the applicant holds a license issued by the state under
the provisions of the private investigator and adjuster act;
   (F)   Whether any person signing the application has ever been arrested on a
charge of the commission of a felony, or a charge involving moral turpitude, at
any time, or arrested for any reason within five years last past, giving full
details; and
   (G)   If the applicant is a corporation, the application shall be
accompanied by a certified copy of the resolution or minutes authorizing the
application.
(Ord. 284, passed 6-13-1985)
§ 3-10-4 INVESTIGATION OF APPLICATION, REPORT TO COUNCIL.
   The City Clerk shall, upon receipt of the application referred to in §
3-10-3, forward it to the City Manager who shall cause an investigation to be
made concerning the conditions prevailing within the district designated in any
such application, as to whether such district is already supplied with
sufficient patrol service, guard or watchman. The City Manager shall make a
further investigation as to the truthfulness of the facts set forth in the
application and the reputation, character, competency and integrity of each
person signing the application. Upon the completion of such investigation, the
City Manager shall file a written report with the City Clerk for presentation
to the City Council setting forth the results of the investigation and
recommending approval or disapproval of the application.
(Ord. 284, passed 6-13-1985)
§ 3-10-5 HEARING ON APPLICATION BY COUNCIL.
   Upon receipt of the written report, referred to in §
3-10-4, the City Council shall forthwith set the application for public hearing
before the Council at a date not less than ten days after its receipt by the
Council. The City Clerk shall cause notice of the public hearing to be
published at least one time in the official newspaper of the city, which
publication must be at least three days prior to the aforesaid public hearing.
Any person, including the applicant, may appear at the public hearing and state
his or her views as to the application to the City Council. Such public hearing
may be continued over from time to time as the circumstances may require.
(Ord. 284, passed 6-13-1985)
§ 3-10-6 APPLICATION NOT GRANTED UNTIL AFTER RESOLUTION.
   No certificate of public convenience or necessity shall be granted until the
Council, after the public hearing, declares by resolution that the public
convenience and necessity require the proposed private patrol service.
(Ord. 284, passed 6-13-1985)
§ 3-10-7 GRANTING OF CERTIFICATE OF PUBLIC CONVENIENCE AND NECESSITY.
   Having declared that the public convenience and necessity require the
proposed private patrol service, the City Council shall grant a certificate of
public convenience and necessity to the person applying therefor, who in its
opinion is entitled thereto.
(Ord. 284, passed 6-13-1985)
§ 3-10-8 SALE, ASSIGNMENT OR TRANSFER OF CERTIFICATE.
   No certificate of public convenience and necessity, granted under this
chapter, shall be sold, assigned or transferred to any other person, without
the prior consent of the City Council.
(Ord. 284, passed 6-13-1985)
§ 3-10-9 GROUNDS FOR REFUSAL TO ISSUE CERTIFICATE.
   The City Council may refuse to issue a certificate of public convenience and
necessity if it finds:
   (A)   Former convictions. That any person signing the application or who has
a financial or other interest in the proposed private patrol service has ever
been convicted of a felony or a misdemeanor involving moral turpitude;
   (B)   Reputation for honesty. That any person signing the application or who
has a financial interest in the proposed private patrol service does not have a
good reputation for honesty, character, integrity or sobriety, or is not a
responsible person; and
   (C)   Other reasons. For any reason within the discretion of the Council
that a private patrol system is not needed within the territory set forth in
the application or for any other reason would not comport with the public
welfare.
(Ord. 284, passed 6-13-1985)
§ 3-10-10 STATE LICENSE PREREQUISITE TO ISSUANCE OF CERTIFICATE.
   No certificate of public convenience and necessity shall be issued to any
person who does not possess a valid and existing private investigator or
private patrol operator’s license issued by the state under the provisions of
the Private Investigator Act.
(Ord. 284, passed 6-13-1985)
§ 3-10-11 SUPERVISION AND REGULATION BY CHIEF OF POLICE.
   Every person lawfully engaged under this chapter in the business of private
patrol service, or his or her agent, servants or employees, shall be subject to
the general supervision of the Chief of Police of the city, and for such
regulations as the latter may prescribe which are claimed to be oppressive by
the person engaged in the business of private patrol service, an appeal in
writing may be filed with the City Manager. If the City Manager concurs in
whole or in part with the regulations as set down by the Chief of Police, an
appeal in writing may be had to the City Council.
(Ord. 284, passed 6-13-1985)
§ 3-10-12 CITY LICENSE REQUIRED.
   (A)   Every person who under this chapter has been issued a certificate of
public convenience and necessity to engage in a private patrol service shall
pay a quarterly business license fee to the city.
   (B)   The procedure for payment of such fee shall be governed by the
provisions of Chapter 1 of this title, relative to licenses.
(Ord. 284, passed 6-13-1985)
§ 3-10-13 FILING CERTIFICATE OF VALID BOND.
   Every person who under this chapter has been issued a certificate of public
convenience and necessity to engage in a private patrol service in this city
shall file, with the City Clerk every six months thereafter, a written
statement, in duplicate, under penalty of perjury, certifying that said person
had a valid bond filed with, and a valid license issued by, the Bureau of
Private Investigators and Adjusters of the state as required by Cal. Business
and Professions Code Chapter 11 of Division 3.
(Ord. 284, passed 6-13-1985)
§ 3-10-14 REVOCATION OR SUSPENSION OF PERMIT.
   (A)   The business of private patrol service regulated by this chapter is
one which is affected with the public interest and therefore requires the
certificate of public convenience and necessity and other regulations in this
chapter set forth. Such business is one requiring honesty, trustworthiness,
dependability, proper conduct and loyalty between it and the public it serves.
The business is under the general supervision of the Chief of Police of the
city. If such honesty, trustworthiness, dependability, proper conduct and
loyalty as above indicated are not maintained in the highest degree, it is the
declared position of the City Council that the public interest, the city
government and its Police Department are adversely affected. This is the intent
and policy of the City Council in enacting this section.
   (B)   The City Council may suspend or revoke the permit to engage in such
business if, in the judgment of the City Council, any person engaged in the
business under the provisions of this chapter:
      1.   Violates, or causes or permits to be violated any of the provisions
of this chapter or fails to comply with the ordinances of the city, state or
federal law, or suspends or discontinues service;
      2.   In any manner or by any means, directly or indirectly, harasses,
annoys, molests, bothers or interferes with any other person lawfully engaged
in such business;
      3.   Becomes involved in any altercations of any kind with any other
person lawfully engaged in such business;
      4.   Engages in any conduct which may bring discredit upon the city or
its Police Department; and
      5.   Commits any act which is a ground for refusal to issue a certificate
of public convenience and necessity.
(Ord. 284, passed 6-13-1985)
CHAPTER 11: MASSAGE ESTABLISHMENTS
Editor’s note:
   Title 3, Article 11 Massage Establishments was repealed by Ord. 495, passed
4-18-2000.
CHAPTER 12: DANCES
Section
3-12-1 Definitions
3-12-2 Permit required
3-12-3 Requirements for permit
3-12-4 Investigation; City Manager’s actions
3-12-5 Safety requirements
3-12-6 Contents of permit
3-12-7 Hours
3-12-8 Fees
3-12-9 Litter cleanup
3-12-10 Suspension and revocation of permit
3-12-11 Penalty
§ 3-12-1 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   ADJACENT. Refers to any property or building within 100 feet of the premises
in which the public dance is proposed to be held as measured from the outside
wall of the premises closest to such other property or building.
   ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGE Means the same as that phrase as defined in Cal. Business
and Professions Code § 23004.
   NUMBER TO ATTEND. The number of persons “reasonably expected to attend” a
public dance shall be determined by an authorized city employee based upon
information contained in the permit application, information derived from the
Police Department’s investigation, information contained in other city records,
and past experience with a similar type dance or dances within the city and/or
Merced County.
   PERSON AND PERMIT HOLDER. Means and includes natural persons of both sexes,
partnerships, joint ventures, corporations, associations, trusts, and any other
business entity or social organization.
   PUBLIC DANCE. Any dance to which the public generally may gain admission
with or without the payment of a fee or compensation therefor. The term shall
also include any private party at which over 100 persons can be reasonably
expected to attend as determined by the City Manager.
   SECURITY OFFICER. Any active or reserve peace officer certified by the
California Commission on Police Officer Standards and Training or a security
officer properly bonded and licensed by the state and approved by the Chief of
Police.
(Ord. 284, passed 6-13-1985)
§ 3-12-2 PERMIT REQUIRED.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to hold or conduct a public dance at any
place within the city or to permit or allow dancing in any place of business
conducted by him or her within the city without a valid and unsuspended dance
permit.
(Ord. 284, passed 6-13-1985)
§ 3-12-3 REQUIREMENTS FOR PERMIT.
   (A)   Every person desiring to hold or conduct a public dance and every
person desiring to permit or allow dancing in his or her place of business,
shall make written application to the City Manager upon a form provided by the
city. The permit for holding or conducting a dance shall be for holding or
conducting one dance on a particular day or night. A dance permit to permit or
allow dancing in a place of business shall expire on June 30 following the date
of issuance, unless a sooner date or shorter period of time is provided for in
the City Council resolution setting permit fees under §
3-12-8 of this chapter.
   (B)   No permit shall be issued if the premises where the dance is proposed
to be held is not in compliance with all applicable building, electrical, fire
and safety codes.
   (C)   A permit must be applied for at least one week in advance of the
dance.
(Ord. 284, passed 6-13-1985)
§ 3-12-4 INVESTIGATION; CITY MANAGER’S ACTIONS.
   (A)   Upon receipt of such application, the City Manager shall direct the
Police Department to conduct an investigation of the applicant and all other
relevant matters pertaining to the application.
   (B)   If the City Manager finds that the premises for which the permit is
desired are not adjacent to a hotel or lodging house or residence or if
adjacent to a hotel or lodging house, or residence, if the premises are
sufficiently soundproof so that the persons living in adjacent residences or
patrons of the hotel and lodging house will not be disturbed, and if the City
Manager is satisfied that the public peace, safety, health and general welfare
will not be endangered or jeopardized by the issuance of the dance permit, then
the City Manager shall, upon the payment of the required fees and litter
cleanup deposit, issue such permit.
   (C)   In the event the City Manager refuses to issue a dance permit, the
applicant may appeal in writing to the City Council within five calendar days
of the City Manager’s decision. The City Council shall hear the matter
including the application and the reason for refusing it at its next regular or
special meeting, and may either grant the permit or refuse the permit if in its
discretion it finds that the applicant, the application or the premises in
which it is proposed to hold said dance do not comply with this chapter.
(Ord. 284, passed 6-13-1985)
§ 3-12-5 SAFETY REQUIREMENTS.
   (A)   The holder of the permit or a responsible person designated by the
permit holder must at all times be present within the premises in which the
dance is held.
   (B)   In addition to the above requirement, the permit holder, except annual
or quarterly permit holders, shall furnish at his or her expense, at least the
minimum number of security officers required by the City Manager. The City
Manager may require a minimum of two security officers for each 100 persons
which can be reasonably expected to attend the dance. A minimum of one security
officer shall be required at every dance, except quarterly or annual dance
permits. Security responsibility for all quarterly and annual dance permits
shall be the responsibility of the permit holder.
(Ord. 284, passed 6-13-1985)
§ 3-12-6 CONTENTS OF PERMIT.
   All permits for public dances shall be in writing and issued and signed by
the City Manager and shall set forth, among other things, the following:
   (A)   The name of the person to whom the permit is issued;
   (B)   The location of the premises upon which the dance is to be permitted;
   (C)   The location of the dance area(s), which area(s) shall be designated
on a floor plan of the premises submitted with the application;
   (D)   The minimum number of security officers which must be provided at the
permit holder’s expense and the name or names of the approved security officers
or of the security business or firm which will provide the required security
officers;
   (E)   Whether alcoholic beverages can be served at the dance subject to
obtaining the required permit from the California State Alcoholic Beverage
Control (“ABC”) Board and that such ABC permit must be obtained before serving
any alcoholic beverages;
   (F)   That all dancing and music shall cease at 1:30 a.m. unless a different
time is authorized by resolution of the City Council;
   (G)   That no minors shall be permitted on the dance floor in any premises
containing a business primarily engaged in the sale of alcoholic beverages;
   (H)   That all state laws and regulations or city ordinances and regulations
shall be observed throughout the time the premises are open for dancing;
   (I)   That the permit holder shall comply with all of the requirements of §
3-12-9 of this chapter regarding litter cleanup;
   (J)   Such other conditions as may be reasonably imposed by the City Manager
to ensure that the public peace, safety, health or general welfare will not be
endangered or jeopardized by the issuance of the dance permit; and
   (K)   The grounds for revocation of the permit.
(Ord. 284, passed 6-13-1985)
§ 3-12-7 HOURS.
   Dancing shall not be permitted between the hours of 1:30 a.m. and 12:00 p.m.
(noon) of any day. By resolution, the City Council may establish different
hours.
(Ord. 284, passed 6-13-1985)
§ 3-12-8 FEES.
   (A)   The following fees shall be imposed and collected for all dance
permits:
 Capacity Quarterly Annual Event
                                  Capacity     Quarterly  Annual     Event
Live music/disco; profit          0—125      $250       $1,000     Not issued
                                  126—225    $350       $1,400     Not issued
                                  226 and over Rates set by City Council
Live music/disc jockey;
nonprofit, charitable, and public All          Not issued Not issued No fee
agencies
Jukebox; “spontaneous dancing”             $25        $100       Not issued
Dance permits for special events
(wedding receptions, parties and                                     $100
the like)
Litter deposits                                           $250       $250
 
   (B)   Fees for annual dance permits may be paid quarterly on July 1, October
1, January 1 and April 1 of each year. If the due date falls on a Saturday or
Sunday, fees will be due and payable the next working day. Persons holding an
annual dance permit will also be allowed “jukebox” dancing at no additional
fee.
(Ord. 460, passed 10-15-1996)
§ 3-12-9 LITTER CLEANUP.
   (A)   Cleanup of premises. Each permit holder shall be required to clean up
all litter outside of the dance premises, including all adjoining public
sidewalks, streets, and alleys and adjoining private property, within seven
hours after each dance held by the permit holder ends, but under no
circumstances later than 8:00 a.m.
   (B)   Dances, litter cleanup, litter cleanup deposit.
      1.   Unless a deposit or statement of liability is made by the owner of
the property and the facility owner has signed a waiver form accepting
responsibility described in subsection (B)2. of this section, each permit
holder shall be required to deposit with the city a litter cleanup deposit as
security for the performance by the permit holder of his or her obligations
under subsection (A) of this section. If the permit holder fails to perform
those obligations, the city can use the security deposit, or any portion of it,
to reimburse the city for the city’s costs in performing those cleanup tasks.
If the permit holder has an annual or quarterly permit, the permit holder
shall, immediately upon demand, pay to the city a sum equal to the portion of
the security deposit expended by the city as provided in this section so as to
maintain the security deposit in the sum initially deposited with the city. For
any other permit holder who is not in default or in violation of any
requirement under this section, the city shall return the security deposit to
such permit holder upon expiration of the permit. The city’s obligations with
respect to the security deposit are those of a debtor and not a trustee. The
city can commingle the security deposit with the city’s general or other funds.
The city shall not be required to pay the permit holder interest on the
security deposit.
      2.   Every owner of a premises who regularly rents or licenses the
premises to others for a fee so that such renters or licensees can hold public
dances therein shall be required to deposit with the city a litter cleanup
deposit or provide the city with a signed statement of liability stating the
facility owner assumes liability as security for the performance by all permit
holders using such premises of their obligations under subsection (A) of this
section. If a statement of liability is used, and the facility owner fails to
meet his or her obligations under subsection (A) of this section, the facility
owner will be billed to reimburse the city for the cost of the cleanup, and the
facility owner will be required to pay the litter cleanup deposit in the
future. This obligation is placed upon the premises’ owner because in most
instances the dance permits issued for such premises are for only one day or
evening.
      3.   The amounts of the security deposits required by this section shall
be fixed and established from time to time by resolution of the City Council.
(Ord. 284, passed 6-13-1985; Ord. 356, passed 11-15-1988; Ord. 431, passed 3-1-
1994)
§ 3-12-10 SUSPENSION AND REVOCATION OF PERMIT.
   (A)   Three day suspension. A dance permit may be suspended for up to three
days by the City Manager, Chief of Police or police lieutenant when any such
city employee finds a violation under subsection (B)2. or (B)3. of this section
or finds that suspension of the dance permit is necessary to immediately
preserve the public peace, safety, health or general welfare.
   (B)   Grounds for suspension or revocation. The City Manager may suspend or
revoke a dance permit on any one or more of the following grounds:
      1.   Negligent or intentional misrepresentation by the permit holder in
obtaining the dance permit;
      2.   Violation of any condition of the permit, including, but not limited
to, those set forth in §
3-12-6 of this chapter;
      3.   Violation of any state law or regulation of any city ordinance or
regulation; and
      4.   To preserve the public peace, safety, health or general welfare if
there has been a change in the circumstances since granting the permit.
   (C)   Hearing. Under subsection (B) of this section, if the City Manager
finds a violation under subsection (B)2. or (B)3. of this section, then he or
she may immediately suspend the dance permit. The City Manager shall then hold
a hearing within 15 calendar days of the immediate suspension date to determine
whether the dance permit should be restored, remain suspended or revoked. The
permit holder shall be given at least five days’ prior notice of such a
hearing. During the hearing, the permit holder will be given the opportunity to
present evidence on his or her behalf and to rebut any evidence presented by
the city, and to be represented by an attorney or other representative of his
or her choice. The City Manager’s decision shall be final unless appealed in
writing to the City Council within ten calendar days of the City Manager’s
decision. Unless determined otherwise by the City Manager, the dance permit
shall continue to be suspended pending the appeal to the City Council. The City
Council shall hear the matter within 30 calendar days of the date of receipt of
the appeal of the City Manager’s decision.
   (D)   Reapplication. A person whose dance permit has been revoked may not
reapply for another dance permit for a period of one year from the date his or
her permit was revoked.
(Ord. 284, passed 6-13-1985)
§ 3-12-11 PENALTY.
   Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter or knowingly or
intentionally misrepresenting to any officer or employee of the city any
material fact in procuring the permit herein, shall be deemed guilty of a
misdemeanor, and upon conviction shall be punishable by a fine not to exceed
$500 for any one offense, or by imprisonment in the county jail for a period of
not more than six months, or by both such fine and imprisonment.
(Ord. 284, passed 6-13-1985)
CHAPTER 13: SELF-SERVICE GASOLINE STATIONS
Section
3-13-1 Installation and operation restricted
3-13-2 Transfer of gasoline; supervision required
3-13-3 Penalty
§ 3-13-1 INSTALLATION AND OPERATION RESTRICTED.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to install or operate any service
station, garage, store or other place of business designed or intended for the
sale of gasoline in which it is intended that the customer serve himself or
herself without continuous supervision by an attendant, or to install and use
unattended coin operated dispensing devices for gasoline.
(Ord. 284, passed 6-13-1985)
§ 3-13-2 TRANSFER OF GASOLINE; SUPERVISION REQUIRED.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to transfer gasoline from any storage
tank in any service station, garage, store or other place of business designed
or intended for sale of gasoline, who is not the owner or operator of said
service station, garage, store or such other place of business, or an employee
of said owner or operator, unless during the entire time of any such transfer
of gasoline, the owner, operator or employee of said owner or operator is
present and continuously supervises each transfer.
(Ord. 284, passed 6-13-1985)
§ 3-13-3 PENALTY.
   Violation of this chapter shall be a misdemeanor. A separate offense shall
be deemed committed for each day or portion thereof which any violation of this
chapter shall be committed, continued or permitted to occur. Any person
violating any provision of this chapter or failing to comply with any of its
requirements shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction
thereof shall be punished as provided in §
1-4-1 of this code.
(Ord. 284, passed 6-13-1985)
CHAPTER 14: LOCAL SALES AND USE TAX
Section
3-14-1 Short title
3-14-2 Rate
3-14-3 Operative date
3-14-4 Purpose
3-14-5 Contract with state
3-14-6 Sales tax
3-14-7 Place of sale
3-14-8 Use tax
3-14-9 Adoption of provisions of state law
3-14-10 Limitations on adoption of state law
3-14-11 Permit not required
3-14-12 Exclusions and exemptions
3-14-13 Application of provisions relating to exclusions and exemptions
3-14-14 Amendments
3-14-15 Enjoining collection forbidden
3-14-16 Penalty
§ 3-14-1 SHORT TITLE.
   This chapter shall be known as the “Uniform Local Sales and Use Tax
Ordinance”.
(Ord. 343, passed 12-15-1987)
§ 3-14-2 RATE.
   The rate of sales and use tax imposed by this chapter shall be 1%.
(Ord. 343, passed 12-15-1987)
§ 3-14-3 OPERATIVE DATE.
   This chapter was operative October 1, 1974.
(Ord. 343, passed 12-15-1987)
§ 3-14-4 PURPOSE.
   The City Council hereby declares that this chapter is adopted to achieve the
following, among other purposes, and directs that the provisions hereof be
interpreted in order to accomplish those purposes:
   (A)   To adopt a sales and use tax chapter which complies with the
requirements and limitations contained in Cal. Revenue and Taxation Code Part
1.5 of Division 2;
   (B)   To adopt a sales and use tax chapter which incorporates provisions
identical to those of the sales and use tax law of the State of California
insofar as those provisions are not inconsistent with the requirements and
limitations contained in Cal. Revenue and Taxation Code Part 1.5 of Division 2;
   (C)   To adopt a sales and use tax chapter which imposes a tax and provides
a measure therefor that can be administered and collected by the State Board of
Equalization in a manner that adapts itself as fully as practicable to, and
requires the least possible deviation from the existing statutory and
administrative procedures followed by the State Board of Equalization in
administering and collecting the California state sales and use taxes; and
   (D)   To adopt a sales and use tax chapter which can be administered in a
manner that will, to the degree possible, consistent with the provisions of
Cal. Revenue and Taxation Code Part 1.5 of Division 2, minimize the cost of
collecting city sales and use taxes and at the same time minimize the burden of
recordkeeping upon persons subject to taxation under the provisions of this
chapter.
(Ord. 343, passed 12-15-1987)
§ 3-14-5 CONTRACT WITH STATE.
   Prior to the operative date hereof, the city shall contract with the State
Board of Equalization to perform all functions incident to the administration
and operation of this sales and use tax chapter; provided, that if the city
shall not have contracted with the State Board of Equalization prior to the
operative date, it shall nevertheless so contract and in such a case the
operative date shall be the first day of the first calendar quarter following
the execution of such a contract rather than the first day of the first
calendar quarter following the adoption of this chapter.
(Ord. 343, passed 12-15-1987)
§ 3-14-6 SALES TAX.
   For the privilege of selling tangible personal property at retail a tax is
hereby imposed upon all retailers in the city at the rate stated in §
3-14-2 of this chapter of the gross receipts of the retailer from the sale of
all tangible personal property sold at retail in the city on and after the
operative date hereof.
(Ord. 343, passed 12-15-1987)
§ 3-14-7 PLACE OF SALE.
   For the purposes of this chapter, all retail sales are consummated at the
place of business of the retailer unless the tangible personal property sold is
delivered by the retailer to his or her agent to an out of state destination or
to a common carrier for delivery to an out of state destination. The gross
receipts from such sales shall include delivery charges, when such charges are
subject to the state sales and use tax, regardless of the place to which
delivery is made. In the event a retailer has no permanent place of business in
the state or has more than one place of business, the place or places at which
the retail sales are consummated shall be determined under rules and
regulations to be prescribed and adopted by the State Board of Equalization.
(Ord. 343, passed 12-15-1987)
§ 3-14-8 USE TAX.
   An excise tax is hereby imposed on the storage, use or other consumption in
the city of tangible personal property purchased from any retailer on and after
the operative date hereof for storage, use or other consumption in the city at
the rate stated in §
3-14-2 of this chapter the sales price of the property. The sales price shall
include delivery charges when such charges are subject to state sales or use
tax regardless of the place to which delivery is made.
(Ord. 343, passed 12-15-1987)
§ 3-14-9 ADOPTION OF PROVISIONS OF STATE LAW.
   Except as otherwise provided in this chapter and except insofar as they are
inconsistent with the provisions of Cal. Revenue and Taxation Code Part 1.5 of
Division 2, all of the provisions of Cal. Revenue and Taxation Code Part 1 of
Division 2 are hereby adopted and made a part of this chapter as though fully
set forth herein.
(Ord. 343, passed 12-15-1987)
§ 3-14-10 LIMITATIONS ON ADOPTION OF STATE LAW.
   In adopting the provisions of Cal. Revenue and Taxation Code Part 1 of
Division 2, wherever the State of California is named or referred to as the
taxing agency, the name of this city shall be substituted therefor. The
substitution, however, shall not be made when the word “state” is used as part
of the title of the State Controller, the State Treasurer, the State Board of
Control, the State Board of Equalization, the state treasury, or the
constitution of the state; the substitution shall not be made when the result
of that substitution would require action to be taken by the city, or any
agency thereof rather than by or against the State Board of Equalization, in
performing the functions incident to the administration or operation of this
chapter; the substitution shall not be made in those sections, including, but
not necessarily limited to, sections referring to the exterior boundaries of
the state, where the result of the substitution would be to provide an
exemption from this tax with respect to certain sales, storage, use or other
consumption of tangible personal property which would not otherwise be exempt
from this tax while such sales, storage, use or other consumption remain
subject to tax by the state under the provisions of Cal. Revenue and Taxation
Code Part 1 of Division 2, or to impose this tax with respect to certain sales,
storage, use or other consumption of tangible personal property which would not
be subject to tax by the state under the said provisions of that code; the
substitution shall not be made in Cal. Revenue and Taxation Code §§ 6701, 6702
(except in the last sentence thereof), 6711, 6715, 6737, 6797 or 6828; and the
substitution shall not be made for the word “state” in the phrase “retailer
engaged in business in this state” in Cal. Revenue and Taxation Code § 6203 or
in the definition of that phrase in Cal. Revenue and Taxation Code § 6203.
(Ord. 343, passed 12-15-1987)
§ 3-14-11 PERMIT NOT REQUIRED.
   If a seller’s permit has been issued to a retailer under Cal. Revenue and
Taxation Code § 6067, an additional seller’s permit shall not be required by
this chapter.
(Ord. 343, passed 12-15-1987)
§ 3-14-12 EXCLUSIONS AND EXEMPTIONS.
   (A)   There shall be excluded from the measure of tax:
      1.   The amount subject to tax shall not include any sales or use tax
imposed by the state upon a retailer or consumer;
      2.   The storage, use or other consumption of tangible personal property,
the gross receipts from the sale of which have been subject to tax under a
sales and use tax ordinance enacted in accordance with Cal. Revenue and
Taxation Code Part 1.5 of Division 2 by any city and county, county, or city,
in this state shall be exempt from the tax due under this section;
      3.   There are exempted from the computation of the amount of sales tax
the gross receipts from the sale of tangible personal property to operators of
aircraft to be used or consumed principally outside the city in which the sale
is made and directly and exclusively in the use of such aircraft as common
carriers or persons or property under the authority of the laws of this state,
the United States or any foreign government; and
      4.   In addition to the exemptions provided in Cal. Revenue and Taxation
Code §§ 6366 and 6366.1 the storage, use or other consumption of tangible
personal property purchased by operators of aircraft and used or consumed by
such operators directly and exclusively in the use of such aircraft as common
carriers of persons or property for hire or compensation under a certificate of
public convenience and necessity issued pursuant to the laws of this state, the
United States, or any foreign government is exempted from the use tax.
   (B)   The amount subject to tax shall not include any sales or use tax
imposed by the state upon a retailer or consumer.
      1.   The storage, use or other consumption of tangible personal property,
the gross receipts from the sale of which have been subject to tax under a
sales and use tax ordinance enacted in accordance with Cal. Revenue and
Taxation Code Part 1.5 of Division 2 by any city and county, county or city in
this state shall be exempt from the tax due under this section.
      2.   There are exempted from the computation of the amount of the sales
tax the gross receipts from the tangible personal property to operators of
waterborne vessels to be used or consumed principally outside the city in which
the sale is made and directly and exclusively in the carriage of persons or
property in such vessels for commercial purposes.
      3.   The storage, use or other consumption of tangible personal property
purchased by operators of waterborne vessels and used or consumed by such
operators directly and exclusively in the carriage of persons or property of
such vessels for commercial purposes is exempted from the use tax.
      4.   There are exempted from the computation of the amount of the sales
tax the gross receipts from the sale of tangible personal property to operators
of aircraft to be used or consumed principally outside the city in which the
sale is made and directly and exclusively in the use of such aircraft as common
carriers of persons or property under the authority of the laws of this state,
the United States or any foreign government.
      5.   In addition to the exemptions provided in Cal. Revenue and Taxation
Code §§ 6366 and 6366.1 the storage, use, or other consumption of tangible
personal property purchased by operators of aircraft and used or consumed by
such operators directly and exclusively in the use of such aircraft as common
carriers of persons or property for hire or compensation under a certificate of
public convenience and necessity issued pursuant to the laws of this state, the
United States, or any foreign government is exempted from the use tax.
   (C)   Subsection (A) of this section shall be operative January 1, 1984.
Subsection (B) of this section shall be operative on the operative date of any
act of the legislature of the state which amends Cal. Revenue and Taxation Code
§ 7202 which repeals and reenacts Cal. Revenue and Taxation Code § 7202 to
provide an exemption from city sales and use taxes for operators of waterborne
vessels in the same, or substantially the same, language as that existing in
Cal. Revenue and Taxation Code § 7202(i)(7) and (i)(8), as those subdivisions
read on October 1, 1983.
(Ord. 343, passed 12-15-1987)
§ 3-14-13 APPLICATION OF PROVISIONS RELATING TO EXCLUSIONS AND EXEMPTIONS.
   (A)   Section
3-14-12(B) of this chapter shall become operative on January 1 of the year
following the year in which the State Board of Equalization adopts an
assessment ratio for state assessed property which is identical to the ratio
which is required for local assessments by Cal. Revenue and Taxation Code §
401, at which time §
3-14-12(A) of this chapter shall become operative.
   (B)   In the event that §
3-14-12(B) of this chapter becomes operative and the State Board of
Equalization subsequently adopts an assessment ratio for the state assessed
property which is higher than the ratio which is required for local assessments
by Cal. Revenue and Taxation Code § 401, §
3-14-12(A) of this chapter shall become operative on the first day of the month
next following the month in which such higher ratio is adopted, at which time §
3-14-12(B) of this chapter shall be inoperative until the first day of the
month following the month in which the board again adopts an assessment ratio
for state assessed property which is identical to the ratio required for local
assessments by Cal. Revenue and Taxation Code § 401, at which time §
3-14-12(B) of this chapter shall again become operative and §
3-14-12(A) of this chapter shall become inoperative.
(Ord. 343, passed 12-15-1987)
§ 3-14-14 AMENDMENTS.
   All subsequent amendments of the Cal. Revenue and Taxation Code which relate
to the sales and use tax and which are not inconsistent with Cal. Revenue and
Taxation Code Part 1.5 of Division 2 shall automatically become a part of this
chapter.
(Ord. 343, passed 12-15-1987)
§ 3-14-15 ENJOINING COLLECTION FORBIDDEN.
   No injunction or writ of mandate or other legal or equitable process shall
issue in any suit, action or proceeding in any court against the state or the
city, or against any officer of the state or the city to prevent or enjoin the
collection of any tax or any amount of tax required to be collected under this
chapter or Cal. Revenue and Taxation Code Part 1.5 of Division 2.
(Ord. 343, passed 12-15-1987)
§ 3-14-16 PENALTY.
   Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall be deemed
guilty of a misdemeanor, and upon conviction thereof shall be punishable as
provided in §
1-4-1 of this code.
(Ord. 343, passed 12-15-1987)
CHAPTER 15: TRANSIENT OCCUPANCY TAX
Section
3-15-1 Title
3-15-2 Definitions
3-15-3 Tax imposed
3-15-4 Exemptions
3-15-5 Operator’s duties
3-15-6 Registration
3-15-7 Reporting and remitting
3-15-8 Penalties and interest
3-15-9 Failure to collect and report tax
3-15-10 Appeal
3-15-11 Records
3-15-12 Refunds
3-15-13 Actions to collect
3-15-14 Violations, misdemeanor
§ 3-15-1 TITLE.
   This chapter shall be known as the “Uniform Occupancy Tax Ordinance of the
City of Livingston”.
(Ord. 343, passed 12-15-1987)
§ 3-15-2 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   HOTEL. Any structure, or any portion of any structure, which is occupied or
intended or designed for occupancy by transients for dwelling, lodging or
sleeping purposes, and includes any hotel, inn, bachelor hotel, lodging house,
rooming house, apartment house, dormitory, public or private club, mobilehome
or house trailer at a fixed location, or other similar structure or portion
thereof.
   OCCUPANCY. The use or possession, or the right to the use or possession of
any room or rooms or portion thereof, in any hotel for dwelling, lodging or
sleeping purposes.
   OPERATOR. The person who is proprietor of the hotel, whether in the capacity
of owner, lessee, sublessee, mortgagee in possession, licensee or any other
capacity. Where the OPERATOR performs his or her functions through a managing
agent of any type or character other than an employee, the managing agent shall
also be deemed an OPERATOR for the purposes of this chapter and he or she shall
have the same duties and liabilities as his or her principal. Compliance with
the provisions of this chapter by either the principal or the managing agent
shall, however, be considered to be compliance by both.
   PERSON. Any individual, firm, partnership, joint venture, association,
social club, fraternal organization, joint stock company, corporation, estate,
trust, business trust, receiver, trustee, syndicate, or any other group or
combination acting as a unit.
   RENT. The consideration charged, whether or not received, for the occupancy
of space in a hotel valued in money, whether to be received in money, goods,
labor or otherwise, including all receipts, cash, credits and property and
services of any kind or nature, without any deduction therefrom whatsoever.
   TRANSIENT. Any person who exercises occupancy or is entitled to occupancy by
reason of concession, permit, right of access, license or other agreement for a
period of 30 consecutive calendar days or less, counting portions of calendar
days as full days. Any such person so occupying space in a hotel shall be
deemed to be a TRANSIENT until the period of 30 days has expired unless there
is an agreement in writing between the operator and the occupancy providing for
a longer period of occupancy. In determining whether a person is a transient,
uninterrupted periods of time extending both prior and subsequent to the
effective date hereof may be considered.
(Ord. 343, passed 12-15-1987)
§ 3-15-3 TAX IMPOSED.
   For the privilege of occupancy in any hotel, each transient is subject to
and shall pay a tax in the amount of 9% of the rent charged by the operator.
Said tax constitutes a debt owed by the transient to the city which is
extinguished only by payment to the operator or to the city. The transient
shall pay the tax to the operator of the hotel at the time the rent is paid. If
the rent is paid in installments, a proportionate share of the tax shall be
paid with each installment. The unpaid tax shall be due upon the transient’s
ceasing to occupy space in the hotel. If for any reason the tax due is not paid
by the operator of the hotel, the Director of Finance may require that such tax
shall be paid directly to the Director of Finance.
(Ord. 343, passed 12-15-1987; amd. per correspondence dated 11-2-2004)
§ 3-15-4 EXEMPTIONS.
   (A)   No tax shall be imposed upon:
      1.   Any person as to whom, or any occupancy as to which, it is beyond
the power of the city to impose the tax herein provided;
      2.   Any federal or state officer or employee when on official business;
and
      3.   Any officer or employee of a foreign government who is exempt by
reason of express provision of federal law or international treaty.
   (B)   No exemption shall be granted except upon a claim therefor made at the
time rent is collected and under penalty of perjury upon a form prescribed by
the Director of Finance.
(Ord. 343, passed 12-15-1987)
§ 3-15-5 OPERATOR’S DUTIES.
   Each operator shall collect the tax imposed by this chapter to the same
extent and at the same time as the rent is collected from every transient. The
amount of tax shall be separately stated from the amount of rent charged, and
each transient shall receive a receipt for payment from the operator. No
operator of a hotel shall advertise or state in any manner, whether directly or
indirectly, that the tax or any part thereof will be assumed or absorbed by the
operator, or that it will not be added to the rent, or that, if added, any part
will be refunded except in the manner hereinafter provided.
(Ord. 343, passed 12-15-1987)
§ 3-15-6 REGISTRATION.
   Within 30 days after the effective date hereof, or within 30 days after
commencing business, whichever is later, each operator of any hotel renting
occupancy to transients shall register said hotel with the Director of Finance
and obtain from him or her a “transient occupancy registration certificate” to
be at all times posted in a conspicuous place on the premises. Said certificate
shall, among other things, state the following:
   (A)   The name of the operator;
   (B)   The address of the hotel;
   (C)   The date upon which the certificate was issued; and
   (D)   This transient occupancy registration certificate signifies that the
person named on the face hereof has fulfilled the requirements of this chapter
by registering with the Tax Administrator for the purpose of collecting from
transients the transient occupancy tax and remitting said tax with the Tax
Administrator. This certificate does not authorize any person to conduct any
unlawful business or to conduct any lawful business in an unlawful manner, nor
to operate a hotel without strictly complying with all local applicable laws,
including, but not limited to, those requiring a permit from any board
commission, department or office of the city. This certificate does not
constitute a permit.
(Ord. 343, passed 12-15-1987)
§ 3-15-7 REPORTING AND REMITTING.
   Each operator shall, on or before the last day of the month following the
close of each calendar quarter, or at the close of any shorter reporting period
which may be established by the Director of Finance, make a return to the
Director of Finance, on forms provided by him or her, of the total rents
charged and received and the amount of tax collected for transient occupancies.
At the time the return is filed, the full amount of the tax collected shall be
remitted to the Director of Finance. The Director of Finance may establish
shorter reporting periods for any certificate holder if he or she deems it
necessary in order to ensure collections of the tax and he or she may require
further information in the return. Returns and payments are due immediately
upon cessation of business for any reason. All taxes collected by operators
pursuant to this chapter shall be held in trust for the account of the city
until payment thereof is made to the Director of Finance.
(Ord. 343, passed 12-15-1987)
§ 3-15-8 PENALTIES AND INTEREST.
   (A)   Original delinquency. Any operator who fails to remit any tax imposed
by this chapter within the time required shall pay a penalty of 10% of the
amount of the tax in addition to the amount of the tax.
   (B)   Continued delinquency. Any operator who fails to remit any delinquent
remittance on or before a period of 30 days following the date on which the
remittance first became delinquent shall pay a second delinquency penalty of
10% of the amount of the tax in addition to the amount of the tax and the 10%
penalty first imposed.
   (C)   Fraud. If the Director of Finance determines that the nonpayment of
any remittance due under this chapter is due to fraud, a penalty of 25% of the
amount of the tax shall be added thereto in addition to the penalties stated in
subsections (A) and (B) of this section.
   (D)   Interest. In addition to the penalties imposed, any operator who fails
to remit any tax imposed by this chapter shall pay interest at the rate of 0.5%
per month or fraction thereof on the amount of the tax, exclusive of penalties,
from the date on which the remittance first became delinquent until paid.
   (E)   Penalties merged with tax. Every penalty imposed and such interest as
accrues under the provisions of this section shall become a part of the tax
herein required to be paid.
(Ord. 343, passed 12-15-1987)
§ 3-15-9 FAILURE TO COLLECT AND REPORT TAX.
   If any operator shall fail or refuse to collect said tax and to make, within
the time provided in this chapter, any report and remittance of said tax or any
portion thereof required by this chapter, the Director of Finance shall proceed
in such manner as he or she may deem best to obtain facts and information on
which to base his or her estimate of the tax due. As soon as the Director of
Finance shall procure such facts and information as he or she is able to obtain
upon which to base the assessment of any tax imposed by this chapter and
payable by any operator who has failed or refused to collect the same and to
make such report and remittance, he or she shall proceed to determine and
assess against such operator the tax, interest and penalties provided for by
this chapter. In case such determination is made, the Director of Finance shall
give a notice of the amount so assessed by serving it personally or by
depositing it in the United States mail, postage prepaid, addressed to the
operator so assessed at his or her last known place of address. Such operator
may, within ten days after the serving or mailing of such notice, make an
application in writing to the Director of Finance for a hearing on the amount
assessed. If application by the operator for a hearing is not made within the
time prescribed, the tax, interest, penalties, if any, determined by the
Director of Finance shall become final and conclusive and immediately due and
payable. If such application is made, the Director of Finance shall give not
less than five days’ written notice in the manner prescribed herein to the
operator to show cause at a time and place fixed in said notice why said amount
specified therein should not be fixed for such tax, interest and penalties.
After such hearing, the Director of Finance shall determine the proper tax to
be remitted and shall thereafter give written notice to the person in the
manner prescribed herein of such determination and the amount of such tax,
interest and penalties. The amount determined to be due shall be payable after
15 days unless an appeal is taken as provided in §
3-15-10 of this chapter.
(Ord. 343, passed 12-15-1987)
§ 3-15-10 APPEAL.
   Any operator aggrieved by any decision of the Director of Finance with
respect to the amount of such tax, interest and penalties, if any, may appeal
to the City Council by filing a notice to appeal with the City Clerk within 15
days of the serving or mailing of the determination of tax due. The City
Council shall fix a time and place for hearing such appeal, and the City Clerk
shall give notice in writing to such operator at his or her last known place of
address. The findings of the City Council shall be final and conclusive and
shall be served upon the appellant in the manner prescribed above for service
of notice of hearing. Any amount found to be due shall be immediately due and
payable upon the service of this notice.
(Ord. 343, passed 12-15-1987)
§ 3-15-11 RECORDS.
   It shall be the duty of every operator liable for the collection and payment
to the city of any tax imposed by this chapter to keep and preserve for a
period of three years, all records as may be necessary to determine the amount
of such tax as he or she may have been liable for the collection of and payment
to the city, which records the Director of Finance shall have the right to
inspect at all reasonable times.
(Ord. 343, passed 12-15-1987)
§ 3-15-12 REFUNDS.
   (A)   Whenever the amount of any tax, interest or penalty has been overpaid
more than once or has been erroneously or illegally collected or received by
the city under this chapter, it may be refunded as provided in subsections (B)
and (C) of this section, provided a claim in writing therefor, stating under
penalty of perjury, the specific grounds upon which the claim is founded, is
filed with the Director of Finance within three years of the date of payment.
The claim shall be on a form furnished by the Director of Finance.
   (B)   An operator may claim a refund or take as credit against taxes
collected and remitted the amount overpaid, paid more than once or erroneously
or illegally collected or received when it is established in a manner
prescribed by the Director of Finance that the person from whom the tax has
been collected was not a transient; provided, however, that neither a refund
nor a credit shall be allowed unless the amount of the tax so collected has
neither been refunded to the transient or credited to rent subsequently payable
by the transient to the operator.
   (C)   A transient may obtain a refund of taxes overpaid or paid more than
once or erroneously or illegally collected or received by the city filing a
claim in the manner provided in subsection (A) of this section, but only when
the tax was paid by the transient directly to the Director of Finance, or when
the transient having paid the tax to the operator, establishes to the
satisfaction of the Director of Finance that the transient has been unable to
obtain a refund from the operator who collected the tax.
   (D)   No refund shall be paid under the provisions of this section unless
the claimant establishes his or her right thereto by written records showing
entitlement thereto.
(Ord. 343, passed 12-15-1987)
§ 3-15-13 ACTIONS TO COLLECT.
   Any tax required to be paid by any transient under the provisions of this
chapter shall be deemed a debt owed by the transient to the city. Any such tax
collected by an operator which has not been paid to the city shall be deemed a
debt owed by the operator to the city. Any person owing money to the city under
the provisions of this chapter shall be liable to an action brought in the name
of the city for the recovery of such amount.
(Ord. 343, passed 12-15-1987)
§ 3-15-14 VIOLATIONS, MISDEMEANOR.
   Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall be guilty
of a misdemeanor and shall be punishable therefor as provided in §
1-4-1 of this code.
(Ord. 343, passed 12-15-1987)
CHAPTER 16: GARAGE SALES
Section
3-16-1 Intent and purpose
3-16-2 Garage sale defined
3-16-3 Permits required
3-16-4 Who may conduct a garage sale; frequency of sales
3-16-5 Application for permits
3-16-6 Issuance of permits
3-16-7 Duration of sale
3-16-8 Revocation of permits
3-16-9 Right of appeal
3-16-10 Exceptions
3-16-11 Violations
3-16-12 Fees
§ 3-16-1 INTENT AND PURPOSE.
   It is the intent and purpose of the City Council in adopting the ordinance
codified in this chapter to regulate those activities which in the most
technical sense have business or commercial characteristics, but which, because
of the manner in which they are conducted or the purposes for which they are
being operated are truly noncommercial in nature. These regulations are
intended to prevent the expansion of such noncommercial operations into truly
commercial operations and to regulate the method of conducting the activity so
that it will be confined to a noncommercial type of operation. It is the
purpose of this chapter to prevent such activities from unfairly competing with
licensed revenue producing commercial and business enterprises; to prevent the
conduct of commercial enterprises upon other than commercially zoned property;
and to curb the evasion of business license fees.
(Ord. 509, passed 12-4-2001)
§ 3-16-2 GARAGE SALE DEFINED.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definition shall apply unless
the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   GARAGE SALE. A sale conducted by an individual homeowner or occupant of a
home, or apartment owner, or occupant of an apartment unit, or owner or
occupant of any other residential or dwelling unit, for the purpose of selling,
trading, bargaining, exchanging or otherwise disposing of unwanted or surplus
household furnishings, or goods, or other tangible personal property, usually
conducted in a garage, on a patio, upon a driveway, or on or in any portion of
premises in a residential zone, and for which no inventory or permanent or
detailed records are kept on the transactions thus carried out. It may, at
times, be conducted by a combination of residential dwellers at a single
location. All sales designated, “lawn sale”, “attic sale”, “rummage sale”,
“moving sale”, “flea market sale”, “yard sale” or other terms of similar or
like intent and having the foregoing characteristics and purposes are GARAGE
SALES, excluding those sales held by charitable institutions on property owned
and maintained by said institutions, and excluding those sales sponsored by
bona fide service clubs.
(Ord. 509, passed 12-4-2001)
§ 3-16-3 PERMITS REQUIRED.
   Any person proposing to promote, advertise, or conduct a garage sale shall,
prior thereto, obtain a permit from the Finance Department.
(Ord. 509, passed 12-4-2001)
§ 3-16-4 WHO MAY CONDUCT A GARAGE SALE; FREQUENCY OF SALES.
   (A)   Garage sales may be conducted by the following person(s):
      1.   The owner or occupant of any residential unit within the city, or a
member of the occupant’s family unit, provided such persons are actually
residing upon the premises as their principal place of residence. This includes
a family unit member who is a member of a service club or high school activity
club who is sponsoring a sale for that club; and
      2.   No more than four garage sales shall be conducted at any residential
unit within the city during a calendar year (January 1 through December 31) by
persons permitted to conduct such sales pursuant to this section.
   (B)   In determining the number of garage sales conducted during the
calendar year at the residential unit, all sales conducted by the owner,
occupant or member of the owner’s family or occupant’s family unit shall be
included. The term FAMILY UNIT shall be defined to mean all those persons who
reside with the owner or occupant at the address of the residential unit.
(Ord. 509, passed 12-4-2001)
§ 3-16-5 APPLICATION FOR PERMITS.
   Persons authorized to conduct garage sales pursuant to this chapter shall
make verified application therefor in a form satisfactory to the Finance
Department. The application shall contain the following:
   (A)   The name of the applicant;
   (B)   The address and phone number of the applicant;
   (C)   The location of the proposed garage sale;
   (D)   The date(s) and hours upon which it is proposed to conduct the garage
sale;
   (E)   The date or dates of any prior garage sales held at the residence; and
   (F)   A statement that the applicant is either an owner/occupant, a renter/
lessee, or a member of the family unit of such owner/occupant or renter/lessee.
At the discretion of the Finance Department, the applicant may be required to
provide verification of applicant’s ownership, occupancy or family unit status
in a form satisfactory to the Director of Finance or his or her designee.
(Ord. 509, passed 12-4-2001)
§ 3-16-6 ISSUANCE OF PERMITS.
   Upon receipt of the application, the Finance Director or designee shall
issue the permit to the applicant provided that the Finance Department
determines that all of the provisions of this chapter have been met. The permit
shall specify the following:
   (A)   The name of the permitted;
   (B)   The exact address or location where the garage sale is to be
conducted;
   (C)   The date or dates upon which the sale is to be conducted;
   (D)   The hours of the day during which said sale is to be conducted;
   (E)   The requirement that signs may be used to advertise said sale, which
sign shall be displayed only during the date or dates and hours of said sale,
and no signs shall be attached in any way to any street pole, utility pole,
traffic control pole or any city street tree. All signs must be removed from
any posted location following the sale or fines will be imposed;
   (F)   A general description of the property to be offered for sale;
   (G)   The requirement that the permit shall be revoked for failure to comply
with all terms and conditions thereof, or the provisions of this chapter, or
other applicable provisions of law;
   (H)   The requirement that the permit shall be prominently displayed at the
location of the garage sale; and
   (I)   Such other conditions relating to the promotion, advertising and
conducting of the garage sale which, in the opinion of the Police Chief, are
necessary or proper for the preservation of the peace, elimination of traffic
hazards, safety of pedestrians, preservation of public or private property, or
like or similar matters.
(Ord. 509, passed 12-4-2001)
§ 3-16-7 DURATION OF SALE.
   No garage sale permit shall be issued permitting the promotion, advertising
or conducting of a garage sale for more than three consecutive days.
(Ord. 509, passed 12-4-2001)
§ 3-16-8 REVOCATION OF PERMITS.
   The Finance Director or designee shall have the authority to revoke at any
time any permit granted in accordance with this chapter upon determining that
the garage sale permitted thereby has been promoted, advertised or conducted in
violation of any of the provisions of this chapter, or in violation of the
provisions or conditions of the garage sale permit issued for such sale, or in
such manner as to deceive or defraud the public, or that the permitted has
committed any of the following:
   (A)   Made any material misstatement in the application for such permit;
   (B)   Been guilty of a fraudulent practice, or practices in the promotion,
advertising or conduct of the sale authorized by such permit; and
   (C)   Violated any of the provisions or conditions of the permit, or
violated any of the provisions of this chapter or of any other provision or law
in promoting, advertising or conducting such sale.
(Ord. 509, passed 12-4-2001)
§ 3-16-9 RIGHT OF APPEAL.
   Any person denied a permit or aggrieved by the conditions attached thereto,
or having had a permit revoked, may appeal the decision of the Finance Director
to the City Council by filing with the City Clerk, within ten days after notice
of the denial or conditions of revocation, a written request for review of the
decision and stating facts supporting such request. The Council shall, upon the
review, affirm, modify or reverse the decision of the Finance Director.
(Ord. 509, passed 12-4-2001)
§ 3-16-10 EXCEPTIONS.
   This chapter shall not apply to the following persons:
   (A)   Persons selling goods pursuant to an order of process of a court of
competent jurisdiction, including estate sales;
   (B)   Persons acting in accordance with their powers and duties as public
officials; and
   (C)   Persons promoting, advertising, or selling an item or items of
personal property which are specifically named in any advertisement therefor.
(Ord. 509, passed 12-4-2001)
§ 3-16-11 VIOLATIONS.
   Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter is guilty of an
infraction and is subject to a citation and a fine as follows: $25 for the
first offense; $50 for the second offense; and $100 for each violation
thereafter.
(Ord. 509, passed 12-4-2001)
§ 3-16-12 FEES.
   The first garage sale permit each calendar year will be free of charge. The
remaining three permits authorized each year will be $10 each.
(Ord. 509, passed 12-4-2001)
CHAPTER 17: TRANSACTIONS AND USE TAX
Section
   
3-17-1   Title
   
3-17-2   Operative date
   
3-17-3   Purpose
   
3-17-4   Contract with state
   
3-17-5   Transactions tax rate
   
3-17-6   Place of sale
   
3-17-7   Use tax rate
   
3-17-8   Adoption of provisions of state law
   
3-17-9   Limitations on adoption of state law and collection of use taxes
   
3-17-10   Permit not required
   
3-17-11   Exemptions and exclusions
   
3-17-12   Amendments
   
3-17-13   Enjoining collection forbidden
   
3-17-14   Semi-annual report to Council
   
3-17-15   Oversight Committee
   
3-17-16   Revenue expended for police and fire purposes/expenditure plan
   
3-17-17   Accountability measures
   
3-17-18   Severability
   
3-17-19   Effective date
   
3-17-20   Termination date
§ 3-17-1 TITLE.
   This chapter shall be known as the City of Livingston Transactions and Use
Tax chapter. The city of Livingston hereinafter shall be called "city." This
chapter shall be applicable in the incorporated territory of the city.
(Ord. 657, passed - - )
§ 3-17-2 OPERATIVE DATE.
   OPERATIVE DATE  means the first day of the first calendar quarter commencing
more than 110 days after the adoption of this chapter, the date of such
adoption being as set forth below.
(Ord. 657, passed - - )
§ 3-17-3 PURPOSE.
   This chapter is adopted to achieve the following, among other purposes, and
directs that the provisions hereof be interpreted in order to accomplish those
purposes:
   (A)   To impose a retail transactions and use tax in accordance with the
provisions of Part 1.6 (commencing with Section 7251) of Division 2 of the
Revenue and Taxation Code and Section 7285.9 of Part 1.7 of Division 2 which
authorizes the city to adopt this tax chapter which shall be operative if the
electors voting on the measure vote to approve the imposition of the tax at an
election called for that purpose.
   (B)   To adopt a retail transactions and use tax ordinance that incorporates
provisions identical to those of the Sales and Use Tax Law of the State of
California insofar as those provisions are not inconsistent with the
requirements and limitations contained in Part 1.6 of Division 2 of the Revenue
and Taxation Code.
   (C)   To adopt a retail transactions and use tax ordinance that imposes a
tax and provides a measure therefore that can be administered and collected by
the California Department of Tax and Fee Administration in a manner that adapts
itself as fully as practicable to, and requires the least possible deviation
from, the existing statutory and administrative procedures followed by the
California Department of Tax and Fee Administration in administering and
collecting the California State Sales and Use Taxes.
   (D)   To adopt a retail transactions and use tax ordinance that can be
administered in a manner that will be, to the greatest degree possible,
consistent with the provisions of Part 1.6 of Division 2 of the Revenue and
Taxation Code, minimize the cost of collecting the transactions and use taxes,
and at the same time, minimize the burden of record keeping upon persons
subject to taxation under the provisions of this chapter.
(Ord. 657, passed - - )
§ 3-17-4 CONTRACT WITH STATE.
   Prior to the operative date, the city shall contract with the California
Department of Tax and Fee Administration to perform all functions incident to
the administration and operation of this transactions and use tax ordinance;
provided, that if the city shall not have contracted with the California
Department of Tax and Fee Administration prior to the operative date, it shall
nevertheless so contract and in such a case the operative date shall be the
first day of the first calendar quarter following the execution of such a
contract.
(Ord. 657, passed - - )
§ 3-17-5 TRANSACTIONS TAX RATE.
   For the privilege of selling tangible personal property at retail, a tax is
hereby imposed upon all retailers in the incorporated territory of the city at
the rate of 1% of the gross receipts of any retailer from the sale of all
tangible personal property sold at retail in said territory on and after the
operative date of this chapter.
(Ord. 657, passed - - )
§ 3-17-6 PLACE OF SALE.
   For the purposes of this chapter, all retail sales are consummated at the
place of business of the retailer unless the tangible personal property sold is
delivered by the retailer or his or her agent to an out-of-state destination or
to a common carrier for delivery to an out-of-state destination. The gross
receipts from such sales shall include delivery charges, when such charges are
subject to the state sales and use tax, regardless of the place to which
delivery is made. In the event a retailer has no permanent place of business in
the state or has more than one place of business, the place or places at which
the retail sales are consummated shall be determined under rules and
regulations to be prescribed and adopted by the California Department of Tax
and Fee Administration.
(Ord. 657, passed - - )
§ 3-17-7 USE TAX RATE.
   An excise tax is hereby imposed on the storage, use or other consumption in
the city of tangible personal property purchased from any retailer on and after
the operative date of this chapter for storage, use or other consumption in
said territory at the rate of 1% of the sales price of the property. The sales
price shall include delivery charges when such charges are subject to state
sales or use tax regardless of the place to which delivery is made.
(Ord. 657, passed - - )
§ 3-17-8 ADOPTION OF PROVISIONS OF STATE LAW.
   Except as otherwise provided in this chapter and except insofar as they are
inconsistent with the provisions of Part 1.6 of Division 2 of the Revenue and
Taxation Code, all of the provisions of Part 1 (commencing with Section 6001)
of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code are hereby adopted and made a
part of this chapter as though fully set forth herein.
(Ord. 657, passed - - )
§ 3-17-9 LIMITATIONS ON ADOPTION OF STATE LAW AND COLLECTION OF USE TAXES.
   In adopting the provisions of Part 1 of Division 2 of the Revenue and
Taxation Code:
   (A)   Wherever the State of California is named or referred to as the taxing
agency, the name of this city shall be substituted therefor. However, the
substitution shall not be made when:
      1.   The word "State" is used as a part of the title of the State
Controller, State Treasurer, State Treasury, or the Constitution of the State
of California;
      2.   The result of that substitution would require action to be taken by
or against this city or any agency, officer, or employee thereof rather than by
or against the California Department of Tax and Fee Administration, in
performing the functions incident to the administration or operation of this
chapter.
      3.   In those sections, including, but not necessarily limited to
sections referring to the exterior boundaries of the State of California, where
the result of the substitution would be to:
         (a)   Provide an exemption from this tax with respect to certain
sales, storage, use or other consumption of tangible personal property which
would not otherwise be exempt from this tax while such sales, storage, use or
other consumption remain subject to tax by the state under the provisions of
Part 1 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code; or
         (b)   Impose this tax with respect to certain sales, storage, use or
other consumption of tangible personal property which would not be subject to
tax by the state under the said provision of that code.
      4.   In Sections 6701, 6702 (except in the last sentence thereof), 6711,
6715, 6737, 6797 or 6828 of the Revenue and Taxation Code.
   (B)   The word "city" shall be substituted for the word "state" in the
phrase "retailer engaged in business in this state" in Section 6203 and in the
definition of that phrase in Section 6203.
      1.   "A retailer engaged in business in the district" shall also include
any retailer that, in the preceding calendar year or the current calendar year,
has total combined sales of tangible personal property in this state or for
delivery in the state by the retailer and all persons related to the retailer
that exceeds $500,000. For purposes of this section, a person is related to
another person if both persons are related to each other pursuant to Section
267(b) of Title 26 of the United States Code and the regulations thereunder.
(Ord. 657, passed - - )
§ 3-17-10 PERMIT NOT REQUIRED.
   If a seller's permit has been issued to a retailer under Section 6067 of the
Revenue and Taxation Code, an additional transactor's permit shall not be
required by this chapter.
(Ord. 657, passed - - )
§ 3-17-11 EXEMPTIONS AND EXCLUSIONS.
   (A)   There shall be excluded from the measure of the transactions tax and
the use tax the amount of any sales tax or use tax imposed by the State of
California or by any city, city and county, or county pursuant to the Bradley-
Burns Uniform Local Sales and Use Tax Law or the amount of any state-
administered transactions or use tax.
   (B)   There are exempted from the computation of the amount of transactions
tax the gross receipts from:
      1.   Sales of tangible personal property, other than fuel or petroleum
products, to operators of aircraft to be used or consumed principally outside
the county in which the sale is made and directly and exclusively in the use of
such aircraft as common carriers of persons or property under the authority of
the laws of this state, the United States, or any foreign government.
      2.   Sales of property to be used outside the city which is shipped to a
point outside the city, pursuant to the contract of sale, by delivery to such
point by the retailer or his or her agent, or by delivery by the retailer to a
carrier for shipment to a consignee at such point. For the purposes of this
division, delivery to a point outside the city shall be satisfied:
         (a)   With respect to vehicles (other than commercial vehicles)
subject to registration pursuant to Chapter 1 (commencing with Section 4000) of
Division 3 of the Vehicle Code, aircraft licensed in compliance with Section
21411 of the Public Utilities Code, and undocumented vessels registered under
Division 3.5 (commencing with Section 9840) of the Vehicle Code by registration
to an out-of-city address and by a declaration under penalty of perjury, signed
by the buyer, stating that such address is, in fact, his or her principal place
of residence; and
         (b)   With respect to commercial vehicles, by registration to a place
of business out-of-city and declaration under penalty of perjury, signed by the
buyer, that the vehicle will be operated from that address.
      3.   The sale of tangible personal property if the seller is obligated to
furnish the property for a fixed price pursuant to a contract entered into
prior to the operative date of this chapter.
      4.   A lease of tangible personal property which is a continuing sale of
such property, for any period of time for which the lessor is obligated to
lease the property for an amount fixed by the lease prior to the operative date
of this chapter.
      5.   For the purposes of divisions (3) and (4) of this division (B), the
sale or lease of tangible personal property shall be deemed not to be obligated
pursuant to a contract or lease for any period of time for which any party to
the contract or lease has the unconditional right to terminate the contract or
lease upon notice, whether or not such right is exercised.
   (C)   There are exempted from the use tax imposed by this chapter, the
storage, use or other consumption in this city of tangible personal property:
      1.   The gross receipts from the sale of which have been subject to a
transactions tax under any state-administered transactions and use tax
ordinance.
      2.   Other than fuel or petroleum products purchased by operators of
aircraft and used or consumed by such operators directly and exclusively in the
use of such aircraft as common carriers of persons or property for hire or
compensation under a certificate of public convenience and necessity issued
pursuant to the laws of this state, the United States, or any foreign
government. This exemption is in addition to the exemptions provided in
Sections 6366 and 6366.1 of the Revenue and Taxation Code of the State of
California.
      3.   If the purchaser is obligated to purchase the property for a fixed
price pursuant to a contract entered into prior to the operative date of this
chapter.
      4.   If the possession of, or the exercise of any right or power over,
the tangible personal property arises under a lease which is a continuing
purchase of such property for any period of time for which the lessee is
obligated to lease the property for an amount fixed by a lease prior to the
operative date of this chapter.
      5.   For the purposes of divisions (3) and (4) of this division (C),
storage, use, or other consumption, or possession of, or exercise of any right
or power over, tangible personal property shall be deemed not to be obligated
pursuant to a contract or lease for any period of time for which any party to
the contract or lease has the unconditional right to terminate the contract or
lease upon notice, whether or not such right is exercised.
      6.   Except as provided in division (7) below, a retailer engaged in
business in the city shall not be required to collect use tax from the
purchaser of tangible personal property, unless the retailer ships or delivers
the property into the city or participates within the city in making the sale
of the property, including, but not limited to, soliciting or receiving the
order, either directly or indirectly, at a place of business of the retailer in
the ity or through any representative, agent, canvasser, solicitor, subsidiary,
or person in the city under the authority of the retailer.
      7.   "A retailer engaged in business in the city" shall also include any
retailer of any of the following: vehicles subject to registration pursuant to
Chapter 1 (commencing with Section 4000) of Division 3 of the Vehicle Code,
aircraft licensed in compliance with Section 21411 of the Public Utilities
Code, or undocumented vessels registered under Division 3.5 (commencing with
Section 9840) of the Vehicle Code. That retailer shall be required to collect
use tax from any purchaser who registers or licenses the vehicle, vessel, or
aircraft at an address in the city.
   (D)   Any person subject to use tax under this chapter may credit against
that tax any transactions tax or reimbursement for transactions tax paid to a
district imposing, or retailer liable for a transactions tax pursuant to Part
1.6 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code with respect to the sale to
the person of the property the storage, use or other consumption of which is
subject to the use tax.
(Ord. 657, passed - - )
§ 3-17-12 AMENDMENTS.
   All amendments subsequent to the effective date of this ordinance to Part 1
of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code relating to sales and use taxes
and which are not inconsistent with Part 1.6 and Part 1.7 of Division 2 of the
Revenue and Taxation Code, and all amendments to Part 1.6 and Part 1.7 of
Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code, shall automatically become a part
of this chapter, provided however, that no such amendment shall operate so as
to affect the rate of tax imposed by this chapter.
(Ord. 657, passed - - )
§ 3-17-13 ENJOINING COLLECTION FORBIDDEN.   
   No injunction or writ of mandate or other legal or equitable process shall
issue in any suit, action or proceeding in any court against the state or the
city, or against any officer of the state or the city, to prevent or enjoin the
collection under this chapter, or Part 1.6 of Division 2 of the Revenue and
Taxation Code, of any tax or any amount of tax required to be collected.
(Ord. 657, passed - - )
§ 3-17-14 SEMI-ANNUAL REPORT TO COUNCIL.
   The City Manager shall report to Council not less frequently than semi-
annually on the amount of tax collected under this chapter, and any
expenditures made, or proposed to be made with such collections.
(Ord. 657, passed - - )
§ 3-17-15 OVERSIGHT COMMITTEE.
   Following the operative date, the city shall establish a Community Oversight
Advisory Committee, which may be its budget advisory committee or a separate
committee. The Committee may be charged with reviewing a report on the
expenditures of the measure and/or recommendations with respect to expenditures
of the sales tax as part of the overall annual budget process. The
recommendations of the Committee shall be presented to the City Council but
shall not be binding on the City Council.
(Ord. 657, passed - - )
§ 3-17-16 REVENUE EXPENDED FOR POLICE AND FIRE PURPOSES/EXPENDITURE PLAN.
   Revenues from the transaction and use tax enacted under this chapter shall
be expended by the city for police and fire purposes. Police and fire purposes
includes but is not limited to:
   (A)   Acquisition, construction, rehabilitation, renovating, furnishing,
operations and maintenance of police and fire facilities, such as fire
stations, police stations, and other improvements needed to carry out such
services.
   (B)   Furnishing of equipment, materials, furniture, uniforms and other
items for use to provide facilities or services related to police and fire.
   (C)   Providing social, psychiatric or other services in place of or in
addition to police and fire services where needed related to homelessness,
domestic violence, drug use and other items in lieu of police and fire services
or in addition to police and fire services.
   (D)   Hiring of personnel, including administrative personnel related to
police and fire services.
   (E)   Use of services provided by the county or the furnishing of new
services provided by the city related to police and fire services.
(Ord. 657, passed - - )
§ 3-17-17 ACCOUNTABILITY MEASURES.
   The city hereby establishes the following accountability measures pertaining
to the levy of the special tax for the purposes described herein:
   (A)   Such special tax shall be levied for the specific purposes set forth
in §
3-17-16 above.
   (B)   The proceeds of the levy of such special tax shall be applied only to
the specific purposes set forth in §
3-17-16 .
   (C)   The city shall establish an account or accounts into which the
proceeds of such special tax shall be deposited.
   (D)   The City Manager shall annually file a report with the City Council as
required pursuant to Government Code Section 50075.3.
(Ord. 657, passed - - )
§ 3-17-18 SEVERABILITY.   
   If any provision of this chapter or the application thereof to any person or
circumstance is held invalid, the remainder of the ordinance and the
application of such provision to other persons or circumstances shall not be
affected thereby.
(Ord. 657, passed - - )
§ 3-17-19 EFFECTIVE DATE.   
   This chapter relates to the levying and collecting of the city transactions
and use taxes and shall take effect immediately as provided by law.
(Ord. 657, passed - - )
§ 3-17-20 TERMINATION DATE.   
   The authority to levy the tax imposed by this chapter shall continue
perpetually.
(Ord. 657, passed - - )
TITLE 4: BUILDING REGULATIONS
CHAPTER 1: BUILDING ADMINISTRATION CODES
Section
4-1-1 Administration and enforcement
4-1-2 Definitions
4-1-3 California Building Code
4-1-3-1 Permit procedure
4-1-3-2 Additional permit requirements
4-1-4 California Mechanical Code
4-1-5 International Property Maintenance Code
4-1-6 California Plumbing Code
4-1-7 California Electrical Code
4-1-8 California Historical Building Code
4-1-9 California Energy Code
4-1-10 California Green Standards Code
4-1-11 California Fire Code
4-1-12 California Residential Building Code
§ 4-1-1 ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT.
   The building division is hereby established within the Community Development
Department under the supervision of the chief building official.
(Ord. 650, passed 4-18-2023)
§ 4-1-2 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   BOARD OF APPEALS. Whenever the term BOARD OF APPEALS appears in this chapter
or in any of the codes referred to herein, it shall mean the City Council,
sitting as an appeals board.
   BUILDING OFFICIAL, ADMINISTRATIVE AUTHORITY, CHIEF or CODE ENFORCEMENT
OFFICER. Whenever the terms BUILDING OFFICIAL, ADMINISTRATIVE AUTHORITY, CHIEF
or CODE ENFORCEMENT OFFICER appear in this chapter, or in any of the codes
hereinafter referred  to, they shall mean the building official, administrative
authority or code enforcement officer as referred to in the code, and any
assistant deputy or employee assigned to the building inspection section and
designated by the director of community development department to serve in such
capacity.
   CONSTRUCTION. Whenever the term CONSTRUCTION appears in this chapter or in
any of the codes referred to herein, it shall include construction, erection,
modification, enlargement, alteration, conversion, additions or movements of
structures.
(Ord. 650, passed 4-18-2023)
§ 4-1-3 CALIFORNIA BUILDING CODE.
   The city hereby adopts the 2022 California Building Code, with appendices,
and any subsequent amendments and/or new editions and is hereby made a part of
this chapter as if fully set forth herein, except that neither this nor any
future adoptions shall have any effect on the enforceability of §§
4-1-3-1 and
4-1-3-2 of this code. The city hereby reaffirms all previously made and legally
required findings relating to those code sections.
(Ord. 650, passed 4-18-2023)
§ 4-1-3-1 PERMIT PROCEDURE.
   (A)   Permit required. As per most current codes.
   (B)   Fee required. As per most current codes or as amended by resolution.
   (C)   Planning Review.
      1.   Permit applications: All permit applications shall be reviewed by
the City Planner to determine whether the proposed work is in conformance with
Title 5 of this code and whether any Title 5 requirements are to be included in
the permit terms and conditions.
      2.   Written Appeal: City Planner determination. If the permit applicant
or any other person is not satisfied with the City Planner’s determination,
written appeal must be filed with the Secretary of the Planning Commission, or
the City Clerk in the Secretary’s absence, within ten days of the City
Planner’s determination. The appeal must set forth the specific reasons why the
appellant believes the determination to be incorrect. The City Planner or the
Secretary to the Planning Commission is authorized under §
5-6-6 (A) of this code to set the public hearing for the appeal.
      3.   Written Appeal: Planning Commission’s decision. If the appellant or
any other person is not satisfied with the Planning Commission’s decision,
written appeal must be filed with the City Clerk within ten days of the
Planning Commission’s decision. The appeal must set forth the specific reasons
why the appellant believes the decision to be incorrect. Upon receipt of the
appeal, the City Clerk shall direct the Planning Commission to submit a report
to the City Council setting for the Planning Commission’s action, the findings
upon which the action was based, and a summary of the evidence which supports
each of the findings and responding to the appellant’s specific reasons set
forth in his or her appeal. Upon receipt of the Planning Commission’s report,
the City Clerk is authorized under §
5-6-6(A) of this code to set the public hearing for the appeal.
      4.   Determination or Decision not Appealed: Any determination or
decision not appealed within the time specified and the decision of the City
Council shall be final and conclusive as to the zoning issues and matters
covered in that determination or decision. Such zoning issues and matters which
are made a part of the permit terms and conditions may not later be appealed to
the Board of Appeals under any code referred to in this title.
      5.   Judicial Review: The time to appeal a decision of the City Council
pursuant to this chapter shall be governed by the provisions of Cal. Code of
Civil Procedure § 1094.6 as currently enacted.
(Ord. 650, passed 4-18-2023)
§ 4-1-3-2 ADDITIONAL PERMIT REQUIREMENTS.
   Waste collection: the building official, depending on the magnitude of a
construction project, may require the permit applicant(s) to locate on site a
waste collection bin large enough to receive construction materials. Permit
applications for extensive remodeling, i.e., reroofing, interior-exterior wall
covering removal and the like, shall be required to have a waste collection bin
on site prior to the issuance of a building permit. All waste materials to be
disposed of shall be placed within this bin and removed from the site by the
bin provider.
(Ord. 650, passed 4-18-2023)
§ 4-1-4 CALIFORNIA MECHANICAL CODE.
   The city hereby adopts the 2022 California Mechanical Code, with appendices,
and any subsequent amendments and/or new editions and is hereby made a part of
this chapter as if fully set forth herein.
(Ord. 650, passed 4-18-2023)
§ 4-1-5 INTERNATIONAL PROPERTY MAINTENANCE CODE.
   The city hereby adopts the 2021 International Property Maintenance Code,
with appendices, and any subsequent amendments and/or new editions and is
hereby made a part of this chapter as if fully set forth herein.
(Ord. 650, passed 4-18-2023)
§ 4-1-6 CALIFORNIA PLUMBING CODE.
   The city hereby adopts the 2022 California Plumbing Code, with appendices,
and any subsequent amendments and/or new editions and is hereby made a part of
this chapter as if fully set forth herein.
(Ord. 650, passed 4-18-2023)
§ 4-1-7 CALIFORNIA ELECTRICAL CODE.
   The city hereby adopts the 2022 California Electrical Code, with appendices,
and any subsequent amendments and/or new editions and is hereby made a part of
this chapter as if fully set forth herein.
(Ord. 650, passed 4-18-2023)
§ 4-1-8 CALIFORNIA HISTORICAL BUILDING CODE.
   The city hereby adopts the 2022 California Historical Building Code, with
appendices, and any subsequent amendments and/or new editions and is hereby
made a part of this chapter as if fully set forth herein.
(Ord. 650, passed 4-18-2023)
§ 4-1-9 CALIFORNIA ENERGY CODE.
   The city hereby adopts the 2022 California Energy Code, with appendices, and
any subsequent amendments and/or new editions and is hereby made a part of this
chapter as if fully set forth herein.
(Ord. 650, passed 4-18-2023)
§ 4-1-10 CALIFORNIA GREEN STANDARDS CODE.
   The city hereby adopts the 2022 California Green Standard Code, with
appendices, and any subsequent amendments and/or new editions and is hereby
made a part of this chapter as if fully set forth herein.
(Ord. 650, passed 4-18-2023)
§ 4-1-11 CALIFORNIA FIRE CODE.
   The city hereby adopts the 2022 California Fire Code, with appendices, and
any subsequent amendments and/or new editions and is hereby made a part of this
chapter as if fully set forth herein.
(Ord. 650, passed 4-18-2023)
§ 4-1-12 CALIFORNIA RESIDENTIAL BUILDING CODE.
   The city hereby adopts the 2022 California Residential Building Code, with
appendices, and any subsequent amendments and/or new editions and is hereby
made a part of this chapter as if fully set forth herein.
(Ord. 650, passed 4-18-2023)
CHAPTER 2: SIGN REGULATIONS
Section
4-2-1 Title
4-2-2 Purpose
4-2-3 Definitions
4-2-4 Prohibited signs
4-2-5 General restrictions and provisions
4-2-6 Real estate signs
4-2-7 Temporary signs
4-2-8 Murals
4-2-9 District regulations
4-2-9-1 Residential Zone Districts
4-2-9-2 Commercial Zone Districts
4-2-9-3 Industrial Zone Districts
4-2-10 Freeway oriented signs
4-2-11 Specific use regulations
4-2-11-1 Service station signs
4-2-11-2 New and used vehicle dealership signs
4-2-12 Nonconforming signs
4-2-13 Amortization
4-2-14 Safety and maintenance
4-2-15 Permits
4-2-16 Sign permit application information
4-2-17 Variances
4-2-18 Appeals
4-2-19 Enforcement
§ 4-2-1 TITLE.
   The title of this chapter shall be the “Sign Chapter of the City of
Livingston”.
(Ord. 596, passed 10-18-2011)
§ 4-2-2 PURPOSE.
   The purpose of these sign regulations is to provide minimum standards to
safeguard life, health, property and public welfare in keeping with the
character of the city by regulating and controlling the size, height,
structural design, quality of materials, construction, location,
electrification and maintenance of all sign structures to accomplish the
following results:
   (A)   To protect and enhance the character of residential neighborhoods and
property values by prohibiting obtrusive and incompatible signs;
   (B)   To promote and maintain healthy commercial centers and property
values, to effectively communicate the nature of goods and services, and to
avoid wasteful, ugly and unsightly competition in signs;
   (C)   To provide a reasonable and comprehensive system of controls of signs;
   (D)   To encourage signs which are well designed and pleasing in appearance,
and to provide incentive and latitude for variety, good design relationship,
spacing and location;
   (E)   To encourage a desirable urban character which has a minimum of
overhead clutter;
   (F)   To attract and direct persons to various activities and enterprises in
order to provide for the maximum public convenience; and
   (G)   To enhance the economic value of the community and each area of it
through the regulation of size, location, design and illumination of signs.
(Ord. 596, passed 10-18-2011)
§ 4-2-3 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   A-FRAME. A freestanding sign usually hinged at the top, or attached in a
similar manner, and widening at the bottom to form a shape similar to the
letter “A”. Such signs are usually designed to be portable; hence they are not
considered permanent signs.
   ABANDONED SIGN. A sign which no longer correctly directs or attracts any
person, nor advertises an existent bona fide business or related activities and
products from the premises on which such sign is displayed.
   ANIMATED SIGN. Signs that have moving parts (inclusive of rotating signs) or
lighting or motion picture projection, which creates the illusion of moving
parts; animated viewing screens; flashing, chasing, scintillating or twinkling
lights.
   AREA OF SIGNS. The area of the sign shall be determined by circumscribing
the exterior limits of the mass of each display with a rectangle, parallelogram
or other acceptable geometric figure connecting all extreme points, but
excluding any reasonable embellishments and the necessary supports or uprights.
If the sign consists of more than one section or module, all areas will be
totaled.
   AWNING. A temporary or permanent structure attached to, or supported by a
building, designed for aesthetics, or shelter over a pedestrian or vehicular
way and which may or may not project over public property.
   BANNER SIGNS. A temporary sign composed of lightweight material not enclosed
in a rigid frame, secured or mounted to allow movement of the sign by the
atmosphere.
   BARBER POLE. A stationary cylindrical pole of red, white and blue spiral
stripe design and which identifies a barbershop.
   BILLBOARD. Any sign which directs attention to a business, commodity,
service, industry or other activity which is not sold, offered or conducted on
the premises upon which such sign is located, or to which it is affixed.
   BUILDING FACADE. That portion of any exterior elevation of a building
extending vertically from the grade to the top of a parapet wall or eave, and
horizontally across the entire width of the building elevation.
   BUILDING FRONT. That portion of the main building which affords public
entry. In the case of more than one public entry, the entrance with the
assigned address shall be considered the main public entry for computation
purposes.
   BUILDING FRONTAGE. The length of the side of a building, which faces
directly upon a public street. For the purposes of this chapter, FACES DIRECTLY
UPON A PUBLIC STREET shall mean the area formed by extending perpendicular
lines to the street from the two building sides. This definition does not
include any portion of a building that intersects any portion of another
structure fronting onto an adjacent street or any portion of another lot. If a
building is curved or triangular, the BUILDING FRONTAGE shall be the shortest
distance between the points on the outside extremity of the building elevation
measured parallel to the public street upon which the building fronts.
   BUILDING IDENTIFICATION SIGN. Signage that is limited to the name of the
tenant or business where the logo or the tenant or business does not contain
product information.
   BULLETIN BOARD. A sign used to announce a coming event or attraction or used
to convey a specific message related to the building or use of the property in
which the bulletin board is located. In all zones, BULLETIN BOARDS, which are
displayed so as to be viewed from a public street, highway, parking lot,
walkway or mall shall be subject to the sign regulations of the zone in which
the building or property is located.
   CANOPY. A permanent roof structure of covering extending along part or all
of a building facade, but not over a public right-of-way.
   CANOPY SIGN. A sign that is constructed in or on, attached to the face or
suspended below a canopy or cantilevered covered walkway or arcade, whether
parallel to or at right angles to the face of the building.
   CIVIC SIGN. A sign, other than a commercial sign, posted to advertise a
civic event, public agency, school, church, civic-fraternal organization or
similar noncommercial organization.
   COMMERCIAL ZONE AREA. All areas within the city zoned for commercial use.
   COMMUNITY DIRECTIONAL SIGN. A sign informing the direction to a community
service organization, public facility or a church.
   CONSTRUCTION SIGN. Signs located on a site during construction, which
informs of new buildings opening dates, leasing opportunities and/or identifies
the architects, engineers, contractors and financiers.
   CURB LINE. The line at the face of the curb nearest the roadway.
   DILAPIDATED SIGN. Any sign or element of a sign which is excessively
weathered or structurally unsound, or where the copy can no longer be seen or
understood by a person with normal eyesight under normal viewing conditions.
   DIRECTIONAL SIGN. A directional or informational sign designed to direct and
guide pedestrian and vehicular traffic while said traffic is on a parcel or
real property.
   DISTRICT. Zoning district.
   ERECT. To erect, construct, attach, hang, place, suspend, paint, post or
affix, but shall not include change of copy.
   FLASHING SIGN. Any sign in which the illumination source alternately is on
and off when the sign is energized.
   FREESTANDING SIGN. A sign wholly supported by one or more uprights, poles or
upright members in or upon the ground, which are not part of, or supported by a
building, and are not temporary in nature.
   FREEWAY. A highway to which the owners of abutting property have no right of
easement or access to or from their property, and which is declared to be such
in compliance with the California Streets and Highways Code.
   FREEWAY SIGN. Any professional, retail/commercial, or industrial use located
on property within 500 feet of the State Highway 99 right-of-way.
   GROUND SIGN. A freestanding sign six feet or less in height with a base or
method of support, which is an integral part of the sign.
   HISTORIC SIGN. A sign which exceeds 50 years in age and exhibits historic,
cultural or aesthetic qualities that embody or represent the character of the
city.
   IDENTIFICATION SIGN. A sign identifying an apartment, residence, school,
church or other nonbusiness use or a use allowed on a lot in a residential
zone.
   ILLUMINATED SIGN. Any sign which has characters, letters, figures, designs
or outlines illuminated by electric lights, or luminous tubes as a part of the
sign.
   INCIDENTAL SIGN. A sign that has a purpose secondary to the use of the
property where it is located. Generally informational, these signs include
posting of “no parking”, “loading only” and other similar directives. No sign
with a legible commercial message shall be considered incidental.
   INDUSTRIAL ZONE DISTRICT. All areas within the city zoned for industrial
use.
   INSTITUTIONAL SIGN. Any identification signs for churches, schools,
fraternal organizations, hospitals, public facilities and institutional uses.
   LOGO SIGN. An established trademark or symbol identifying a product or use.
   MARQUEE. Any permanent roofed structure, projecting over public property or
right-of-way, attached to and supported by a building.
   MONUMENT SIGN. Any “freestanding sign”, as defined herein, which does not
exceed a height of five feet.
   MURAL. A permanent picture painted directly on an exterior wall or on panels
affixed to exterior walls.
   MURAL PERMIT. A permit issued by the city authorizing the painting of a
mural within the city.
   NONCONFORMING SIGN. See §
4-2-12  of this chapter.
   OFF-PREMISES SIGN. Any sign that advertises goods, products, services or
facilities not sold, produced, manufactured or furnished on the premises on
which the sign is located.
   PARKING LOT SIGN. A sign that is placed or displayed on a parking lot to
supply information to people using such lot, including information with respect
to liability as well as entry, exit and directional information, as is
necessary to facilitate the safe movement of vehicles served by the parking
area.
   PERMANENT SIGN. Every sign except temporary signs.
   POLE SIGN. A freestanding sign independently supported by one or more poles.
   POLITICAL SIGN. A temporary sign designed for the purpose of expressing
support for, or opposition to, a political candidate, campaign issue, or
proposition at a public election.
   PORTABLE FREESTANDING SIGN. Any sign that is designed to be movable and is
not structurally attached to the ground, a building, a structure, or any other
sign. Such portable sign may or may not be in the configuration of an “A”.
   PROJECTING SIGN. Any sign other than a wall sign which is suspended from or
supported by a building or wall and which projects more than 12 inches
therefrom.
   READER BOARD. A sign constructed so that individual letters or other
advertising material can easily be changed, used only by businesses, activities
or uses that depend on frequently changing events.
   REAL ESTATE SIGN. A sign that is a temporary sign advertising the sale,
lease or rent of the property upon which it is located, which may include the
identification of the person or firm handling such sale, lease or rent, and an
attached rider providing additional information about the property.
   RESIDENTIAL ZONE DISTRICT. All areas zoned within the city for residential
use.
   REVOLVING SIGN. A sign which rotates in either part of or a full circle.
   ROOF SIGN. Any sign erected upon, against or directly above a roof, or
projecting above the roofline of the building.
   ROOFLINE. The ridge of the roof or the top of the parapet, whichever forms
the top line of the building silhouette.
   ROTATING SIGN. Any sign which physically moves about on an axis.
   SHOPPING CENTER. Any combination of five or more separately owned or
operated business establishments on a single or commonly owned parcel of land.
   SHOPPING CENTER IDENTIFICATION SIGN. A freestanding sign used to identify a
shopping center or group of businesses which function as an integral unit and
does not reference or advertise any individual tenant.
   SIGN. Any insignia, display board, bill, announcement, poster, picture,
lithograph, map, plat, banner, bunting flag, pennant, balloon, valances,
sample, model, structure or other device when erected or maintained out of
doors in view of the general public, including application of such to window
surface so as to be displayed to the exterior, used to announce, declare,
demonstrate, display, advertise or attract the attention of the public,
including, but not limited to, clocks, and barber poles or other similar
devices, but shall not include display of the American flag or State of
California flag.
   SIGN AREA. The number of square feet of the smallest rectangular figures
which a sign face can be enclosed.
   SITE (INCLUSIVE OF PARCEL, LAND AND PREMISES). Only that portion of the site
or building land area actually occupied by the building and/or contiguous
improved surfaces (parking area and the like). This is not to be construed as
including vacant or unimproved land under the same ownership or contiguous to
the building site area; however, off premises parking lots shall be subject to
identification signs as defined by “directional sign”.
   SNIPE SIGN. Signs of a temporary nature advertising a specific event or
product and which are illegally posted to trees, posts, poles, stakes, fences
or similar support structures.
   SUBDIVISION DIRECTIONAL SIGN. A directional or informational sign, located
on a site other than the subdivision being advertised, and designed to direct
or guide traffic to another location where new homes are available for sale.
   TEMPORARY SIGN. Any sign approved for a limited period of time.
   TIME AND TEMPERATURE SIGN. A sign or the portion of any sign that displays
the current time and temperature in alternating sequence.
   WALL SIGN. Any sign posted or painted on, suspended from or otherwise
affixed to the wall of any building or structural part thereof, in essentially
a flat position, with the exposed face of the sign approximately parallel to
the plane of such wall and not extending more than 12 inches beyond the face of
the building or structural part thereof.
   WINDOW SIGN. Any sign maintained in or painted upon the surface of a window.
Such signs include non-national advertising signs.
   ZONE. One of the various classes of areas into which the city has been
divided by this chapter.
(Ord. 596, passed 10-18-2011; Ord. 612, passed 4-1-2014)
§ 4-2-4 PROHIBITED SIGNS.
   The following signs are prohibited in all districts within the city, except
as provided elsewhere in this chapter:
   (A)   Any sign which is not included under the types of signs permitted in
district regulations or in this section;
   (B)   Signs which incorporate in any manner flashing, moving or intermittent
lighting; or signs which are in any manner animated or include any noisemaking
attachments. This does not include public service signs, such as time/
temperature units, barber poles or rotating signs conforming to subsection (H)
of this section;
   (C)   Signs which by color, wording, design, location or illumination
resemble or conflict with any traffic control device or with safe and efficient
flow of traffic;
   (D)   Portable signs as defined herein, except as noted in §§
4-2-7 and
4-2-9 of this chapter;
   (E)   Any structural supports or members of a roof sign shall not be visible
to public view;
   (F)   Banners, streamers, pendants, balloons, pennants, whirligigs, posters,
ribbons, strings of light bulbs, spinners or other similar devices. These
devices when not part of any sign are similarly prohibited, e.g., holidays,
grand openings and special events, as provided under §
4-2-7 of this chapter;
   (G)   Stationary motor vehicles, trailers and related devices to circumvent
the intent of this chapter;
   (H)   Any “rotating sign”, as defined herein, where the rotation exceeds
eight revolutions per minute;
   (I)   Signs which are attached to utility poles, trees, fences or other
signs, rocks or natural features;
   (J)   Off site or billboard signs except as authorized by §
4-2-7(A) of this chapter;
   (K)   On site business related signs that advertise an activity, product or
service no longer conducted or available at the site on which the signs are
located; and
   (L)   Any sign displayed on or over public property, unless approved by the
City Council.
(Ord. 596, passed 10-18-2011)
§ 4-2-5 GENERAL RESTRICTIONS AND PROVISIONS.
   (A)   Signs in street right-of-way or future right-of-way. No freestanding
sign shall be located in or project into the present or future right-of-way of
any public street, including sidewalks, unless such location or projection is
specifically authorized by other provisions of this chapter.
   (B)   Signs interfering with sight distance. No sign shall be so designed or
constructed as to interfere with the sight distance of motorists proceeding on
or approaching adjacent streets, alleys, driveways, or parking areas, or of
pedestrians proceeding on or approaching adjacent sidewalks or pedestrianways.
   (C)   Monument signs. Monument signs, as defined herein, may be used in
conjunction with freestanding identification signs on sites one acre or more in
size, or as primary identification signs on sites less than one acre in size.
Monument signs shall conform to the following restrictions in either case:
      1.   Maximum 30 square feet per display face;
      2.   Maximum five feet in height, measured from the adjacent permanent
surface;
      3.   Shall not be placed closer than 100 feet to any freestanding
identification sign on the same site or adjacent site;
      4.   Shall not be placed closer than 200 feet to any other monument sign
on the same site or adjacent site; and
      5.   Shall be no closer than 25 feet from a driveway which intersects the
public right-of-way; or, any sidewalks, driveways and the like, on the same
site or adjacent site.
   (D)   Directional signs. On site directional signs, as defined herein, shall
be excluded from the sign provisions of this chapter. These signs shall not
contain advertising or promotional information or business related logos.
   (E)   Closure of business. Upon the closure and vacation of a business or
activity, the owner of said business or activity, or property owner, if
different from business owner, shall within 90 days have all related signs
removed from public view.
   (F)   Window signs. Window signs, as defined herein, shall be considered as
a sign in determining aggregate sign area. The following signs, if used in the
specified manner, are not computed as part of the aggregate sign area and do
not require a permit: banners or posters on inside of windows. Such signs may
be used in conjunction with national advertising programs, or as weekly
marketing specials or as decorations customary for special holidays, and may
not exceed 50% of the total window area of any window.
   (G)   Painted signs. Signs painted on exterior walls, windows or structures
of any kind shall be computed as part of the aggregate sign area.
   (H)   Community directional signs on public streets. Permission to erect a
community directional sign on public streets shall be obtained from the
Director of Public Works.
      1.   The sign shall be rectangular in shape, a maximum 18 inches by 30
inches in size, constructed of minimum 80-gauge steel or aluminum, finished
with either porcelain enamel, baked enamel, reflective or nonreflective
sheeting and have white letters on a green background with a one-half inch
white border.
      2.   The sign shall be easily read by normal traffic and shall contain
the name of the organization, location designation or distance in blocks or
miles, and a directional arrow.
   (I)   Sign area computations.
      1.   When computing permitted sign area based on the percentage of square
feet of building facade, a maximum height of 16 feet shall be used.
      2.   All display faces of a sign shall be used in computing sign area.
   (J)   Fence signs. Fence signs closer than 50 feet to any street frontage
shall be considered freestanding signs. Such signs shall be included in the
aggregate sign area.
   (K)   Marquee/projecting sign requirements. Marquee, canopy or projecting
signs shall project no closer than two feet to the outside edge of the curb.
Signs projecting more than two-thirds the distance to the curb shall be no
lower (bottom edge of sign) than 12 feet above the sidewalk; less than two-
thirds the distance, the sign shall be no lower than eight feet above the
sidewalk.
(Ord. 596, passed 10-18-2011)
§ 4-2-6 REAL ESTATE SIGNS.
   (A)   Sale, rent or lease signs. Real estate signs advertising the sale,
rent or lease of property and structures are permitted as follows: no sign
permit or deposit is required. Such signs shall be removed within 15 days after
sale, rent or lease of the property or structure, except where otherwise
listed.
   (B)   Single-family dwellings and duplexes. One real estate sign shall be
permitted for each lot. The sign may have two faces, shall not exceed an area
of six square feet per face, shall not exceed a height of five feet above the
surface of the street, unless placed in a window and shall be unlighted.
   (C)   Multiple-family dwellings, commercial and industrial.
      1.   Generally. One real estate sign shall be permitted for each
development street frontage. May be attached flat against the building or
freestanding to a maximum height of six feet above the adjacent surface. Shall
not project above the eave line or the top of the parapet of the building and
shall be unlighted.
      2.   Area limitations.
         (a)   Multiple-family dwellings: 16 square feet;
         (b)   Commercial: 22 square feet;
         (c)   Shopping center: 40 square feet;
         (d)   Industrial: 30 square feet;
         (e)   Industrial center: 48 square feet; and
         (f)   Multiple use: 40 square feet.
   (D)   Unimproved acreage. One real estate sign shall be permitted per street
frontage. The sign shall not exceed 48 square feet, may have two faces, shall
not exceed a height of ten feet above the adjacent surface and shall be
unlighted.
(Ord. 596, passed 10-18-2011)
§ 4-2-7 TEMPORARY SIGNS.
   Temporary signs may be permitted by the Planning Director for a time period
specified for each type of temporary sign.
   (A)   Subdivision directional sign permit. The permit for any subdivision
directional sign shall be valid for one year from the approval date. The
Planning Director shall have the authority to extend the time period for one
additional year. Requests for extension shall be submitted to the Planning
Department prior to the expiration of the first year permit. Maximum size is
four feet by eight feet and may be double sided.
   (B)   Political signs. Political signs may be posted on private property,
with property owner permission, preceding an election. The maximum size of each
sign shall not exceed 32 square feet. No deposit shall be required to ensure
the proper removal of such signs.
      1.   No political sign shall be erected within or overhang into any
public right-of-way or publicly owned property, nor constitute a traffic hazard
by reason of obscuring motorist vision, or otherwise jeopardizing the normal
flow of traffic.
      2.   All political signs shall be removed from view within seven days
after the election date, except for those candidates who were successful in a
primary election or must compete in a runoff election, in which case, such
signs shall be allowed to remain until seven days after the final election day.
      3.   It shall be the responsibility of the property owner to remove all
political signs within seven days after the final election day. In the event
that any political sign is not removed within the specified time, the property
owner shall be notified of his or her responsibility to remove such signs and
directed to remove the sign within seven days or be cited. If the sign has not
been removed within the additional seven days, the property owner shall be
issued a citation in the amount of $50 for each successive day until such sign
is removed.
   (C)   Construction signs. One sign identifying a project under construction
shall be permitted per street frontage on the structure or site under
construction. The sign may contain the name of the building contractor and his
or her subcontractors, the architect, the engineer, the owner, and the
developer. The sign shall be permitted during the period of actual construction
after the building permit has been issued. The sign area shall not exceed 50
square feet, shall be one sided, shall not exceed ten feet above the adjacent
pavement surface, and be unlighted.
   (D)   Grand opening and special event signs. A special permit may be issued
by the Planning Director for banners, streamers, flags or other prohibited
signs, as defined herein, and temporary or portable signs such as A-frame
signs, as defined herein, for special events or sales, such as new car models,
clearance sales, outdoor fairs and sales, grand openings and events of a
similar nature. All such signage shall be located on site at the business
location and shall not intrude into setback “vision triangles” or be located on
public sidewalks.
      1.   Signs shall be allowed in all zoning districts for a maximum of 90
days, except residential, subject to the approval of the Planning Director.
      2.   A deposit of $100 shall be required to ensure the removal of such
signs. The deposit shall be forfeited to the city if the sign is not removed by
the 90 day deadline plus seven days.
      3.   A minimum distance of 25 feet shall be maintained between a
commercial directional sign and any other advertising sign.
      4.   The Planning Director may extend a permit by an additional 90 days
if, upon inspection, the signage is still considered in good shape.
(Ord. 596, passed 10-18-2011)
§ 4-2-8 MURALS.
   The purpose of this section is to provide opportunities for art citywide
that will contribute to livable, aesthetically pleasing and pedestrian friendly
streetscapes in accordance with the goals and objectives of the city’s general
plan. Promoting murals of historical or community significance will assist in
educating residents and visitors about the city. This section will promote the
local economy, tourism and city beautification efforts by establishing
standards for murals, their location and design.
   (A)   Application required. Applications for a mural permit shall be filed
with the City Recreation Department. Such applications shall include the
following:
      1.   The address and assessor’s parcel number for the property;
      2.   Written consent of the property owner or authorized representative;
      3.   A description of the proposed mural, both in written and picture/
design form, including a size estimate for the mural; and
      4.   Any other information the Recreation Superintendent deems necessary
in describing whether the mural will comply with subsection (D) of this
section.
   (B)   Application fee. The application for a mural permit shall be
accompanied by a fee established by the resolution of the City Council.
   (C)   Location. Murals may be located on the sides of buildings and walls on
property in any commercial and industrial zone district (C-1, C-2, C-3, DTC, M-
1, M-2, P-F) within the city.
   (D)   Criteria for design of murals.
      1.   The subject matter of the mural shall be of historical or community
significance regarding the growth and development of the city and the region. A
mural may not contain text, registered trademarks, logos or business
advertising unless such items fall within the guidelines of this subsection
(D)1.
      2.   The paint and materials to be used shall be appropriate for use in
an outdoor locale, for an artistic rendition and shall be of a permanent, long
lasting variety.
      3.   The mural shall be designed and painted by mural artists with
knowledge in the design and painting of such projects. Mural artists must
demonstrate their knowledge by providing photographs of murals they have
painted or by providing evidence of their experience.
      4.   To the extent feasible, the mural shall be resistant to acts of
vandalism, such as graffiti.
      5.   Murals shall be subject to review by the Recreation Superintendent,
or individual designated by the City Manager, every two years, or as needed to
determine physical condition and maintenance.
   (E)   Mural permit and design approval.
      1.   Prior to painting, installation and execution of a mural, an
application shall be submitted to the Recreation Department and approved by the
Parks, Recreation and Arts Commission, subject to appeal as described in
subsection (G) of this section.
      2.   The application shall include all the criteria detailed in
subsection (A) of this section, including a detailed drawing or sketch of the
mural and other details as described on the application. As required under
subsection (A) of this section, the application shall provide proof that
permission from the property owner has been secured for the wall on which the
mural will be applied; this will require written authorization by the property
owner.
   (F)   Parks, Recreation and Arts Commission review of mural permit.
      1.   The Recreation Superintendent shall forward the application for a
mural permit, with a recommendation, to the Parks, Recreation and Arts
Commission. The Parks, Recreation and Arts Commission shall hold a public
hearing to review and approve, approve with modifications, or deny the mural
permit as submitted according to the criteria set forth in subsection (D) of
this section. Public hearings for the consideration of proposed applications
for a mural permit shall require at least one publication in an official
newspaper of general circulation in the county not less than ten calendar days
prior to the date of the hearing.
      2.   Should the Parks, Recreation and Arts Commission be disbanded, or
not have sufficient members appointed to constitute a quorum, the Planning
Commission shall fulfill the role of the Parks, Recreation and Arts Commission.
In fulfilling the role of the Parks, Recreation and Arts Commission, the
Planning Commission shall comply with all requirements of this chapter.
   (G)   Appeal process. Within ten days of the Parks, Recreation and Arts
Commission’s decision on a mural permit, any interested party may appeal a
decision of the Parks, Recreation and Arts Commission regarding a mural permit
application. The appeal must be in writing and must be filed with the City
Clerk within ten days of the action by the Parks, Recreation and Arts
Commission. The appeal shall state specifically wherein the decision of Parks,
Recreation and Arts Commission was inappropriate. The appeal shall be
considered by the City Council at a noticed public hearing. Action of the City
Council shall be considered final. Public hearings for the consideration of an
appeal under this section shall require at least one publication in an official
newspaper of general circulation in the county not less than ten calendar days
prior to the date of the hearing.
(Ord. 612, passed 4-1-2014; Ord. 635, passed 10-2-2018)
§ 4-2-9 DISTRICT REGULATIONS.
§ 4-2-9-1 RESIDENTIAL ZONE DISTRICTS.
   (A)   Residential dwellings. One identification sign containing the name
and/or street address of the occupant shall be permitted for each dwelling. The
sign shall not exceed an area of two square feet per face.
   (B)   Multiple-family dwellings. One identification sign shall be permitted
for each street frontage of each development. The sign shall not exceed an area
of 20 square feet per face, may be a wall or freestanding sign, shall be
unlighted, and not exceed four feet in height above the adjacent pavement
surface.
   (C)   Home occupations. Home occupations may be permitted one sign in
addition to that permitted for dwelling type. The sign may contain the business
name, hours and/or telephone number; shall be unlighted, flat against the
building, and not exceed two square feet in area.
   (D)   Neighborhood identification. Neighborhood identification signs may be
authorized for residential subdivisions at least five acres in size. One such
sign may be permitted for each major collector street entrance to the
subdivision subject to the following requirements:
      1.   Maximum sign area shall be 20 square feet per face;
      2.   Where ground mounted, the height of the sign shall not exceed four
feet above the adjacent pavement surface; and
      3.   The sign shall be unlighted.
   (E)   Professional offices.
      1.   One identification sign shall be permitted per street frontage. The
sign shall not exceed 24 square feet per face, may be a wall sign or
freestanding, shall be unlighted, and not exceed a height of six feet above the
adjacent pavement surface.
      2.   One additional nonilluminated wall sign, not exceeding four square
feet, may be permitted for each occupant having an outside entrance.
   (F)   Mobilehome parks, churches, schools, clubs, parks and the like. One
identification sign shall be permitted per street frontage. The sign shall not
exceed 24 square feet per display face, may be a wall sign or freestanding,
shall be unlighted, and shall not exceed a height of six feet above the
adjacent pavement surface.
   (G)   Institutions. One double faced freestanding or wall identification
sign is permitted for each street frontage. The sign area for each frontage
shall be one and one-half square feet for each ten linear feet of frontage.
Each parcel is guaranteed a minimum of 24 square feet regardless of frontage
length. A freestanding sign may not exceed 20 feet in height.
   (H)   Lighting. All signs allowable within the residential zone district
shall be unlighted.
(Ord. 596, passed 10-18-2011; Ord. 612, passed 4-1-2014)
§ 4-2-9-2 COMMERCIAL ZONE DISTRICTS.
   (A)   C-1, Central Commercial.
      1.   Each business within this district shall be allowed a maximum of 30
square feet of sign aggregate per street frontage. All signs within this
district shall be wall signs and shall not extend past the edge of the roofline
nor below the awning, except the following signs.
         (a)   Each business shall be allowed one window sign per street
frontage. Such signs shall be included in the business’s total sign aggregate.
         (b)   Each business shall be allowed one identification sign below the
awning level, which shall be one foot by six feet. The sign shall not exceed
one foot in height and six feet in width. Such signs shall not be included in
the total sign aggregate.
         (c)   No projection signs are allowed.
      2.   (a)   One freestanding identification sign which may list the names
of the occupants of a shopping center within its surface area shall be
permitted. The sign may be double faced, shall not exceed a height of 20 feet
and may be illuminated.
         (b)   The sign may have up to two double faced modules and shall not
exceed 80 square feet per side for total display area.
            (1)   Each tenant/occupant within the shopping plaza shall be
allowed up to a maximum of 10% aggregate sign area across the front building
facade of each respective occupancy. An overall site sign design scheme shall
be coordinated to gain perspective of size, color and illumination.
            (2)   No projecting signs are permitted.
         (c)   It shall be the responsibility of the Planning Director to
conduct a sign design review of all new signs proposed within the DTC district.
This design review will be based upon that criteria found within §
5-6-7, Site Plan And Design Review, of this code.
   (B)   DTC, Downtown Commercial. Same as subsection (A) of this section.
   (C)   C-2, Community Commercial.
      1.   Each business establishment shall be allowed a maximum aggregate
sign area of 20% of the front building facade. No projecting signs are
permitted.
      2.   One freestanding identification sign, which may list the names of
the occupants of the shopping center within its surface area, shall be
permitted for each street frontage. The sign may be double faced, shall not
exceed a height of 30 feet and may be illuminated. The sign may have up to
three double faced modules and shall not exceed 120 square feet per side for
total display area.
      3.   Each tenant/occupant within a shopping center shall be allowed up to
a maximum of 15% aggregate sign area across the front building facade of each
respective occupancy. No minimum sign area is required; however, an overall
site sign design scheme shall be coordinated to gain perspective of size,
color, and illumination. No projecting signs are permitted.
   (D)   C-3, Service Commercial.
      1.   The aggregate sign area for each parcel shall be three square feet
for each linear foot of street frontage. For lots with more than one street
frontage, the aggregate sign area shall be 75% of the total so computed.
      2.   Each parcel shall be permitted to have one freestanding
identification sign per street frontage and one additional freestanding sign
per street frontage of 300 feet or more.
      3.   Freestanding signs shall not exceed 30 feet in height, may have up
to two double faced modules, and shall not exceed an aggregate per side sign
area of 100 square feet. No additional attached signs shall be permitted.
      4.   One freestanding identification sign, which may list the names of
the occupants of the shopping center within its surface area, shall be
permitted for each street frontage. The sign may be double faced, shall not
exceed a height of 30 feet and may be illuminated. The sign may have up to
three double faced modules and shall not exceed 120 square feet per side for
total display area.
      5.   Each tenant/occupant within a shopping center shall be allowed up to
a maximum of 15% aggregate sign area across the front building facade of each
respective occupancy. No minimum sign area is required; however, an overall
site sign design scheme shall be coordinated to gain perspective of size, color
and illumination. No projecting signs are permitted.
(Ord. 596, passed 10-18-2011; Ord. 610, passed 2-18-2014; Ord. 612, passed 4-1-
2014)
§ 4-2-9-3 INDUSTRIAL ZONE DISTRICTS.
   (A)   Sign area. The aggregate sign area for lots of M-1 and M-2 Zones shall
not exceed one-half of a square foot per foot of lot frontage. The signs
enumerated below shall be subject to the total sign area.
   (B)   Identification sign. One freestanding identification sign shall be
permitted for each lot on each street frontage. The maximum size of said sign
shall be 100 square feet per display face, and shall not exceed a height of 30
feet. The sign may be illuminated.
   (C)   Wall signs. One wall sign shall be permitted for each lot on each
street frontage. The maximum size of said sign shall be 20% of the building
facade on which it is to be attached. The sign may be illuminated.
   (D)   Multi-occupant complex.
      1.   One freestanding identification sign which conforms to subsection
(A) of this section shall be permitted per street frontage. The sign may list
the names of the occupants within its surface.
      2.   Each industrial suite within the building shall be allowed to
install two identification signs adjacent to the large rollup door totaling 40
square feet maximum and may list the name of the business and a logo, and one
sign on the main entrance door of each suite, which shall total four square
feet maximum and may contain the business name, hours of operation and/or
telephone number.
      3.   Required signage by the state for regulated businesses may be
located inside windows or near the main entrance door. These signs shall be
unlighted and lie flat against the building/door.
         (a)   Such signs shall not be included in the total sign aggregate for
the parcel.
         (b)   An overall site and design scheme (signage master plan) shall be
coordinated to review the size and colors of all the signage, and the
illumination of the freestanding sign.
(Ord. 596, passed 10-18-2011; Ord. 612, passed 4-1-2014)
§ 4-2-10 FREEWAY ORIENTED SIGNS.
   For the purpose of considering freestanding signs only, those businesses
within 500 feet of a state or federal highway right-of-way shall be deemed
freeway oriented. One freestanding freeway oriented sign per parcel or shopping
center, a maximum 500 square feet per side, may be permitted in addition to
those signs described in §
4-2-9 of this chapter. The freeway oriented sign shall be limited to 60 feet in
height without a use permit, but may be increased to a maximum of 80 feet with
an approved use permit. Notwithstanding any prohibition that may be located
elsewhere in the Livingston Municipal Code, freeway oriented signs with
changeable copy may advertise businesses and services located off-site only
within the counties of Merced, Stanislaus, San Joaquin and Fresno and shall
allow the city (with content its choosing) a minimum of nine “plays” per hour
for a “dwell” duration of eight seconds each per sign face.
(Ord. 596, passed 10-18-2011; Ord. 612, passed 4-1-2014; Ord. 658, passed 1-21-
2025)
§ 4-2-11 SPECIFIC USE REGULATIONS.
§ 4-2-11-1 SERVICE STATION SIGNS.
   (A)   Aggregate sign area. The aggregate sign area for any lot shall not
exceed one square foot for each foot of street frontage. Each lot shall,
however, be permitted a minimum 80 square feet of aggregate sign area.
   (B)   Freestanding identification sign. One freestanding illuminated, double
faced identification sign, not exceeding 50 square feet in area per display
face, nor higher than 30 feet in height, and one double faced module unit is
permitted. No additional attached signs are permitted.
   (C)   Building identification signs. One all illuminated identification
sign, not exceeding 20% of the building facade area to which it is attached,
may be permitted for each street frontage.
   (D)   Gas price sign. One unlighted double faced sign, not exceeding 20
square feet per face, nor over six feet in height, shall be permitted for each
street frontage. The sign shall be permanent in nature, identify only gas
prices, state and federal information, and credit cards honored.
   (E)   Freeway oriented signs:. An additional freestanding identification
sign may be permitted in accordance with §
4-2-10 of this chapter.
(Ord. 596, passed 10-18-2011; Ord. 612, passed 4-1-2014)
§ 4-2-11-2 NEW AND USED VEHICLE DEALERSHIP SIGNS.
   (A)   Aggregate sign area. Aggregate sign area shall be compatible with
requirements of the zoning district.
   (B)   Freestanding identification sign. A freestanding identification sign
shall be compatible with requirements of the zoning district.
   (C)   Building identification sign. One wall sign shall be permitted for
each lot on each street frontage. The maximum size of said sign shall be 25% of
the building facade on which it is to be attached. The sign may be illuminated.
   (D)   Freeway oriented signs. An additional freestanding identification sign
may be permitted in accordance with §
4-2-10 of this chapter.
   (E)   Temporary attractors/signs. Pendants, flags and other temporary
attractors/signs may be allowed in excess of 45 days per calendar year with an
approved conditional use permit.
(Ord. 596, passed 10-18-2011; Ord. 612, passed 4-1-2014)
§ 4-2-12 NONCONFORMING SIGNS.
   (A)   Definition. For the purpose of this section, the following definition
shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different
meaning.
      NONCONFORMING SIGN. One which was lawfully erected or placed upon real
property, but which could not be established in the same manner under the
present ordinance.
   (B)   Alterations. Nonconforming signs may remain in perpetuity and run with
the land and may be maintained but not substantially altered, modified or added
to, or increased in area. Any such change would require full conformance with
the provisions of this chapter. Notwithstanding this section, certain signs
shall be required to conform as provided in §
4-2-13 of this chapter.
   (C)   Damaged or destroyed. A nonconforming sign which is destroyed or
damaged to an extent in excess of 50% of its estimated value shall not be
replaced, or repaired, except by a sign which conforms to the provisions of
this chapter.
(Ord. 596, passed 10-18-2011; Ord. 612, passed 4-1-2014)
§ 4-2-13 AMORTIZATION.
   Notwithstanding other provisions of this chapter, the following signs shall
be required to be removed, or modified to comply with the provisions of this
chapter:
   (A)   Abandoned signs, as defined herein, must be removed within 30 days of
business closure; and
   (B)   Signs nonconforming to the established signing standards must be made
to conform within five years after adoption of the sign design standards.
(Ord. 596, passed 10-18-2011; Ord. 612, passed 4-1-2014)
§ 4-2-14 SAFETY AND MAINTENANCE.
   (A)   All parts, portions, units and materials composing the sign, together
with the frame, background, supports or anchorage thereof, shall be maintained
in a proper state of repair and safety, and state of preservation.
   (B)   All parts of the sign, inclusive of the frame, background, supports or
anchorage, shall be maintained in a neatly painted condition.
   (C)   All signs, other than painted-on wall signs, shall be inspected by the
building official.
(Ord. 596, passed 10-18-2011; Ord. 612, passed 4-1-2014)
§ 4-2-15 PERMITS.
   (A)   No person shall place any sign regulated by this chapter without first
obtaining written consent of the owner, lessee or person having lawful
possession of the property upon which such sign will be placed.
   (B)   A sign permit shall be required for all signs hereinafter constructed,
erected, installed, applied, affixed, substantially altered, relocated, or
painted on, within the corporate boundaries of the city.
   (C)   The following signs must conform with the regulations of this chapter,
but do not require a sign permit:
      1.   For sale, lease or rent signs; and
      2.   Residential signs for single-family dwellings.
(Ord. 596, passed 10-18-2011; Ord. 612, passed 4-1-2014)
§ 4-2-16 SIGN PERMIT APPLICATION INFORMATION.
   A building permit must be obtained from and fees paid to the Building
Department. Sign permit application information is as follows:
   (A)   Name, address, and phone number of the applicant, property owner and
agent;
   (B)   Name and address of the use for which the sign is intended, and parcel
number of land on which it is to be placed;
   (C)   Three copies of a scale drawing illustrating the sign(s); if lighted,
the method of illumination, and height of sign;
   (D)   Three copies of a scale drawing illustrating parcel development
(existing structures, parking, and street improvements), and location of
proposed sign(s); and
   (E)   If the sign is a wall sign, three copies of a scale drawing
illustrating the elevation of the building facade. The drawing shall show the
proposed sign(s) and existing sign(s).
(Ord. 596, passed 10-18-2011; Ord. 612, passed 4-1-2014)
§ 4-2-17 VARIANCES.
   (A)   A request for variance from the strict application of sign ordinance
provisions may be made to the Planning Commission.
   (B)   A public hearing before the Planning Commission pursuant to §
5-6-10(C) of this code shall be required.
      1.   Findings of fact must be made by the Planning Commission pursuant to
§
5-6-10(B) of this code before a variance can be approved.
      2.   Appeals of a Planning Commission decision can be made to the City
Council as prescribed by §
5-6-10(D) of this code.
(Ord. 596, passed 10-18-2011; Ord. 612, passed 4-1-2014)
§ 4-2-18 APPEALS.
   (A)   Appeals from administrative decisions rendered on sign ordinance
interpretation and its strict application may be made to the Planning
Commission. Upon proper application and hearing, a decision shall be rendered
by the Planning Commission as to the reasonableness of the administrative
decision based upon applicable ordinance standards.
   (B)   1.   A public hearing before the Planning Commission shall be required
for an administrative appeal.
      2.   A public hearing before the Planning Commission shall be noticed by
mailing notices to all property owners within 300 feet of the property in
question, these property owners as listed on the last equalized assessment roll
of the County Assessor. Such notices shall be mailed out not less than eleven
days prior to the date of the hearing.
   (C)   1.   Within ten days following the decision of the Planning Commission
on an administrative appeal application, the decision may be appealed to the
City Council by the applicant or any other interested party. The appeal shall
be filed with the City Clerk. The appeal shall state specifically wherein the
decision of the Planning Commission was inappropriate.
      2.   A public hearing before the City Council shall be required as
prescribed in §
5-6-6 of this code.
(Ord. 596, passed 10-18-2011; Ord. 612, passed 4-1-2014)
§ 4-2-19 ENFORCEMENT.
   (A)   Notice. If the City Planner finds that any sign or other advertising
structure regulated herein is unsafe, or is a hazard to the public, or is
abandoned or maintained in a dilapidated condition, or has been constructed or
erected or is being maintained in violation of the provisions of this chapter,
or otherwise does not meet the criteria specified in §§
4-2-7 ,
4-2-9-1 ,
4-2-9-2  or
4-2-9-3  of this chapter, he or she shall give written notice to the sign user
or property owner thereof. If the sign user or property owner fails to remove
or alter the structure so as to comply with the standards herein set forth
within one week after such notice, the City Planner may require a meeting with
the violator as well as a notice. If the violation is not corrected within one
week after the meeting, a notice will be sent out to the property owners to
clean up the violation within 24 hours. If that is not done, the case will be
referred to the City Attorney for prosecution.
   (B)   Removal. The City Planner may cause any sign or other advertising
structure which is an immediate hazard to persons or property, or is located
upon public property in violation of this chapter, to be removed summarily and
without notice.
   (C)   Disposal. Any sign removed by the City Planner pursuant to the
provisions of this section shall become the property of the city and may be
disposed of in any manner deemed appropriate by the city. The cost of removal
of such sign shall be considered a debt owed to the city by the owner of the
sign and/or the owner of the property and may be recovered in an appropriated
court action by the city. The cost of removal shall include any and all
incidental expenses incurred by the city in connection with the sign’s removal,
storage and disposal, and shall include court costs and reasonable attorney
fees.
   (D)   Penalty. Any person whether as principal, agent, employee, or
otherwise, violating or causing the violation of any of the provisions of this
chapter shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, and upon conviction thereof shall be
punishable by a fine of not more than $500, or by imprisonment for a term not
exceeding six months, or by both such fine and imprisonment. Such person shall
be deemed guilty of a separate offense for each and every day during any
portion of any violation of this chapter as committed or continued by such
person, and shall be punishable as herein provided.
(Ord. 596, passed 10-18-2011; Ord. 612, passed 4-1-2014)
CHAPTER 3: NUMBERING BUILDINGS
Section
4-3-1 Numbering required
4-3-2 Numbering system
4-3-3 Determination of numbers
4-3-4 Placement, style of numbers
4-3-5 Duty to affix number
4-3-6 Penalty
§ 4-3-1 NUMBERING REQUIRED.
   All units or other property abutting on any street or avenue shall be
numbered in accordance with the provisions of this chapter under the
supervision and direction of the Director of Finance.
(Ord. 335, passed 6-2-1987)
§ 4-3-2 NUMBERING SYSTEM.
   (A)   Units fronting streets from the east and units fronting streets from
the south shall bear even numbers in their figures. Units fronting streets from
the west and units fronting streets from the north shall bear odd numbers in
their last figures.
   (B)   In each block each ten feet shall be deemed the unit for determining
the last figure of the number to be used. From the corner of the block nearest
its baseline each ten feet of frontage shall be given a number.
   (C)   1.   On the south side of the Southern Pacific Railroad mainline
track, on all streets extending east and west, the numbers shall commence at
number 900 at the western city limits and extending east. The next blocks east
shall commence at number 1000 and thereafter each block shall commence at a
number 100 higher than the last.
      2.   On all streets extending north and south, commencing at the north
end of Second Street, south of the Southern Pacific right-of-way, the first
block shall commence at number 300 and, extending south; each successive block
shall commence at a number 100 higher than the last. All blocks extending north
and south of each other shall bear the same numbers, and all east and west of
each other shall bear the same numbers.
   (D)   On the north side of the Southern Pacific Railroad mainline track, on
all streets extending easterly and westerly the numbers shall commence at
number 800 at Davis Street and, extending easterly, the next blocks easterly
shall commence at number 900 and thereafter each block shall commence at a
number 100 higher than the last. On all blocks extending northerly and
southerly, commencing at the northerly line of Court Street, the first blocks
shall commence at a number 100 higher than the last.
(Ord. 335, passed 6-2-1987)
§ 4-3-3 DETERMINATION OF NUMBERS.
   In case of doubt, or where a question arises as to the proper number to be
assigned to a lot or building, the City Director of Finance shall decide the
question and fix the number of such lot or building.
(Ord. 335, passed 6-2-1987)
§ 4-3-4 PLACEMENT, STYLE OF NUMBERS.
   On buildings now or hereafter constructed and fronting on any street or
alley, there shall be conspicuously placed the number provided by this chapter.
On commercial buildings, the number plate shall be placed at the front of the
building on the entry door or transom. Said number shall be at least three
inches in height, of a contrasting color with the surface placed upon, and
shall be easily seen from the street. On residential buildings, numbering shall
be provided by means of an electrically illuminated address unit powered by
premises wiring system and located on the exterior wall closest to and parallel
with the front property line. The unit shall be mounted within the center mass
of the building and at least six feet but not more than ten feet above the
finished grade.
(Ord. 510, passed 2-5-2002)
§ 4-3-5 DUTY TO AFFIX NUMBER.
   If the owner or lessee of any building shall fail, refuse or neglect to
place the required number or to replace it when necessary, the City Director of
Finance may cause a notice to be personally served upon such owner or lessee or
mailed by registered mail to his or her last known address, ordering him or her
to place or replace the number. Such owner or lessee shall comply with such
notice within ten days from the date of the service.
(Ord. 335, passed 6-2-1987)
§ 4-3-6 PENALTY.
   Anyone violating the provisions of this chapter shall upon conviction, be
subject to imprisonment not exceeding 30 days or to a fine not exceeding $100.
(Ord. 335, passed 6-2-1987)
CHAPTER 4: NEW CONSTRUCTION MUNICIPAL FACILITIES CHARGES
Section
4-4-1 Purpose
4-4-2 Definitions
4-4-3 Municipal facilities charges established
4-4-4 Applicability of provisions
4-4-5 Payment of charge
4-4-6 Municipal facilities fund established
4-4-7 Municipal facilities charges review
§ 4-4-1 PURPOSE.
   The continued construction of new residential and nonresidential structures
with the attendant increase in the population of the city has affected the
quality and quantity of municipal services for the city and the people who
currently live in the city and has created an urgent need for the acquisition,
improvement and expansion of municipal facilities. Many new municipal
facilities and expansion of existing facilities including traffic control and
major roads to serve the increase in population and commercial establishments
will be needed in order to maintain the existing quality and quantity of
municipal services to the city and to preserve the public health, safety and
general welfare. These new residential and nonresidential structures will
receive municipal services provided by existing municipal facilities, yet have
not contributed to the financing of those facilities. It is appropriate that
this new construction help pay their fair share of the cost of existing
municipal facilities necessitated by the new construction. Therefore, the
Council declares that a municipal facilities charge (like the city’s water and
sewer service connection charges and subtrunk sewer extension charges) should
be imposed on certain specified new construction within the city.
(Ord. 338, passed 7-7-1987)
§ 4-4-2 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   BUILDING. Any new structure used or intended for supporting or sheltering
any use or occupancy, but not including any outdoor tanks, towers, carports or
other similar structures.
   DWELLING UNIT. A single unit providing complete, independent living
facilities, balconies and other similar structures, as determined by the
building official. The living area of apartment houses shall include
independent laundry rooms, lounge and study areas.
   MOBILEHOME. A vehicle, other than a motor vehicle, designed or used for
residential purposes, for carrying persons and property on its own structure
and for being drawn by a motor vehicle.
   MOBILEHOME LOT. Any area or portion of a mobilehome park designated,
designed or used for the occupancy of one mobilehome on a temporary,
semipermanent or permanent basis.
   MOBILEHOME PARK. Any area or tract of land containing one or more mobilehome
lots.
   PERSON. Any domestic or foreign corporation, firm, association, syndicate,
joint stock company, partnership of any kind, joint venture, club, society or
individual.
   RESIDENTIAL BUILDINGS. Apartments or dwellings shall be considered
residential buildings; all other buildings shall be considered nonresidential.
(Ord. 338, passed 7-7-1987)
§ 4-4-3 MUNICIPAL FACILITIES CHARGES ESTABLISHED.
   (A)   The following municipal facilities charge schedule is hereby imposed
on any dwelling unit, mobilehome, mobilehome lot, mobilehome park,
nonresidential building, commercial and industrial lot and every person to whom
a permit to construct any building is issued, and every person to whom a permit
to construct and install electrical and plumbing equipment to service a
mobilehome park in the city is issued and every person to whom a permit to
construct off site improvements for a residential subdivision where a final map
has been approved:
New dwelling units                                       $1.87 per square foot
New nonresidential buildings                             $0.75 per square foot
Additions to nonresidential buildings:
   1,000 square feet of additional alteration,        No charge
modification
   Over first 1,000 square feet                       $0.75 per square foot
Each mobilehome lot or mobilehome                        $700
Each residential subdivision lot with approved final map $0.22 per square foot
Each commercial or industrial development/lot            $0.22 per square foot
 
   (B)   Commercial and industrial development with buildings are subject to
either the $0.75 per square foot of building fee or the $0.22 per square foot
of land fee subject to the determination of the city.
   (C)   The city must use the following criteria in making this determination:
      1.   Number of employees;
      2.   Number of customers;
      3.   Circulation or traffic generated; and
      4.   Demand for city services.
   (D)   No charge shall be imposed when an existing building (whether
residential or nonresidential) or portion thereof is replaced on the same lot
with a new building or portion thereof so long as the square footage of the new
building or portion thereof does not exceed the sum of:
      1.   The square footage of the building or portion thereof replaced; and
      2.   One thousand square feet. If the new building or portion thereof
exceeds that sum, then a charge of $0.75 per square foot shall be imposed on
the excess square footage.
(Ord. 368, passed 11-7-1989; Ord. 392, passed 6-4-1991)
§ 4-4-4 APPLICABILITY OF PROVISIONS.
   (A)   The municipal facilities charge is intended to apply to the living
area of all residential construction and to all reconstruction, alteration,
modification and additions which create additional dwelling units.
   (B)   The municipal facilities charge is intended to apply to the building
area of all new nonresidential construction and to additional building area due
to reconstruction, alteration, modification and additional nonresidential
buildings.
   (C)   Square footage shall be determined by adding the number of square feet
of space on each floor or level.
(Ord. 338, passed 7-7-1987)
§ 4-4-5 PAYMENT OF CHARGE.
   (A)   The municipal facilities charge required to be paid shall be due and
payable upon issuance by the city of a building permit or upon issuance by the
city of a permit to construct and install electrical and plumbing equipment to
service a mobilehome lot in a mobilehome park.
   (B)   The municipal facilities charge shall be paid to the building official
of the city or his or her authorized agent at the City Hall.
(Ord. 338, passed 7-7-1987)
§ 4-4-6 MUNICIPAL FACILITIES FUND ESTABLISHED.
   (A)   All of the municipal facilities charges collected shall be placed in a
special fund which is hereby created and established for such purposes and
which shall be known as the Municipal Facilities Fund. Sums collected under
this chapter may be expended for the maintenance, improvement or expansion of
existing municipal facilities or for the acquisition or construction of new
facilities, provided that such expenditure from the fund has been authorized by
the City Council.
   (B)   No sums collected under this chapter shall be used for municipal
facilities or improvements which are required to be constructed or paid for by
the building permit applicant as a condition of any other ordinances or
requirements of the city.
(Ord. 338, passed 7-7-1987)
§ 4-4-7 MUNICIPAL FACILITIES CHARGES REVIEW.
   The City Council shall conduct an annual review of municipal facilities
charges at the first meeting in January to determine if any increase in such
charges is warranted.
(Ord. 338, passed 7-7-1987)
CHAPTER 5: FLOODPLAIN MANAGEMENT
Section
4-5-1 Statutory authorization, findings of fact, purpose and methods
4-5-1-1 Statutory authorization
4-5-1-2 Findings of fact
4-5-1-3 Statement of purpose
4-5-1-4 Methods of reducing flood losses
4-5-2 Definitions
4-5-3 General provisions
4-5-3-1 Lands to which this chapter applies
4-5-3-2 Basis for establishing the areas of special flood hazard
4-5-3-3 Compliance
4-5-3-4 Abrogation and greater restrictions
4-5-3-5 Interpretation
4-5-3-6 Warning and disclaimer of liability
4-5-3-7 Severability
4-5-4 Administration
4-5-4-1 Establishment of development permit
4-5-4-2 Designation of the Floodplain Administrator
4-5-4-3 Duties and responsibilities of the Floodplain Administrator
4-5-4-4 Appeals
4-5-5 Provisions for flood hazard reduction
4-5-5-1 Standards of construction
4-5-5-2 Standards for utilities
4-5-5-3 Standards for subdivisions
4-5-5-4 Floodways
4-5-6 Variance procedure
4-5-6-1 Nature of variances
4-5-6-2 Appeal Board
4-5-6-3 Conditions for variances
§ 4-5-1 STATUTORY AUTHORIZATION, FINDINGS OF FACT, PURPOSE AND METHODS.
§ 4-5-1-1 STATUTORY AUTHORIZATION.
   The legislature has in Cal. Gov’t Code §§ 65302, 65560 and 65800 conferred
upon local government units authority to adopt regulations designed to promote
the public health, safety and general welfare of its citizenry. Therefore, the
City Council does hereby adopt the following floodplain management regulations.
(Ord. 445, passed 8-1-1995)
§ 4-5-1-2 FINDINGS OF FACT.
   (A)   The flood hazard areas of the city are subject to periodic inundation
which results in loss of life and property, health and safety hazards,
disruption of commerce and governmental services, extraordinary public
expenditures for flood protection and relief, and impairment of the tax base,
all of which adversely affect the public health, safety and general welfare.
   (B)   These flood losses are caused by uses that are inadequately elevated,
floodproofed or protected from flood damage. The cumulative effect of
obstructions in areas of special flood hazards which increase flood heights and
velocities also contribute to the flood loss.
(Ord. 445, passed 8-1-1995)
§ 4-5-1-3 STATEMENT OF PURPOSE.
   It is the purpose of this chapter to promote the public health, safety and
general welfare, and to minimize public and private losses due to flood
conditions in specific areas by provisions designed to:
   (A)   Protect human life and health;
   (B)   Minimize expenditure of public money for costly flood control
projects;
   (C)   Minimize the need for rescue and relief efforts associated with
flooding and generally undertaken at the expense of the general public;
   (D)   Minimize prolonged business interruptions;
   (E)   Minimize damage to public facilities and utilities such as water and
gas mains; electric, telephone and sewer lines; and streets and bridges located
in areas of special flood hazard;
   (F)   Help maintain a stable tax base by providing for the sound use and
development of areas of special flood hazard so as to minimize future blighted
areas caused by flood damage;
   (G)   Ensure that potential buyers are notified that property is in an area
of special flood hazard; and
   (H)   Ensure that those who occupy the areas of special flood hazard assume
responsibility for their actions.
(Ord. 445, passed 8-1-1995)
§ 4-5-1-4 METHODS OF REDUCING FLOOD LOSSES.
   In order to accomplish its purposes, this chapter includes methods and
provisions to:
   (A)   Restrict or prohibit uses which are dangerous to health, safety and
property due to water or erosion hazards, or which result in damaging increases
in erosion or flood heights or velocities;
   (B)   Require that uses vulnerable to floods, including facilities which
serve such uses, be protected against flood damage at the time of initial
construction;
   (C)   Control the alteration of natural floodplains, stream channels and
natural protective barriers, which help accommodate or channel floodwaters;
   (D)   Control filling, grading, dredging and other development which may
increase flood damage; and
   (E)   Prevent or regulate the construction of flood barriers which will
unnaturally divert floodwaters or which may increase flood hazards in other
areas.
(Ord. 445, passed 8-1-1995)
§ 4-5-2 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   ACCESSORY USE. A use which is incidental and subordinate to the principal
use of the parcel of land on which it is located.
   ALLUVIAL FAN. A geomorphologic feature characterized by a cone or fan shaped
deposit of boulders, gravel and fine sediments that have been eroded from
mountain slopes, transported by flood flows, and then deposited on the valley
floors, and which is subject to flash flooding, high velocity flows, debris
flows, erosion, sediment movement and deposition, and channel migration.
   APEX. The point of highest elevation on an alluvial fan, which on
undisturbed fans is generally the point where the major stream that formed the
fan emerges from the mountain front.
   APPEAL. A request for a review of the Floodplain Administrator’s
interpretation of any provision of this chapter.
   AREA OF SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD. See definition of SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD AREA
(SFHA).
   BASE FLOOD. A flood which has a 1% chance of being equaled or exceeded in
any given year (also called the 100-YEAR FLOOD). BASE FLOOD is the term used
throughout this chapter.
   BASEMENT. Any area of the building having its floor subgrade, i.e., below
ground level, on all sides.
   BUILDING. See definition of STRUCTURE.
   DEVELOPMENT. Any human-made change to improved or unimproved real estate,
including, but not limited to, buildings or other structures, mining, dredging,
filling, grading, paving, excavation or drilling operations or storage of
equipment or materials.
   ENCROACHMENT. The advance or infringement of uses, plant growth, fill,
excavation, buildings, permanent structures or development into a floodplain
which may impede or alter the flow capacity of a floodplain.
   EXISTING MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION. A manufactured home park or
subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on
which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including, at a minimum, the
installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site
grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is completed before the effective date
of the floodplain management regulations adopted by a community.
   EXPANSION TO AN EXISTING MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION. The
preparation of additional sites by the construction of facilities for servicing
the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including the
installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site
grading or the pouring of concrete pads).
   FLOOD BOUNDARY AND FLOODWAY MAP (FBFM). The official map on which the
Federal Emergency Management Agency or Federal Insurance Administration has
delineated both the areas of special flood hazards and the floodway.
   FLOOD, FLOODING or FLOODWATER. A general and temporary condition of partial
or complete inundation of normally dry land areas from the overflow of inland
waters; the unusual and rapid accumulation or runoff of surface water from any
source.
   FLOOD HAZARD BOUNDARY MAP. The official map on which the Federal Emergency
Management Agency or Federal Insurance Administration has delineated both the
areas of special flood hazards.
   FLOOD INSURANCE RATE MAP (FIRM). The official map on which the Federal
Emergency Management Agency or Federal Insurance Administration has delineated
both the areas of special flood hazards and the risk premium zones applicable
to the community.
   FLOOD INSURANCE STUDY. The official report provided by the Federal Insurance
Administration that includes flood profiles, the flood insurance rate map, the
flood boundary and floodway map and the water surface elevation of the base
flood.
   FLOODPLAIN ADMINISTRATOR. The individual appointed to administer and enforce
the floodplain management regulations.
   FLOODPLAIN MANAGEMENT. The operation of an overall program of corrective and
preventive measures for reducing flood damage and preserving and enhancing,
where possible, natural resources in the floodplain, including, but not limited
to, emergency preparedness plans, flood control works, floodplain management
regulations and open space plans.
   FLOODPLAIN MANAGEMENT REGULATIONS. This chapter and other zoning ordinances,
subdivision regulations, building codes, health regulations, special purpose
ordinances (such as grading and erosion control) and other application of
police power which control development in flood prone areas. This term
describes federal, state or local regulations in any combination thereof which
provide standards for preventing and reducing flood loss and damage.
   FLOODPLAIN or FLOOD PRONE AREA. Any land area susceptible to being inundated
by water from any source. See definition of FLOOD, FLOODING or FLOODWATER.
   FLOODPROOFING. Any combination of structural and nonstructural additions,
changes or adjustments to structures which reduce or eliminate flood damage to
real estate or improved real property, water and sanitary facilities,
structures and their contents.
   FLOODWAY. The channel of a river or other watercourse and the adjacent land
areas that must be reserved in order to discharge the base flood without
cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation more than one foot. Also
referred to as REGULATORY FLOODWAY as defined herein.
   FLOODWAY ENCROACHMENT LINES. The lines marking the limits of floodways on
federal, state and local floodplain maps.
   FLOODWAY FRINGE. That area of the floodplain on either side of the
regulatory floodway where encroachment may be permitted.
   FRAUD and VICTIMIZATION. As related to §
4-5-6 , Variance Procedure, of this chapter, means that the variance granted
must not cause FRAUD on or VICTIMIZATION of the public. In examining this
requirement, the Planning Commission will consider the fact that every newly
constructed building adds to government responsibilities and remains a part of
the community for 50 to 100 years. Buildings that are permitted to be
constructed below the base flood elevation are subject during all those years
to increased risk of damage from floods, while future owners of the property
and the community as a whole are subject to all the costs, inconvenience,
danger and suffering that those increased flood damages bring. In addition,
future owners may purchase the property, unaware that it is subject to
potential flood damage, and can be insured only at very high flood insurance
rates.
   FUNCTIONALLY DEPENDENT USE. A use which cannot perform its intended purpose
unless it is located or carried out in close proximity to water. The term
includes only docking facilities, port facilities that are necessary for the
loading and unloading of cargo or passengers, and shipbuilding and ship repair
facilities, and does not include long term storage or related manufacturing
facilities.
   GOVERNING BODY. The local governing unit, i.e., county or municipality, that
is empowered to adopt and implement regulations to provide for the public
health, safety and general welfare of its citizenry.
   HARDSHIP. As related to §
4-5-6 , Variance Procedure, of this chapter means the exceptional hardship that
would result from a failure to grant the requested variance. The Planning
Commission requires that the variance be exceptional, unusual and peculiar to
the property involved. Mere economic or financial hardship alone is not
exceptional. Inconvenience, aesthetic considerations, physical handicaps,
personal preferences or the disapproval of one’s neighbors likewise cannot, as
a rule, qualify as an exceptional HARDSHIP. All of these problems can be
resolved through other means without granting a variance, even if the
alternative is more expensive, or requires the property owner to build
elsewhere or put the parcel to a different use than originally intended.
   HIGHEST ADJACENT GRADE. The highest natural elevation of the ground surface
prior to construction next to the proposed walls of a structure.
   HISTORIC STRUCTURE. Any structure that is:
      1.   Listed individually on the national register of historic places (a
listing maintained by the U.S. Department of the Interior) or preliminarily
determined by the Secretary of the Interior as meeting the requirements for
individual listing on the national register;
      2.   Certified or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the
Interior as contributing to the historical significance of a registered
historic district or a district preliminarily determined by the Secretary to
qualify as a registered historic district;
      3.   Individually listed on a state inventory of historic places in
states with historic preservation programs which have been approved by the
Secretary of the Interior; or
      4.   Individually listed on a local inventory of historic places in
communities with historic preservation programs that have been certified either
by an approved state program as determined by the Secretary of the Interior or
directly by the Secretary of the Interior in states with approved programs.
   LEVEE. A human-made structure, usually an earthen embankment, designed and
constructed in accordance with sound engineering practices to contain, control
or divert the flow of water so as to provide protection from temporary
flooding.
   LEVEE SYSTEM. A flood protection system which consists of a levee, or
levees, and associated structures, such as closure and drainage devices, which
are constructed and operated in accord with sound engineering practices.
   LOWEST FLOOR. The lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area, including
basement. An unfinished or flood resistant enclosure, usable solely for parking
of vehicles, building access or storage in an area other than a basement area
(see definition of BASEMENT) is not considered a building’s LOWEST FLOOR,
provided that such enclosure is not built so as to render the structure in
violation of the applicable nonelevation design requirements of this chapter.
(Note: This definition allows attached garages to be built at grade. Below
grade garages are not allowed as they are considered to be basements.)
   MANUFACTURED HOME. A structure, transportable in one or more sections, which
is built on a permanent chassis and is designed for use with or without a
permanent foundation when attached to the required utilities. The term
manufactured home does not include a “recreational vehicle”.
   MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION. A parcel (or contiguous parcels) of
land divided into two or more manufactured home lots for rent or sale.
   MEAN SEA LEVEL. Means, for purposes of the national flood insurance program,
the national geodetic vertical datum (NGVD) of 1929 or other datum, to which
base flood elevations shown on a community’s flood insurance rate map are
referenced.
   NEW CONSTRUCTION. For floodplain management purposes, means structures for
which the “start of construction” commenced on or after the effective date of
floodplain management regulations adopted by this community, and includes any
subsequent improvements to such structures.
   NEW MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION. A manufactured home park or
subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on
which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including, at a minimum, the
installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site
grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is completed on or after the effective
date of floodplain management regulations adopted by this community.
   OBSTRUCTION. Includes, but is not limited to, any dam, wall, wharf,
embankment, levee, dike, pile, abutment, protection, excavation,
channelization, bridge, conduit, culvert, building, wire, fence, rock, gravel,
refuse, fill, structure, vegetation or other material in, along, across or
projecting into any watercourse which may alter, impede, retard or change the
direction and/or velocity of the flow of water, snare or collect debris carried
by the flow of water, or is likely to be carried downstream.
   ONE HUNDRED-YEAR FLOOD (100-YEAR FLOOD). See definition of BASE FLOOD.
   PRINCIPAL STRUCTURE. A structure used for the principal use of the property
as distinguished from an accessory use.
   PUBLIC SAFETY AND NUISANCE. As related to §
4-5-6 , Variance Procedure, of this chapter means that the granting of a
variance must not result in anything which is injurious to safety or health of
an entire community, neighborhood or any considerable number of persons, or
unlawfully obstructs the free passage or use, in the customary manner, of any
navigable lake, river, bay, stream, canal or basin.
   RECREATIONAL VEHICLE. A vehicle which is:
      1.   Built on a single chassis;
      2.   Four hundred square feet or less when measured at the largest
horizontal projection;
      3.   Designed to be self-propelled or permanently towable by a light duty
truck; and
      4.   Designed primarily not for use as a permanent dwelling but as
temporary living quarters for recreational, camping, travel or seasonal use.
   REGULATORY FLOODWAY. The channel of a river or other watercourse and the
adjacent land areas that must be reserved in order to discharge the base flood
without cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation more than one foot.
   RIVERINE. Relating to, formed by or resembling a river (including
tributaries), stream, brook and the like.
   SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD AREA (SFHA). An area having special flood or mudslide
(i.e., mudflow), and shown on an FHBM or FIRM as Zone A.
   START OF CONSTRUCTION. Substantial improvement and other proposed new
development and means the date the building permit was issued, provided the
actual start of construction, repair, reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition,
placement or other improvement was within 180 days from the date of the permit.
The ACTUAL START means either the first placement of permanent construction of
a structure on a site, such as the pouring of slab or footings, the
installation of piles, the construction of columns, or any work beyond the
stage of excavation; or the placement of a manufactured home on a foundation.
Permanent construction does not include land preparation, such as clearing,
grading and filling; nor does it include the installation of streets and/or
walkways; nor does it include excavation for a basement, footings, piers or
foundations or the erection of temporary forms; nor does it include the
installation on the property of accessory buildings, such as garages or sheds
not occupied as dwelling units or not part of the main structure. For a
substantial improvement, the ACTUAL START OF CONSTRUCTION means the first
alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor or other structural part of a building,
whether or not that alteration affects the external dimensions of the building.
   STRUCTURE. A walled and roofed building that is principally above ground;
this includes a gas or liquid storage tank or a manufactured home.
   SUBSTANTIAL DAMAGE. Damage of any origin sustained by a structure whereby
the cost of restoring the structure to its before damaged condition would equal
or exceed 50% of the market value of the structure before the damage occurred.
   SUBSTANTIAL IMPROVEMENT. Any reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition or
other proposed new development of a structure, the cost of which equals or
exceeds 50% of the market value of the structure before the start of
construction of the improvement. This term includes structures which have
incurred substantial damage, regardless of the actual repair work performed.
The term does not, however, include either:
      1.   Any project for improvement of a structure to correct existing
violations or state or local health, sanitary or safety code specifications
which have been identified by the local code enforcement official and which are
the minimum necessary to assure safe living conditions; or
      2.   Any alteration of a “historic structure”, provided that the
alteration will not preclude the structure’s continued designation as a
historic structure.
   VARIANCE. A grant of relief from the requirements of this chapter which
permits construction in a manner that would otherwise be prohibited by this
chapter.
   WATER SURFACE ELEVATION. The height, in relation to the national geodetic
vertical datum (NGVD) of 1929 (or other datum where specified), of floods of
various magnitudes and frequencies in the floodplains of coastal or riverine
areas.
   WATERCOURSE. A lake, river, creek, stream, wash, arroyo, channel or other
topographic feature on or over which waters flow at least periodically.
WATERCOURSE includes specifically designated areas in which substantial flood
damage may occur.
(Ord. 445, passed 8-1-1995)
§ 4-5-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS.
§ 4-5-3-1 LANDS TO WHICH THIS CHAPTER APPLIES.
   This chapter shall apply to all areas of special flood hazards within the
city.
(Ord. 445, passed 8-1-1995)
§ 4-5-3-2 BASIS FOR ESTABLISHING THE AREAS OF SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD.
   The areas of special flood hazard identified by the Federal Insurance
Administration (FIA) of the Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) in the
flood insurance study (FIS) dated August 2, 1995, and accompanying flood
insurance rate maps (FIRMs) and flood boundary and floodway maps (FBFMs), dated
August 2, 1995, and all subsequent amendments and/or revisions, are hereby
adopted by reference and declared to be a part of this chapter. This FIS and
attendant mapping is the minimum area of applicability of this chapter and may
be supplemented by studies for other areas which allow implementation of this
chapter and which are recommended to the City Council by the Floodplain
Administrator. The study, FIRMs and FBFMs are on file at City Hall, 1416 C
Street, Livingston, CA 95334.
(Ord. 445, passed 8-1-1995)
§ 4-5-3-3 COMPLIANCE.
   No structure or land shall hereafter be constructed, located, extended,
converted or altered without full compliance with the terms of this chapter and
other applicable regulations. Violation of the requirements (including
violations of conditions and safeguards established in connection with
conditions) shall constitute a misdemeanor. Nothing herein shall prevent the
Planning Commission from taking such lawful action as is necessary to prevent
or remedy any violation.
(Ord. 445, passed 8-1-1995)
§ 4-5-3-4 ABROGATION AND GREATER RESTRICTIONS.
   This chapter is not intended to repeal, abrogate or impair any existing
easements, covenants or deed restrictions. However, where this chapter and
another ordinance, easement, covenant or deed restriction conflict or overlap,
whichever imposes the more stringent restrictions shall prevail.
(Ord. 445, passed 8-1-1995)
§ 4-5-3-5 INTERPRETATION.
   In the interpretation and application of this chapter, all provisions shall
be:
   (A)   Considered as minimum requirements;
   (B)   Liberally construed in favor of the governing body; and
   (C)   Deemed neither to limit nor repeal any other powers granted under
state statutes.
(Ord. 445, passed 8-1-1995)
§ 4-5-3-6 WARNING AND DISCLAIMER OF LIABILITY.
   The degree of flood protection required by this chapter is considered
reasonable for regulatory purposes and is based on scientific and engineering
considerations. Larger floods can and will occur on rare occasions. Flood
heights may be increased by human-made or natural causes. This chapter does not
imply that land outside the areas of special flood hazards or uses permitted
within such areas will be free from flooding or flood damages. This chapter
shall not create liability on the part of the city, any officer or employee
thereof, the state, or the Federal Insurance Administration, Federal Emergency
Management Agency, for any flood damages that result from reliance on this
chapter or any administrative decision lawfully made hereunder.
(Ord. 445, passed 8-1-1995)
§ 4-5-3-7 SEVERABILITY.
   This chapter and the various parts thereof are hereby declared to be
severable. Should any section of this chapter be declared by the courts to be
unconstitutional or invalid, such decision shall not affect the validity of the
chapter as a whole or any portion thereof, other than the section so declared
to be unconstitutional or invalid.
(Ord. 445, passed 8-1-1995)
§ 4-5-4 ADMINISTRATION.
§ 4-5-4-1 ESTABLISHMENT OF DEVELOPMENT PERMIT.
   A development permit shall be obtained before any construction or other
development begins within any area of special flood hazard established in §
4-5-3-2 of this chapter. Application for a development permit shall be made on
forms furnished by the Floodplain Administrator and may include, but not be
limited to: plans in duplicate drawn to scale showing the nature, location
dimensions, and elevation of the area in question; existing or proposed
structures, fill, storage of materials, drainage facilities; and the location
of the foregoing. Specifically, the following information is required:
   (A)   Proposed elevation, in relation to mean sea level, of the lowest floor
(including basement) of all structures;
   (B)   Proposed elevation in relation to mean sea level to which any
structure will be floodproofed, if required in §
4-5-5-1(C)3. of this chapter;
   (C)   All appropriate certifications listed in §
4-5-4-3(D) of this chapter; and
   (D)   Description of the extent to which any watercourse will be altered or
relocated as a result of proposed development.
(Ord. 445, passed 8-1-1995)
§ 4-5-4-2 DESIGNATION OF THE FLOODPLAIN ADMINISTRATOR.
   The City Engineer or his or her designee is hereby appointed to administer,
implement and enforce this chapter by granting or denying development permits
in accordance with its provisions.
(Ord. 445, passed 8-1-1995)
§ 4-5-4-3 DUTIES AND RESPONSIBILITIES OF THE FLOODPLAIN ADMINISTRATOR.
   The duties and responsibilities of the Floodplain Administrator shall
include, but not be limited to, the following.
   (A)   Permit review. Review all development permits to determine that:
      1.   Permit requirements of this chapter have been satisfied;
      2.   All other required state and federal permits have been obtained;
      3.   The site is reasonably safe from flooding; and
      4.   The proposed development does not adversely affect the carrying
capacity of areas where base flood elevations have been determined but a
floodway has not been designated. For purposes of this chapter, ADVERSELY
AFFECTS means that the cumulative effect of the proposed development when
combined with all other existing and anticipated development will increase the
water surface elevation of the base flood more than one foot at any point.
   (B)   Review and use of any other base flood data. When base flood elevation
data has not been provided in accordance with §
4-5-3-2 of this chapter, the Floodplain Administrator shall obtain, review and
reasonably utilize any base flood elevation and floodway data available from a
federal or state agency, or other source in order to administer §
4-5-5 of this chapter. Any such information shall be submitted to the City
Council for adoption.
   (C)   Notification of other agencies. In alteration or relocation of a
watercourse:
      1.   Notify adjacent communities and the California Department of Water
Resources prior to alteration or relocation;
      2.   Submit evidence of such notification to the Federal Insurance
Administration, Federal Emergency Management Agency; and
      3.   Assure that the flood carrying capacity within the altered or
relocated portion of said watercourse is maintained.
   (D)   Documentation of floodplain development. Obtain and maintain for
public inspection and make available as needed the following:
      1.   Certification required by §
4-5-5-1(C)1. of this chapter (floor elevations);
      2.   Certification required by §
4-5-5-1(C)2. of this chapter (elevation or floodproofing of nonresidential
structures);
      3.   Certification required by §
4-5-5-1(C)3. of this chapter (wet floodproofing standard);
      4.   Certification of elevation required by §
4-5-5-3(B) of this chapter (subdivision standards); and
      5.   Certification required by §
4-5-5-4(A) of this chapter (floodway encroachments).
   (E)   Map determinations. Make interpretations where needed as to the exact
location of the boundaries of the areas of special flood hazard, for example,
where there appears to be a conflict between a mapped boundary and actual field
conditions. The person contesting the location of the boundary shall be given a
reasonable opportunity to appeal the interpretation as provided in §
4-5-6 of this chapter.
   (F)   Remedial action. Take action to remedy violations of this chapter as
specified in §
4-5-3-3 of this chapter.
(Ord. 445, passed 8-1-1995)
§ 4-5-4-4 APPEALS.
   The City Council shall hear and decide appeals when it is alleged there is
an error in any requirement, decision or determination made by the Floodplain
Administrator in the enforcement or administration of this chapter.
(Ord. 445, passed 8-1-1995)
§ 4-5-5 PROVISIONS FOR FLOOD HAZARD REDUCTION.
§ 4-5-5-1 STANDARDS OF CONSTRUCTION.
   In all areas of special flood hazards the following standards are required.
   (A)   Anchoring. All new construction and substantial improvements shall be
adequately anchored to prevent flotation, collapse or lateral movement of the
structure resulting from hydrodynamic and hydrostatic loads, including the
effects of buoyancy.
   (B)   Construction materials and methods. All new construction and
substantial improvement shall be constructed:
      1.   With materials and utility equipment resistant to flood damage;
      2.   Using methods and practices that minimize flood damage; and
      3.   With electrical, heating, ventilation, plumbing and air conditioning
equipment and other service facilities that are designed and/or located so as
to prevent water from entering or accumulating within the components during
conditions of flooding.
   (C)   Elevation and floodproofing. (See §
4-5-2, Definitions, of this chapter for “new construction”, “substantial
damage” and “substantial improvement”.)
      1.   (a)   Residential construction, new or substantial improvement,
shall have the lowest floor, including basement:
            (1)   In an A zone, elevated one foot above the base flood
elevation; and
            (2)   In all other zones, elevated to the base flood elevation.
         (b)   Upon the completion of the structure, the elevation of the
lowest floor including basement shall be certified by a registered professional
engineer or surveyor, or verified by the community building inspector to be
properly elevated. Such certification or verification shall be provided to the
Floodplain Administrator.
      2.   Nonresidential construction shall either be elevated to conform with
§
4-5-5-1(C)1. of this chapter or together with attendant utility and sanitary
facilities:
         (a)   Be floodproofed below the elevation recommended under §
4-5-5-1(C)1. of this chapter so that the structure is watertight with walls
substantially impermeable to the passage of water;
         (b)   Have structural components capable of resisting hydrostatic and
hydrodynamic loads and effects of buoyancy; and
         (c)   Be certified by a registered professional engineer or architect
that the standards of this subsection (C) are satisfied. Such certification
shall be provided to the Floodplain Administrator.
      3.   All new construction and substantial improvement with fully enclosed
areas below the lowest floor (excluding basements) that are usable solely for
parking of vehicles, building access or storage, and which are subject to
flooding, shall be designed to automatically equalize hydrostatic flood forces
on exterior walls by allowing for the entry and exit of floodwater. Designs for
meeting this requirement must exceed the following minimum criteria:
         (a)   Be certified by a registered professional engineer or architect;
         (b)   Be certified to comply with a local floodproofing standard
approved by the Federal Insurance Administration, Federal Emergency Management
Agency; or
         (c)   Have a minimum of two openings having a total net area of not
less than one square inch for every square foot of enclosed area subject to
flooding. The bottom of all openings shall be no higher than one foot above
grade. Openings may be equipped with screens, louvers, valves or other
coverings or devices provided that they permit the automatic entry and exit of
floodwater.
(Ord. 445, passed 8-1-1995)
§ 4-5-5-2 STANDARDS FOR UTILITIES.
   (A)   All new and replacement water supply and sanitary sewage systems shall
be designed to minimize or eliminate:
      1.   Infiltration of floodwaters into the systems; and
      2.   Discharge from the systems into floodwaters.
   (B)   On site waste disposal systems shall be located to avoid impairment to
them, or contamination from them, during flooding.
(Ord. 445, passed 8-1-1995)
§ 4-5-5-3 STANDARDS FOR SUBDIVISIONS.
   (A)   All preliminary subdivision proposals shall identify the flood hazard
area and the elevation of the base flood.
   (B)   All subdivision plans will provide the elevation of proposed
structures and pad(s). If the site is filled above the base flood elevation,
the final first floor and pad elevations shall be certified by a registered
professional engineer or surveyor and provided to the Floodplain Administrator.
   (C)   All subdivision proposals shall be consistent with the need to
minimize flood damage.
   (D)   All subdivision proposals shall have public utilities and facilities
such as sewer, gas, electrical and water systems located and constructed to
minimize flood damage.
   (E)   All subdivisions shall provide adequate drainage to reduce exposure to
flood hazards.
(Ord. 445, passed 8-1-1995)
§ 4-5-5-4 FLOODWAYS.
   Located within areas of special flood hazard established in §
4-5-3-2 of this chapter are areas designated as floodways. Since the floodway
is an extremely hazardous area due to the velocity of floodwaters which carry
debris, potential projectiles, and erosion potential, the following provisions
apply:
   (A)   Prohibit encroachments, including fill, new construction, substantial
improvement, and other new development unless certification by a registered
professional engineer or architect is provided demonstrating that encroachments
shall not result in any increase in (the base) flood elevation during the
occurrence of the base flood discharge; and
   (B)   If subsection (A) of this section is satisfied, all new construction,
substantial improvement, and other proposed new development shall comply with
all other applicable flood hazard reduction provisions of this §
4-5-5.
(Ord. 445, passed 8-1-1995)
§ 4-5-6 VARIANCE PROCEDURE.
§ 4-5-6-1 NATURE OF VARIANCES.
   (A)   The variance criteria set forth in this section is based on the
general principle of zoning law that variances pertain to a piece of property
and are not personal in nature. A variance may be granted for a parcel of
property with physical characteristics so unusual that complying with the
requirements of this chapter would create an exceptional hardship to the
applicant or the surrounding property owners. The characteristics must be
unique to the property and not be shared by adjacent parcels. The unique
characteristic must pertain to the land itself, not to the structure, its
inhabitants or the property owners.
   (B)   1.   It is the duty of the City Council to help protect its citizens
from flooding. This need is so compelling and the implications of the cost of
insuring a structure built below flood level are so serious that variances from
the flood elevation or from other requirements in this chapter are quite rare.
(The long term goal of preventing and reducing flood loss and damage can only
be met if variances are strictly limited.
      2.   Therefore, the variance guidelines provided in this chapter are more
detailed and contain multiple provisions that must be met before a variance can
be properly granted. The criteria are designed to screen out those situations
in which alternatives other than a variance are more appropriate.)
(Ord. 445, passed 8-1-1995)
§ 4-5-6-2 APPEAL BOARD.
   (A)   In passing upon requests for variances, the City Council shall
consider all technical evaluations, all relevant factors, standards specified
in other sections of this chapter and:
      1.   Danger that materials may be swept onto other lands to the injury of
others;
      2.   Danger of life and property due to flooding or erosion damage;
      3.   Susceptibility of the proposed facility and its contents to flood
damage and the effect of such damage on the existing individual owner and
future owners of the property;
      4.   Importance of the services provided by the proposed facility to the
community;
      5.   Necessity to the facility of a waterfront location, where
applicable;
      6.   Availability of alternative locations for the proposed use which are
not subject to flooding or erosion damage;
      7.   Compatibility of the proposed use with existing and anticipated
development;
      8.   Relationship of the proposed use to the comprehensive plan and
floodplain management program for that area;
      9.   Safety of access to the property in time of flood for ordinary and
emergency vehicles;
      10.   Expected heights, velocity, duration, rate of rise and sediment
transport of the floodwaters expected at the site; and
      11.   Costs of providing governmental services during and after flood
conditions, including maintenance and repair of public utilities and facilities
such as sewer, gas, electrical, and water system, and streets and bridges.
   (B)   Any applicant to whom a variance is granted shall be given written
notice over the signature of a community official that:
      1.   The issuance of a variance to construct a structure below the base
flood level will result in increased premium rates for flood insurance up to
amounts as high as $25 for $100 of insurance coverage; and
      2.   Such construction below the base flood level increases risks to life
and property. A copy of the notice shall be recorded by the Floodplain
Administrator in the office of the Merced County Recorder and shall be recorded
in a manner so that it appears in the chain of title of the affected parcel of
land.
   (C)   The Floodplain Administrator will maintain a record of all variance
actions, including justification for their issuance, and report such variances
issued in its biennial report submitted to the Federal Insurance Administration
of the Federal Emergency Management Agency.
(Ord. 445, passed 8-1-1995)
§ 4-5-6-3 CONDITIONS FOR VARIANCES.
   (A)   Generally, variances may be issued for new construction, substantial
improvement and other proposed new development to be erected on a lot of one-
half acre or less in size contiguous to and surrounded by lots with existing
structures constructed below the base flood level, providing that the
procedures of §§
4-5-4 and
4-5-5 of this chapter have been fully considered. As the lot size increases
beyond one-half acre, the technical justification required for issuing the
variance increases.
   (B)   Variances may be issued for the repair or rehabilitation of “historic
structures” (as defined in §
4-5-2 of this chapter) upon a determination that the proposed repair or
rehabilitation will not preclude the structure’s continued designation as a
historic structure and the variance is the minimum necessary to preserve the
historic character and design of the structure.
   (C)   Variances shall not be issued within any mapped regulatory floodway if
any increase in flood levels during the base flood discharge would result.
   (D)   Variances shall only be issued upon a determination that the variance
is the minimum necessary considering the flood hazard, to afford relief.
MINIMUM NECESSARY means to afford relief with a minimum of deviation from the
requirements of this chapter. For example, in the case of variances to an
elevation requirement, this means the City Council need not grant permission
for the applicant to build at grade, or even to whatever elevation the
applicant proposes, but only to that elevation which the City Council believes
will both provide relief and preserve the integrity of the local ordinance.
   (E)   Variances shall only be issued upon:
      1.   Showing of good and sufficient cause;
      2.   Determination that failure to grant the variance would result in
exceptional “hardship” (as defined in §
4-5-2 of this chapter) to the applicant; and
      3.   Determination that the granting of a variance will not result in
increased flood heights, additional threats to public safety, or extraordinary
public expense; create a nuisance (see “public safety and nuisance” as defined
in §
4-5-2 of this chapter), cause “fraud and victimization” (as defined in §
4-5-2 of this chapter) of the public, or conflict with existing local laws or
ordinances.
   (F)   Variances may be issued for new construction, substantial improvement
and other proposed new development necessary for the conduct of a functionally
dependent use provided that the provisions of subsections (A) through (E) of
this section are satisfied and that the structure or other development is
protected by methods that minimize flood damages during the base flood and does
not result in additional threats to public safety and does not create a public
nuisance.
   (G)   Upon consideration of the factors of §
4-5-6-2(C) of this chapter and the purposes of this chapter, the City Council
may attach such conditions to the granting of variances as it deems necessary
to further the purposes of this chapter.
(Ord. 445, passed 8-1-1995)
CHAPTER 6: GRADING, EROSION AND SEDIMENTATION CONTROL
Section
4-6-1 Purposes
4-6-2 Applicability of provisions
4-6-3 Definitions
4-6-4 Grading permit required
4-6-5 Emergency grading
4-6-6 Exceptions from grading permit
4-6-7 Application for grading permit
4-6-8 Review of reports
4-6-9 Issuance or denial of grading permit; conditions and limitations
4-6-10 Grading permit conditions
4-6-11 Grading permit fees
4-6-12 Grading permit appeal procedures
4-6-13 Faithful performance bond required
4-6-14 Maintenance bond
4-6-15 Grading permit limitations
4-6-16 Grading permit term
4-6-17 Copy of plans and grading permit to be kept at job site
4-6-18 Changes in grading permit or work
4-6-19 Assignment of grading permit
4-6-20 Grading permit required with building permit
4-6-21 Right of entry
4-6-22 Inspection; types required; notice to city
4-6-23 Inspection; special supervision
4-6-24 Conflicts with the California Building Code or city ordinance
4-6-25 Liability for injury or damage
4-6-26 Control of work; standards of work
4-6-27 Grading hours of operation
4-6-28 Grading dust and noise control
4-6-29 Grading slopes and banks
4-6-30 Trenching in slopes and banks
4-6-31 Building site pads
4-6-32 Berms for slopes and banks
4-6-33 Placement specifications for fill material
4-6-34 Maintenance of protective devices
4-6-35 Certificate of completion
4-6-36 Suspension or revocation of grading permit
4-6-37 Prosecutions of violations as infractions
4-6-38 Penalties
4-6-39 Continuing violations
4-6-40 Violations declared nuisance
4-6-41 Civil actions
4-6-42 Remedies not exclusive
4-6-43 Severability
§ 4-6-1 PURPOSES.
   This chapter is enacted for the following purposes:
   (A)   To provide minimum standards to safeguard life and limb; protect
property and property values; preserve natural beauty; promote public welfare;
and protect and enhance water quality of watercourses, water bodies and
wetlands;
   (B)   To control erosion, sedimentation, increases in surface runoff and
related environmental damage caused by construction related activities, by
regulating and controlling the design, construction, quality of materials, use,
location and maintenance of grading, excavating and fill, land disturbances,
land fill and soil storage in connection with the clearing and grading of land
for construction within the city; and
   (C)   To ensure that grading is conducted in a manner with the least adverse
effect upon persons and property and in conformance with applicable standards,
requirements and procedures.
(Ord. 578, passed 1-20-2009)
§ 4-6-2 APPLICABILITY OF PROVISIONS.
   New grading, excavations and fills, or changes, additions, repairs or
alterations made to existing excavations and fills within the city shall
conform to the provisions of this chapter. If two or more limitations are not
identical, those limitations which provide the greater safety to life and limb,
property, natural beauty and public welfare shall prevail. The permissive
provisions of this chapter shall not be presumed to waive any limitations
imposed by other federal, state or local laws.
(Ord. 578, passed 1-20-2009)
§ 4-6-3 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning. The
singular shall be taken to mean plural, and the plural shall mean the singular
when required by the context of this chapter.
   APPLICANT. The property owner, the property owner’s designee or any other
person who makes an application for a grading permit.
   BEDROCK. A relatively solid, structured material in place either at the
ground surface or beneath surface deposits of soil.
   BENCH. A relatively level surface interrupting the slope of an excavation or
embankment.
   BEST MANAGEMENT PRACTICES (BMPs). Schedules of activities, prohibitions or
practices, general good housekeeping practices, pollution prevention practices,
maintenance procedures and other management practices to prevent or reduce the
discharge of pollutants directly or indirectly to watercourse, water bodies and
wetlands. BEST MANAGEMENT PRACTICES also include treatment requirements,
operating procedures, design specifications and practices to control site
runoff, spillage or leaks, and waste disposal.
   BORROW. Earth material acquired from an off site location.
   BUILDING PAD. That area of a lot, parcel or site which will be occupied by a
building and related structures.
   CITY. The City of Livingston.
   CITY ENGINEER. The City Engineer of the City of Livingston or his or her
designee.
   CITY MANAGER. The City Manager of the City of Livingston or his or her
designee.
   CIVIL ENGINEER. An engineer licensed in the State of California to practice
civil engineering.
   CLEARING, BRUSHING and GRUBBING. Site preparation consisting of, but not
limited to, the removal of vegetation.
   COMMUNITY DEVELOPMENT DIRECTOR. The Community Development Director of the
City of Livingston or his or her designee.
   CRITICALLY EXPANSIVE SOILS. Soil conditions which have the potential to
cause damage to improvements, including streets, structures and buildings.
   CUT SLOPE. A finished or interim surface along an inclined plane resulting
from grading.
   DIVERSION. A facility such as a ditch or berm constructed to intercept and
divert surface runoff.
   EARTH MATERIAL. Any rock, soil or any combination thereof.
   ELEVATION. The vertical distance above an established datum.
   ENGINEERING GEOLOGIST. A person licensed by the State of California in
engineering geology.
   ENGINEERING GEOLOGY. The application of geological data and principles to
engineering problems with rock and soil.
   EROSION. The wearing away, detachment and movement of the ground surface by
wind, water, ice or gravity action.
   EXCAVATION. Any action by which earth material is removed.
   EXISTING OR NATURAL GRADE. The grade prior to grading.
   FILL. A deposit of earth material placed by artificial means.
   FINAL EROSION AND SEDIMENT CONTROL PLAN. A plan that depicts the permanent
erosion control approved by the City Engineer.
   FINISHED GRADE. The completed grade constructed in accordance with the
approved plan.
   GEOLOGIC REPORT. A report prepared by an engineering geologist or civil
engineer dealing with geological features and characteristics such as fault
line, fault creep, landslide and seismic hazards.
   GEOTECHNICAL/SOIL ENGINEER. A civil engineer who is experienced in the field
of engineering as described in the definition of GEOTECHNICAL/SOIL ENGINEERING
in this section.
   GEOTECHNICAL/SOIL ENGINEERING. The branch of engineering that specializes in
behavior of earth materials including rock and soil.
   GEOTECHNICAL/SOIL REPORT. A report prepared by a geotechnical engineer
dealing with items such as field test results, observations regarding the
nature, distribution and strength of existing soils and recommendations and
conclusions for grading procedures and designs.
   GRADE. The elevation of a ground surface.
   GRADING. Any excavation (cut), filling, stripping, stockpiling, clearing and
grubbing, or any combination thereof, which alters land or vegetation.
   HILLSIDE SITE. A site within the limits of grading having an average of 15%
or greater.
   HOLIDAYS. Days observed as legal holidays by the city.
   HYDROMULCHING. The application of plant residue or other suitable materials
to the land surface to conserve moisture, hold soil in place, and aid in
establishing plant growth.
   PERMITTEE. The applicant to whom the permit is issued.
   PERSON. A natural person, his or her heirs, executors, administrators or
assigns, and also includes a firm, partnership or corporation, its or their
successors or assigns, or the agent of any of the aforesaid.
   POLLUTANTS. Any material other than stormwater, including, but not limited
to, rock, sand, building materials, waste and litter discharged into the city’s
stormwater system as defined in this chapter and other parts of this code.
   RAINY OR WET SEASON. The period of time between October 15 and April 15
inclusive.
   RELATIVE COMPACTION. The ratio of the field or dry or wet density to the
laboratory maximum dry or adjusted wet density respectively, expressed as a
percentage.
   ROUGH GRADE. The temporary grade which approximates the finished grade.
   RUNOFF. The surface flow of water.
   SEDIMENT. Earth material deposited by action of water, wind or gravity.
   SEDIMENT BASIN. A reservoir which retards flow so as to cause or allow
deposition of transported sediment.
   SEDIMENTATION. The process by which soil, mineral, or organic matter is
removed, transported, and deposited by action of water, wind or gravity.
   SITE. Any lot or parcel of land or contiguous combination where grading is
to be performed.
   SLOPE. The inclination of a ground surface expressed as the:
      1.   Ratio of horizontal distance to vertical distance; or
      2.   Ratio of vertical distance to horizontal distance expressed in
percent.
   SOIL. Earth material of whatever origin that overlies bedrock.
   STOCKPILE. Earth, rock, gravel, sand or other similar material temporarily
stored prior to final disposition.
   TERRACE. A relatively level area constructed in a face of a slope surface
for drainage and maintenance purposes.
   VICINITY MAP. A visual representation of the project site in relationship to
significant geographic features such as watercourses, water bodies, roads and
other significant structures.
(Ord. 578, passed 1-20-2009; Ord. 610, passed 2-18-2014)
§ 4-6-4 GRADING PERMIT REQUIRED.
   Except as provided in §§
4-6-5, Emergency Grading, and
4-6-6, Exceptions From Grading Permit, of this chapter, no person shall perform
or cause any grading or excavating without a city issued grading permit.
(Ord. 578, passed 1-20-2009)
§ 4-6-5 EMERGENCY GRADING.
   Emergency grading to safeguard life or property may be undertaken prior to
the issuance of a grading permit. The City Engineer or his or her designee
shall be notified within 24 hours of the commencement of emergency work, unless
such work is exempt in accordance with the provisions of §
4-6-6 of this chapter.
(Ord. 578, passed 1-20-2009)
§ 4-6-6 EXCEPTIONS FROM GRADING PERMIT.
   A grading permit may be waived by the City Engineer if one or more of the
following conditions apply:
   (A)   The excavation and fill at any location:
      1.   Is less than three feet deep and adequately supported by a retaining
structure designed in accordance with the applicable adopted building code; and
      2.   Does not create a slope steeper than two horizontal to one vertical
(2:1).
   (B)   The volume of excavation or fill does not exceed 15 cubic yards
provided:
      1.   The excavation or fill does not obstruct a drainage course or alter
existing drainage patterns, and does not add pollutants to the storm drain
system, rivers, creeks or other waterways;
      2.   The excavation or fill is less than three feet at its deepest point,
measured vertically upward from natural grade to the surface;
      3.   The fill is not intended to support structures;
      4.   The fill is placed on natural grade that has a slope not steeper
than five horizontal to one vertical (5:1); and
      5.   The proposed grading or resulting grades will not adversely impact
abutting properties.
   (C)   Minor land leveling or agriculture, farming and gardening if the
ground elevation stays substantially the same and the drainage pattern is not
altered;
   (D)   Cemetery graves;
   (E)   Excavations below finished grade for swimming pools or basements,
walls or footings of a building, or underground structures authorized by a
valid city building permit;
   (F)   Trench excavations authorized by a valid building permit for the
purpose of installing underground utilities, if such excavations are to be
backfilled to natural or existing grade;
   (G)   Grading in refuse disposal areas and sanitary landfills, mining,
quarrying, processing or stockpiling of rock, sand, gravel, aggregate, or clay,
if:
      1.   A development permit has been granted, provided such operations do
not affect the lateral support or increase the stresses in, or pressure upon
any adjacent or contiguous property, or alter the orientation of natural
watercourse which may result in adverse changes to adjoining property; and
      2.   Such operations are consistent with the grading practices set forth
herein.
   (H)   1.   Stockpiles of topsoil materials that are not placed within the
public right-of-way and:
         (a)   Do not obstruct drainageways;
         (b)   Are not subject to erosion;
         (c)   Do not endanger other properties; and
         (d)   Do not create a public nuisance or safety hazard.
      2.   The land shall be restored to its original condition after removal
of stockpiles.
   (I)   Clearing of vegetation when all of the following conditions are met:
      1.   The slope of the ground is less than 15%;
      2.   The area to be cleared is one acre or less;
      3.   Clearing is more than 100 feet away from the top bank of a
watercourse or other water body; and
      4.   Clearing will not result in erosion.
   (J)   Construction of water wells;
   (K)   Construction of test trenches, pits and bores within private property
under the supervision of a professional civil engineer or engineering
geologist, provided the drainage patterns remain the same;
   (L)   Placement of fill above existing grade, which will be retained by the
exterior wall of a building, a retaining wall, a swimming pool or other
structure authorized by a valid building permit, when the existing and finished
ground slope is less than 15%;
   (M)   Grading within a street to conform to elevations approved by the City
Engineer and for which an encroachment permit has been issued by the city; and
   (N)   Unless otherwise exempt, all excavations and trenches are subject to
the applicable sections of the State of California, Division of Safety, or Cal-
OSHA.
(Ord. 578, passed 1-20-2009)
§ 4-6-7 APPLICATION FOR GRADING PERMIT.
   The application for a grading permit shall include, but not be limited to,
the following:
   (A)   Completed grading permit application form provided by the city;
   (B)   Payment of filing and review fees as established by resolution of the
City Council. Filing and review fees are nonrefundable;
   (C)   Vicinity map;
   (D)   Description of the land on which the proposed work is to be done by
lot, block, tract and street address, or similar description that will readily
identify and definitively locate the proposed work.;
   (E)   Four copies of the grading plan and specifications that conform to the
guidelines of the City Engineer. The grading plan and specifications shall be
prepared, stamped and signed by a civil engineer, and shall be subject to
approval by the City Engineer. The grading plan and specifications shall
include, but not be limited to, the following information:
      1.   A contour map to scale and having contour intervals of five feet,
showing the present contours of the land, the proposed contours of the land
after completion of the proposed grading, boundaries, lot lines, neighboring
public ways and sufficient dimensions and other data to show the location of
all work;
      2.   Description of the type and classification of the soil, details and
location of the proposed drainage structures and piping, benches, walls and
cribbing;
      3.   Details, locations and species, planting plans and schedules and the
like, for all proposed slope control plantings and for all proposed screening,
the location of all existing trees of over four-inch trunk diameter on the
site, and identifying those trees which will not be disturbed by the proposed
grading;
      4.   The name, address, business number, cell phone number and e-mail
address of the contact person responsible for preparing the plans and
specifications; and
      5.   Such other information as the City Engineer may require to carry out
the purposes of this chapter.
   (F)   Estimated start and completion date for the grading work, the
construction schedule, and the schedule for installation of permanent erosion
and sediment control devices where required;
   (G)   Earthwork calculations;
   (H)   Name of the permittee, who shall be responsible for the correctness of
the work and for requesting inspections required under this chapter;
   (I)   Geotechnical/soils investigation report if grading operation exceeds
1,000 cubic yards. The City Engineer may also request a geotechnical/soils
investigation report if grading operation is less than 1,000 cubic yards. The
geotechnical/soils investigation report shall be prepared by a firm of
consulting civil engineers, licensed in the State of California, specializing
in soil mechanics and foundation engineering, and shall clearly state that the
proposed grading conforms to conservative safe engineering practices. The
geotechnical/soils investigation report shall include, but not be limited to,
the following:
      1.   Description of any critically expansive soil or any other soil
problem(s) present at the site;
      2.   Investigation of each site, including recommended corrective actions
which will prevent structural damage to buildings, structures and improvements
to be constructed;
      3.   Discussion of the stability of all exposed slopes, both cut and
fill, and all required drainage for both surface and subsurface waters, and
requirements for berms on all slopes, and recommended degrees of compaction for
all fills;
      4.   A geologic map and description of geologic formations and structures
significant to the safety and performance of improvements;
      5.   Faults, existing active or inactive landslides, and areas subject to
earthquake ground failure such as liquefaction;
      6.   “R” values necessary to determine the suitability of the earth
material for any improvements;
      7.   Recommendations for corrective actions at locations where land
stability problems exist;
      8.   Such other recommendations, as in the opinion of the civil
engineers, are required by the purposes of this chapter. Logs of all test
borings, and results of all field and laboratory tests performed during the
soils investigation, shall be included with the soils investigation report; and
      9.   The signature and registration number of the civil engineer
geologist preparing the report. All reports shall be subject to review by the
City Engineer.
   (J)   Interim and final erosion and sedimentation control plan unless waived
in writing by the City Engineer:
      1.   An erosion and sedimentation control plan shall, through the use of
permanent control features, minimize soil erosion and maximize sediment
interception from the completed project site and shall also provide for the
control of runoff from the site;
      2.   The interim and final erosion and sedimentation control plan shall
conform to the guidelines provided by the City Engineer;
      3.   The interim and final erosion and sedimentation control plans shall
be prepared in accordance with the provisions of the California Stormwater Best
Management Practices Handbooks and other applicable standards; and
      4.   An interim erosion and sediment control plan is required prior to
each rainy season for a staged project or a project that may be completed
before October 15. The permittee shall submit plans for review and secure
approval no later than September 1, and install all erosion and sediment
control measures no later than October 15.
   (K)   Geologic report when required by the City Engineer. A geologic report
when required by the City Engineer shall be based on adequate and necessary
test borings and shall contain, and not be limited to, the following
information:
      1.   Adequate description of the geology at the site, including
delineating any hazard of surface fault trace or rupture;
      2.   Conclusions and recommendations regarding the effect of geologic
conditions on the proposed development;
      3.   Recommendations and conclusions regarding the adequacy of site(s) to
be developed by the proposed grading; and
      4.   Any other information required by the City Engineer.
   (L)   Landscape addendum to the erosion and sediment control plan by a
licensed landscaped architect when required by the Community Development
Director or City Engineer;
   (M)   Copies of the notice of intent (NOI) and stormwater pollution
prevention plan (SWPPP) when required by state law;
   (N)   Such other items as requested by the City Engineer; and
   (O)   Any application for a grading permit shall comply with CEQA by
demonstrating with sufficient information that the proposed grading will not
cause significant harm to the environment or that the environmental mitigation
measures imposed through a prior and applicable CEQA review have been or will
be completed as conditions to the grading permit.
(Ord. 578, passed 1-20-2009)
§ 4-6-8 REVIEW OF REPORTS.
   All reports shall be subject to review by the City Engineer. Supplemental
reports and data may be required as deemed necessary by the City Engineer.
Recommendations included in the reports and approved by the City Engineer shall
be incorporated in the grading plan and grading permit.
(Ord. 578, passed 1-20-2009)
§ 4-6-9 ISSUANCE OR DENIAL OF GRADING PERMIT; CONDITIONS AND LIMITATIONS.
   (A)   Upon receiving an application for a grading permit along with required
submittals, posting of surety as required, and payment of fees, the City
Engineer will review the application and related reports, documents and plans.
Applications may be approved, conditionally approved or denied.
   (B)   Factors to be considered in the review process include, but are not be
limited to:
      1.   Probability of hazardous or unsightly conditions;
      2.   Possible saturation by rain, erosions and earth movements;
      3.   Runoff of surface water;
      4.   Subsurface conditions such as the stratification and faulting of
rock;
      5.   Nature and type of soil or rock; and
      6.   Whether applicant has complied with CEQA.
   (C)   A grading permit may be denied if the applicant fails to furnish
information or secure other permits that may be required by the city or
agencies of the county, state or federal government or other public agencies.
   (D)   Failure of the City Engineer to observe or recognize hazardous or
unsightly conditions or failure to deny the grading permit shall not relieve
the owner or his or her agent for responsibility for the condition or damages
resulting therefrom.
   (E)   1.   The City Engineer may issue a grading permit, attaching such
conditions as he or she may deem necessary to ensure compliance with this
chapter, when the application:
         (a)   Will not adversely affect the drainage or lateral support or
other properties in the area;
         (b)   Will not be detrimental to the public health, safety or the
general welfare; and
         (c)   Is in accordance with the requirements of this chapter or other
provisions of this code.
      2.   The permittee shall perform the work in accordance with the approved
plans and in compliance with all the requirements of this chapter. The
permittee shall keep informed of all state and federal laws, local ordinances
and regulations which in any manner affect the permit. The permittee shall at
all times comply with and shall cause all his or her agents and employees to
comply with all such laws, ordinances, regulations, decisions, and court and
similar administrative orders. All work shall be performed under the provisions
of the California contractors license provisions contained in Cal. Business and
Professions Code Chapter 9 of Division 3.
(Ord. 578, passed 1-20-2009)
§ 4-6-10 GRADING PERMIT CONDITIONS.
   The City Engineer may impose any condition to ensure compliance with the
provisions of this chapter and other applicable laws and regulations. Such
conditions may include, but are not limited to:
   (A)   Requirements for fencing around excavations or fills which otherwise
would be hazardous, and drip lines of trees to be preserved;
   (B)   Completion of the work within a specified period of time;
   (C)   Compliance with best management practices (BMPs);
   (D)   Provisions for dust control;
   (E)   Construction of stabilized ingress and egress;
   (F)   Hours of operation;
   (G)   Designation of route and time of travel over streets. A surety bond,
or other acceptable security, may be required, if deemed necessary by the City
Engineer, to secure the repair of improvements that may be damaged by the
permittee;
   (H)   Installation of barricades and barricade lighting;
   (I)   Designation of the disposal site for any material removed from the
grading site; and
   (J)   Other conditions established by the City Engineer to carry out the
purposes of this chapter.
(Ord. 578, passed 1-20-2009)
§ 4-6-11 GRADING PERMIT FEES.
   Before issuing any grading permit, the City Engineer shall collect the
permit fee as established by the City Council along with all filing and review
costs incurred by the city in connection with the permit application.
(Ord. 578, passed 1-20-2009)
§ 4-6-12 GRADING PERMIT APPEAL PROCEDURES.
   Any applicant aggrieved by the determination of the City Engineer may appeal
such determination to the City Manager by filing a written notice of appeal,
and accompanying fee within 15 days after receiving a permit denial. The City
Manager shall conduct an investigation and provide the opportunity for the
aggrieved applicant to be heard. The City Manager shall render a decision which
shall be final and binding within 15 days of the City Manager’s meeting or
hearing with the applicant. The City Manager may:
   (A)   Affirm or reverse the action of the City Engineer;
   (B)   Add or delete the conditions of the grading permit; and/or
   (C)   Refer the matter back to the City Engineer for further review and/or
discussion with the applicant.
(Ord. 578, passed 1-20-2009)
§ 4-6-13 FAITHFUL PERFORMANCE BOND REQUIRED.
   The intent of this requirement is to permit the city to restore the property
to a safe and reasonably attractive condition in the event of noncompliance of
the grading permit conditions.
   (A)   The City Engineer shall require a faithful performance bond,
guaranteeing to the city the faithful performance of all work and all
conditions contained or described in the approved grading permit and in the
approved plans and specifications made a part hereof, if he or she determines
that the:
      1.   Grading or excavation and/or fill is in excess of 1,000 cubic yards;
and
      2.   Grading or excavation, if left incomplete, will interfere with any
drainage or will endanger persons or constitute a nuisance.
   (B)   The faithful performance bond may take the following forms with the
approval of the City Engineer and City Attorney:
      1.   A corporate surety bond executed by a surety company authorized in
the state;
      2.   A cash deposit or its equivalent; and
      3.   An instrument of credit filed with the city, from a financial
institution subject to regulation by the state or the federal government:
         (a)   Pledging that the funds necessary to meet the grading permit
performance requirements are on deposit and guaranteed for payment upon demand;
and
         (b)   Agreeing that the funds designated by the instrument shall be
trust funds for the purposes set forth in the instrument.
   (C)   The amount of the faithful performance bond shall be based upon the
estimated cost to the city to complete the grading or perform work to eliminate
drainage obstruction, hazard or nuisance and shall include the cost of interim
and permanent erosion control measures if deemed necessary by the City
Engineer. If the grading permit requires an erosion control and sediment
control plan, the faithful performance bond shall include a cash deposit in an
amount equal to the estimated cost of the proposed erosion and sediment control
measures. The estimated cost of the proposed erosion and sediment control
measures shall be subject to review and approval by the City Engineer.
   (D)   Among other appropriate provisions, every faithful performance bond
shall include the following conditions, by which the principal and surety shall
each be bound:
      1.   Comply with the applicable provisions of this chapter and all other
applicable laws, ordinances, rules and regulations;
      2.   Comply with all of the terms and conditions of the permit to the
satisfaction of the City Engineer;
      3.   Complete the proposed work under the permit to the satisfaction of
the City Engineer. The City Engineer may for sufficient cause, extend the time
specified in the grading permit. Such extension shall not release the surety;
      4.   Pay all reasonable costs incurred or expended by the city,
including, but not limited to, court costs and attorney fees, in doing or
causing to be done any of the work set forth in the grading permit, any other
work which in the judgment of the City Engineer is required to be done as a
result of any work or activity done under the permit, or any abatement of any
nuisance created by any work or activity done under the permit, or in
collecting money or damages in connection with any of the foregoing; and
      5.   The term of the faithful performance bond shall begin on the date of
its posting and shall end upon satisfactory completion of the terms and
conditions of the grading permit. Completion shall be evidenced by a
certificate of completion to be issued by the City Engineer and filed with the
records of the permit.
   (E)   The City Manager may request the City Attorney to commence an action
against the faithful performance bond under the following circumstances for
example and without limitation:
      1.   The permittee ceases land disturbing activities and abandons the
work site prior to completion of the site and grading plans;
      2.   The permittee fails to implement or comply with the terms and
conditions of the permit and the accompanying plans and specifications or
interim plans and specifications as approved by the City Engineer; and
      3.   Techniques used in the permit plans and specifications fail within
one year of installation.
   (F)   In the event of a default in the performance of any term or condition
of the grading permit, the surety or the City Engineer or their designees shall
have the right to enter into the premises to complete the work. It shall be
unlawful for any person in any way to hinder, obstruct or prevent such entry.
(Ord. 578, passed 1-20-2009)
§ 4-6-14 MAINTENANCE BOND.
   (A)   The City Manager or City Engineer shall also have the authority to
require the filing with the city of a maintenance bond, in a form approved by
the City Attorney, which shall be effective for not more than one year from the
date of issuance of the grading certificate provided for in this chapter.
   (B)   The maintenance bond shall be in an amount not to exceed 25% of the
amount of the faithful performance bond.
(Ord. 578, passed 1-20-2009)
§ 4-6-15 GRADING PERMIT LIMITATIONS.
   The issuance of a permit under this chapter shall constitute an
authorization to do only that work described or illustrated on the application
or on the site plans approved by the City Engineer and shall not exempt the
permittee from any applicable zoning and subdivision regulations and other
federal, state and local laws.
(Ord. 578, passed 1-20-2009)
§ 4-6-16 GRADING PERMIT TERM.
   (A)   1.   The permittee shall diligently perform and complete the work by
the completion date set forth in the grading permit. Permits issued under this
chapter shall be valid for the period during which the proposed land disturbing
or filling activities and soil storage takes place or is scheduled to take
place.
      2.   The permit shall expire no later than on the specified completion
date.
      3.   The City Engineer may, if the permit holder presents satisfactory
evidence that unusual difficulties have prevented work being started or
completed within the specified time limits, grant a reasonable extension of
time on the permit, provided that the applicant’s request for the extension of
time is in writing and made before the date of expiration of the permit or an
immediate threat to public safety exists.
   (B)   The permittee shall commence permitted activities within 60 days of
the scheduled commencement date for grading or the permittee shall resubmit all
required application forms, maps, plans, schedules, reports and security to the
City Engineer.
(Ord. 578, passed 1-20-2009)
§ 4-6-17 COPY OF PLANS AND GRADING PERMIT TO BE KEPT AT JOB SITE.
   When an application is approved and a permit is issued, one set of approved
plans shall be returned to the permittee. The approved plans and specifications
as well as the permit shall be kept available for review at the job site.
(Ord. 578, passed 1-20-2009)
§ 4-6-18 CHANGES IN GRADING PERMIT OR WORK.
   (A)   No work shall deviate from the approved grading permit or plans
without prior written approval by the City Engineer. The City Engineer may
require the submittal of a revised plan prior to approving any proposed change.
Additional fees shall be charged for reviewing plan revisions. Failure to
obtain prior approval for any change in work may be grounds for suspension of
work.
   (B)   The City Engineer may, upon the written recommendation of a licensed
civil engineer or soils engineer, modify the requirements of the grading permit
and erosion control plan under the following circumstances:
      1.   Where causes exist which may have a deleterious effect on the
quality of receiving waters, or increase surface runoff, erosion or off site
sedimentation; and
      2.   Where modifications achieve the same level of water quality and
surface runoff, erosion and sediment control as would have been achieved had
these problems not arisen.
(Ord. 578, passed 1-20-2009)
§ 4-6-19 ASSIGNMENT OF GRADING PERMIT.
   A grading permit may be assigned pursuant to this chapter provided the
permittee notifies the City Engineer and the Building Division of the Community
Development Department of the proposed assignment in writing and the City
Engineer and Building Division of the Community Development Department approve
of the assignment. In addition, the proposed assignee must:
   (A)   Submit an application form pursuant to this chapter;
   (B)   Agree in writing to all conditions and duties imposed by the grading
permit;
   (C)   Agree in writing to assume responsibility for all work performed prior
to the assignment;
   (D)   Provide security pursuant to this chapter; and
   (E)   Agree to pay all applicable charges and permit fees.
(Ord. 578, passed 1-20-2009)
§ 4-6-20 GRADING PERMIT REQUIRED WITH BUILDING PERMIT.
   Whenever an application for a building permit discloses that grading
operations within the provisions of this chapter may be conducted upon the
site, the building official shall refer the application to the City Engineer,
and no building permit shall be issued until the City Engineer has issued a
grading permit or reported in writing that a grading permit is not required in
accordance with this chapter.
(Ord. 578, passed 1-20-2009)
§ 4-6-21 RIGHT OF ENTRY.
   No person shall interfere with, obstruct, hinder or prevent the ingress or
egress to or from any site by an authorized representative or agent of any
surety or the city engaged in completing the work required under the grading
permit, checking on compliance of the work with the terms and conditions of the
permit and the provisions of this chapter, or taking emergency actions for the
protection of the public and abutting properties.
(Ord. 578, passed 1-20-2009)
§ 4-6-22 INSPECTION; TYPES REQUIRED; NOTICE TO CITY.
   The City Engineer shall, when requested, cause the inspections hereinafter
required to be made, and shall either approve that portion of the work
completed, or shall notify the permit holder in writing wherein the same fails
to comply with this chapter. Where it is found by inspection that the soil or
other conditions are not as stated or shown in the application for a grading
permit, the City Engineer may refuse to approve further work until approval is
obtained for a revised grading plan conforming to the existing conditions. The
permittee shall notify the City Engineer in order to obtain the following
inspections at least 24 hours before the requested inspection date:
   (A)   Initial inspection. When the permittee or his or her agent is ready to
begin work on an excavation or fill, notification to the city shall be given
not less than two days before any grading is started;
   (B)   Clearing and grubbing. When all clearing and grubbing has been
completed, and all materials removed from the site. Upon written permission
from the City Engineer, grading operations may begin on specified portions of a
site prior to completion of clearing and grubbing over the entire site;
   (C)   Special structures. When excavations are complete for retaining and
crib walls, and when reinforcing steel is in place and before concrete is
poured;
   (D)   Final inspection. When all work, including installation of all
drainage and other structures, and all plantings, has been completed; and
   (E)   Additional inspections. The City Engineer may require additional
inspections that he or she deems are necessary and appropriate.
(Ord. 578, passed 1-20-2009)
§ 4-6-23 INSPECTION; SPECIAL SUPERVISION.
   When required by the City Engineer, inspection of compaction of fills shall
be done by a civil engineer licensed by the state, or other approved testing
agency. A report, prepared and signed by the civil engineer or testing agency
shall be submitted to the City Engineer upon completion of the work, and shall
show the following:
   (A)   A contour map, showing the original and finished surfaces of the areas
filled;
   (B)   The unit foundation bearing value recommended on faces of the areas
filled;
   (C)   A plan showing the location of tests made in the fill, together with a
tabulation of the percent compaction, including the preparation of original
ground surface before making the fill;
   (D)   A statement that all work was done in conformity with the provisions
of this chapter and any other ordinances, rules and regulations of the city,
state or federal government; and
   (E)   Other information required by the City Engineer.
(Ord. 578, passed 1-20-2009)
§ 4-6-24 CONFLICTS WITH THE CALIFORNIA BUILDING CODE OR CITY ORDINANCE.
   In the event of conflict between this chapter and the California Building
Code or any existing ordinance of the city, the more restrictive code or
ordinance shall govern.
(Ord. 578, passed 1-20-2009)
§ 4-6-25 LIABILITY FOR INJURY OR DAMAGE.
   The permittee shall be responsible for all liability for personal injury or
property damage proximately caused by work permitted and done by the permittee
or proximately caused by the permittee’s failure to perform its obligations
under said permit in respect to maintenance. If any claim of such liability is
made against the city, its officers, or employees, the permittee shall defend,
indemnify and hold each of them harmless from such claim insofar as permitted
by law.
(Ord. 578, passed 1-20-2009)
§ 4-6-26 CONTROL OF WORK; STANDARDS OF WORK.
   (A)   The City Engineer shall have the right to enter the site at all times
to verify compliance with permit conditions and inspect the work as deemed
necessary.
   (B)   Grading activities shall protect adjacent properties.
      1.   No grading activities shall be performed close to a property line
that may cause damage to other properties or improvements, or cause injuries to
persons, or create a nuisance or hazard or unlawful encroachment on other
properties.
      2.   Whenever any portion of the work requires entry onto an adjacent
property for any reason, the permittee shall obtain the written consent of the
adjacent property owners or their authorized representative and shall file a
copy of said consent with the City Engineer before a permit for such work may
be issued.
   (C)   No person shall obstruct, impede or interfere with an existing
watercourse whether improved or unimproved unless permitted by the city.
   (D)   No grading shall be conducted in such a manner as to alter the
established gradient of natural drainage channels in such a manner as to cause
excessive erosion or flooding.
   (E)   The permittee shall comply with all applicable laws, ordinances and
regulations.
   (F)   If the permittee ceases work before the work is completed, all
necessary steps shall be taken to leave the premises in a condition that will
not cause damage to properties, natural or artificial drainage facilities, or
improvements and will not cause injury to persons.
   (G)   The permittee shall bear the cost for exposure and recovery of all
noninspected work.
(Ord. 578, passed 1-20-2009)
§ 4-6-27 GRADING HOURS OF OPERATION.
   All grading in residential zones, or within 1,000 feet of any residential
occupancy, hotel, motel or hospital, shall be carried on between the hours of
8:30 a.m. and 5:30 p.m. Monday through Saturday, and 10:00 a.m. and 5:30 p.m.
on holidays, unless other hours are specified by the City Engineer or the City
Manager, upon receipt of evidence that an emergency exists which would
constitute a hazard to persons or property.
(Ord. 578, passed 1-20-2009)
§ 4-6-28 GRADING DUST AND NOISE CONTROL.
   All graded surfaces and materials, whether filled, excavated, transported or
stockpiled, shall be wetted, protected or contained in such a manner as to
prevent any nuisance from dust, or spillage upon adjoining property or streets.
Equipment and materials on the site should be used in such a manner as to avoid
excessive dust and noise. Roadways on the site shall be surfaced or wetted
sufficiently to prevent excessive dust.
(Ord. 578, passed 1-20-2009)
§ 4-6-29 GRADING SLOPES AND BANKS.
   (A)   Exposed or finished banks or slopes of any fill or excavation shall be
uniformly graded, and no such slope, bank or inclined graded surface shall
exceed a vertical height of 30 feet unless intercepting drains or terraces are
provided. Such drains or terraces shall be permanently lined or protected with
approved materials, and accumulating surface water shall be conducted to an
approved discharge. Berms shall be provided to prevent overflow from any such
terrace or intercepting drain.
   (B)   1.   All exposed or finished banks or slopes of any fill or excavation
having a slope steeper than three horizontal to one vertical (3:1) shall be
protected from erosion by approved planting, cribbing, walls or terracing, or a
combination thereof.
      2.   Other unprotected graded surfaces exceeding 5,000 square feet in
area shall be planted, paved or built upon, or shall be provided with berms and
approved drainage facilities adequate to prevent erosion and to conduct the
accumulated or runoff surface waters to an approved place of discharge.
   (C)   It is the intent of this section to prohibit the abandonment of graded
areas or slopes which are not provided with erosion protection and adequate
drainage facilities even though all other requirements herein have been
provided and approved.
(Ord. 578, passed 1-20-2009)
§ 4-6-30 TRENCHING IN SLOPES AND BANKS.
   Any pipe trench or other trenching or excavation made in any slope or bank
of an excavated or filled site shall be backfilled to the level of the
surrounding grade. Such backfill shall be compacted to the density of the
original materials, but in no case less than 90% of the maximum density
achieved by AASHO compaction test method T99-57 or TI80-57, as selected by the
City Engineer or as otherwise determined by the City Engineer.
(Ord. 578, passed 1-20-2009)
§ 4-6-31 BUILDING SITE PADS.
   Whenever possible, all building site pads shall be graded to provide
drainage to a street, public way, natural watercourse, approved flood channel
or public easement, for drainage purposes.
(Ord. 578, passed 1-20-2009)
§ 4-6-32 BERMS FOR SLOPES AND BANKS.
   Berms shall be provided and maintained at the top of all banks or graded
slopes unless the slope of the site exceeds one-fourth inch per foot in the
direction of an approved point of discharge. Sites shall be graded to prevent
spillage of surface waters across banks or graded slopes.
(Ord. 578, passed 1-20-2009)
§ 4-6-33 PLACEMENT SPECIFICATIONS FOR FILL MATERIAL.
   (A)   All fill used, designed or intended to be used to provide vertical or
lateral support for buildings or structures shall be compacted as required by
the soils engineer employed for the project, or not less than 90%, as
determined by the American Association of State Highway Officials (AASHO)
compaction test method T99-57 or TI80-57, as selected by the City Engineer or
as otherwise determined by the City Engineer.
   (B)   Before placing any fill intended to be compacted, all existing ground
surfaces upon which such fill will be placed shall be cleared of all
deleterious materials not indigenous to the site. Tree stumps cut flush with
the ground may be permitted, provided at least three feet of fill is to be
placed over the stump. Surface shall be rough graded to a minimum depth of six
inches in order to provide a bond between original and filled material. In
addition to the bounding requirement herein, when fill is to be placed on
existing slopes steeper than six horizontal to one vertical (6:1), terraces or
deep furrows shall be provided at intervals of slope distance not exceeding 20
feet. The slope shall be benched at least four feet horizontally for the full
length of the slope upon which the fill is to be made.
   (C)   Fill material shall be of uniform density and composition, and no fill
shall contain excessive voids, trash debris, garbage, organic solids, metal
containers or parts, combustible waste, or other materials not specifically
approved as fill material by the City Engineer in the approved plans or
specifications for the project.
   (D)   Fill materials shall contain proper amount of moisture to assure
proper behavior of the fill material, both during compaction and after the fill
is in place. This shall be in accordance with design requirements approved by
the City Engineer.
   (E)   The maximum slope of any fill shall not exceed two horizontal to one
vertical (2:1). When cohesionless soils are used, or other conditions warrant
further restriction of slope, the City Engineer may require a flatter slope.
(Ord. 578, passed 1-20-2009)
§ 4-6-34 MAINTENANCE OF PROTECTIVE DEVICES.
   The owner of any property on which any excavation or fill has been made
shall maintain in good condition and repair all retaining walls, cribbing,
drainage structures and other protective devices, including protective
planting, until the same are well established.
(Ord. 578, passed 1-20-2009)
§ 4-6-35 CERTIFICATE OF COMPLETION.
   If, upon final inspection of any excavation or fill, it is found that the
work authorized by the grading permit has been satisfactorily completed in
accordance with the requirements of this chapter, a grading certificate
covering such work, and stating that the work is approved, shall be issued to
the owner by the city upon request.
(Ord. 578, passed 1-20-2009)
§ 4-6-36 SUSPENSION OR REVOCATION OF GRADING PERMIT.
   (A)   Suspension of permit and work. If the permittee fails to comply with
the permit conditions or the provisions of this chapter, the City Engineer may
suspend the permit. In addition, the City Engineer may order the suspension of
any work authorized by a grading permit upon determination that the weather,
soil, slope or general site conditions may cause serious accelerated erosion or
sediment damage either on site or downstream from the site. Any suspension of
work ordered by the City Engineer shall toll the time limits applicable to the
grading permit. Upon notice of such suspension, the permittee shall immediately
cease all work except for work required by the City Engineer to eliminate
hazardous conditions or nuisances. The City Engineer may reinstate or revoke
suspended permits.
   (B)   Revocation of permit. The City Engineer may in writing revoke a permit
issued under the provisions of this chapter whenever the permit is issued in
error on the basis of incorrect information or in violation of any federal or
state law or local ordinance or regulation. The permit may also be revoked due
to noncompliance with the permit conditions, the provisions of this chapter, or
other applicable laws and regulations, or whenever the permittee has defaulted
in performing any work under the terms of the posted bond. Once the permit is
revoked, work shall not commence or resume until a new application is filed and
a new permit issued.
   (C)   Procedure. Upon determination that grounds for revocation of a grading
permit exist, the City Engineer shall conduct a hearing. A written notice shall
be sent separately to the permittee and to the surety, stating the time and
place for the hearing, and it shall be served personally or by certified United
States mail, addressed to the permittee and surety at the mail address shown in
the application and in the surety instrument. Within 30 days of the conclusion
of the hearing, the City Engineer shall make his or her findings and decision
and file the same in his or her office and shall serve a copy thereof
separately upon the permittee and its surety. Any applicant aggrieved by the
determination of the City Engineer may appeal such determination to the City
Manager by filing a written notice of appeal, and accompanying fee within 15
days after the determination is made pursuant to §
4-6-12 of this chapter. The City Manager shall conduct the appeal pursuant to
the procedures set forth in that section.
(Ord. 578, passed 1-20-2009)
§ 4-6-37 PROSECUTIONS OF VIOLATIONS AS INFRACTIONS.
   The violation of any provision of this chapter, or failure to comply with
any of the mandatory requirements of this chapter, shall constitute a
misdemeanor, except that, notwithstanding any other provisions of this chapter,
any such violation constituting a misdemeanor under this chapter may, at the
discretion of the authorized enforcement officer, be charged and prosecuted as
an infraction.
(Ord. 578, passed 1-20-2009)
§ 4-6-38 PENALTIES.
   (A)   Upon conviction of a misdemeanor, a person shall be subject to payment
of a fine, imprisonment, or both.
   (B)   Upon conviction of an infraction, a person shall be subject to payment
of a fine.
(Ord. 578, passed 1-20-2009)
§ 4-6-39 CONTINUING VIOLATIONS.
   Every day any violation of this chapter occurs or continues shall constitute
a separate offense.
(Ord. 578, passed 1-20-2009)
§ 4-6-40 VIOLATIONS DECLARED NUISANCE.
   In addition to the penalties provided herein, any condition caused or
permitted to exist in violation of any of the provisions of this chapter, is a
threat to the public health, safety and welfare, is hereby declared and deemed
a public nuisance and may be abated. Each day such condition continues shall be
regarded as a new and separate offense.
(Ord. 578, passed 1-20-2009)
§ 4-6-41 CIVIL ACTIONS.
   In addition to any other remedies provided in this chapter, any violation of
this chapter may be enforced by civil action brought by the city. In any such
action, the city may seek, as appropriate, any or all of the following
remedies:
   (A)   A temporary restraining order, preliminary and permanent injunction;
   (B)   Reimbursement for the costs of any investigation or inspection which
led to the establishment of the violation and for the reasonable costs of
preparing and bringing any related enforcement action under this chapter; and/
or
   (C)   Costs incurred in removing, correcting or terminating the adverse
effect resulting from the violation.
(Ord. 578, passed 1-20-2009)
§ 4-6-42 REMEDIES NOT EXCLUSIVE.
   Remedies identified in this chapter are in addition to and do not supersede
or limit any or all other remedies, civil or criminal. The remedies provided
for herein shall be cumulative and not exclusive.
(Ord. 578, passed 1-20-2009)
§ 4-6-43 SEVERABILITY.
   If any section, subsection, subdivision, sentence, clause, phrase or portion
of this chapter, is for any reason held to be invalid or unconstitutional by
the decision of any court of competent jurisdiction, such decision will not
affect the validity of the remaining portions of this chapter. The City Council
hereby declares that it would have adopted this chapter, and each section,
subsection, subdivision, sentence, clause, phrase, or portion thereof,
irrespective of the fact that any one or more sections, subsections,
subdivisions, sentences, clauses, phrases or portions thereof be declared
invalid or unconstitutional.
(Ord. 578, passed 1-20-2009)
CHAPTER 7: REGIONAL TRANSPORTATION IMPACT FEE
Section
4-7-1 Intent
4-7-2 Purpose
4-7-3 Specific findings
4-7-4 Definitions
4-7-5 Applicability
4-7-6 Establishment of regional transportation impact fee
4-7-7 Findings
4-7-8 Exemptions
4-7-9 Credits
4-7-10 Collection of fee
4-7-11 Regional Transportation Impact Fee Fund
4-7-12 Appeal process
4-7-13 Annual fee and program review
4-7-14 Severability
§ 4-7-1 INTENT.
   (A)   The City Council finds that future development within the County of
Merced to the year 2030 will result in traffic volumes in excess of capacity on
the regional system of arterials, highways, and freeways as designated in this
chapter.
   (B)   The City Council finds that failure to expand the capacity of the
existing circulation system will result in new development causing unacceptable
levels of congestion on the arterials, highways, and freeways of the regional
system.
   (C)   The City Council also finds and declares that, in the absence of this
chapter imposing a fair share traffic fee upon new development, existing and
future sources of revenue are inadequate to fund substantial portions of the
regional transportation system improvements needed to avoid unacceptable levels
of congestion and related adverse impacts caused by new development.
(Ord. 613, passed 5-20-2014)
§ 4-7-2 PURPOSE.
   (A)   The City Council finds and determines that adoption of this chapter
will raise additional revenues needed to construct improvements to accommodate
traffic that will be generated by new development within the county and city.
   (B)   The City Council also finds and declares that the Regional
Transportation Impact Fee Study (MCAG, January 18, 2008) has determined the
extent to which the new development of land will generate traffic volumes
impacting the roadway system and that this chapter establishes a fair and
equitable method for distributing unfunded costs of transportation improvements
necessary to accommodate traffic volumes generated by such development.
(Ord. 613, passed 5-20-2014)
§ 4-7-3 SPECIFIC FINDINGS.
   The need for regional transportation improvements and for the regional
transportation impact fee established by this chapter are based on the finding
of the Regional Transportation Impact Fee Study prepared by the Merced County
Association of Governments whose governing board is composed of City Council
members and county supervisors from the county’s six cities and the County
Board of Supervisors. The study has established that growth to the year 2030
will affect the entire regional transportation system and therefore that the
area of impact for future development is appropriately the entire County of
Merced. The study made the following additional findings.
   (A)   Population and employment within the County of Merced is anticipated
to increase by 98% and 82%, respectively by the year 2030 and will result in
levels of service E and F (as defined in the Highway Capacity Manual, 6th
edition) on existing arterials, highways and freeways.
   (B)   The Regional Transportation Plan (MCAG, 2007) modeled and evaluated
the effect of projected growth to the year 2030 on all major arterials,
highways and freeways in Merced County and found that without expansion, the
transportation system would suffer severe congestion. Further, the plan showed
that the recommended transportation improvements would accommodate the traffic
anticipated in the year 2030 at the desired level of service D.
   (C)   Existing and future sources of public revenues are insufficient to
fund all the needed transportation improvements.
   (D)   The revenues generated by this regional transportation impact fee will
provide additional funds necessary to construct the transportation improvements
and will help provide the additional capacity needed in the year 2030 to
accommodate the traffic generated by new development in the cities and County
of Merced.
   (E)   The regional transportation impact fee is a fair and equitable method
of distributing the cost of transportation improvements among the development
that will generate the increased traffic.
(Ord. 613, passed 5-20-2014)
§ 4-7-4 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   AVERAGE WEEKDAY PEAK HOUR TRIPS. The average number of peak hour vehicle
trips to or from a designated land use Monday through Friday.
   DEVELOPMENT.
      1.   Any discretionary or ministerial action by the city resulting in the
issuance of grading, building, plumbing, mechanical or electrical permits,
conditional use permits or certificates of occupancy issued by the city to
construct, or to change the use of, a building or property.
      2.   Where DEVELOPMENT applies to a change in use of, or enlargement of
an existing building, the average weekday peak hour trips shall be only the
additional trips in excess of those associated with the existing use.
   MERCED COUNTY. The unincorporated areas of the County of Merced and the
incorporated areas of the six cities within Merced County.
   MERCED COUNTY ASSOCIATION OF GOVERNMENTS. The joint powers agency delegated
to manage and administer the regional transportation impact fee and whose
members are the incorporated cities and the County of Merced.
   MERCED COUNTY ASSOCIATION OF GOVERNMENTS REGIONAL TRANSPORTATION IMPACT FEE
TRUST FUND or TRUST FUND. The account to which regional transportation impact
fees collected under this chapter are deposited with the Merced County
Treasurer by the cities and county for any lawful use as provided in this
chapter.
   PEAK HOUR. The one hour long period during which the maximum amount of
traffic occurs. Often the PEAK HOUR is a rush period when commuters travel to
and from work.
   REGIONAL SYSTEM. The following street, road and highway segments:
      1.   State highways; the portions of Interstate 5 and State Routes 33,
59, 99, 140, 152, 165 that lie within Merced County;
      2.   Bradbury Road from Highway 165 to Highway 99;
      3.   Bloss Avenue from Highway 165 to Highway 99;
      4.   Westside Boulevard from Highway 165 to Highway 99;
      5.   Lincoln Boulevard from Highway 140 to Peach Avenue in Livingston;
      6.   Main Street in Livingston from Peach Avenue to Highway 99;
      7.   Livingston-Cressey Road from Highway 99 to Santa Fe Avenue;
      8.   Olive Avenue from Livingston-Cressey Road in Livingston to Santa Fe
Avenue in Winton;
      9.   Santa Fe Avenue from the Stanislaus County line to Highway 59/Olive
Avenue in Merced;
      10.   Santa Fe Avenue from Plainsburg Road in Planada to the Madera
County line;
      11.   Applegate Road from Highway 140 to Highway 99 in Atwater;
      12.   Winton Way from Highway 99 in Atwater to Santa Fe Avenue in Winton;
      13.   Buhach Road from Highway 140 to Santa Fe Avenue;
      14.   Bellevue Road from Highway 99 to Lake Road or the Campus Parkway,
including gaps;
      15.   Olive Avenue in Merced from Highway 59 to Campus Parkway;
      16.   G Street in Merced from Highway 99 to Bellevue Road;
      17.   Mission Avenue from Highway 59 to Campus Parkway;
      18.   Plainsburg Road from Highway 99 to Highway 140;
      19.   Sandy Mush Road from Highway 59 to Highway 99;
      20.   Henry Miller Avenue east from Interstate 5 in Santa Nella, across
State Route 165 to Turner Island Road;
      21.   Los Banos to Gustine Route along Volta Road, Ingomar Grade,
Cottonwood Road and Hunt Road to Gustine;
      22.   Sandy Mush Road/Turner Island Road west from State Route 99, across
State Route 59 to Turner Island Road and south to State Route 152;
      23.   Washington Road from Indiana Avenue to Highway 59;
      24.   Hutchins Road from Carlucci Road to Indiana Avenue;
      25.   Indiana Avenue from Highway 152 to Washington Road;
      26.   Walnut Avenue in the county, from Livingston to Santa Fe Drive;
      27.   Le Grand Road in the county, from Highway 99 to Santa Fe Avenue;
      28.   Minturn Road in the county, from Le Grand Road to the Madera County
line;
      29.   Oakdale Road in the county, from Highway 59 to the Stanislaus
County line;
      30.   La Grange Road in the county, from Highway 59’s termination in
Snelling to the Stanislaus County line;
      31.   Merced Falls Road in the county, from Highway 59’s termination in
Snelling to the Mariposa County line;
      32.   The future Campus Parkway from Highway 99 to end of route at
Yosemite Avenue or UC Merced County; and
      33.   Gurr Road from State Route 140 near the McSwain area to Sandy Mush
Road.
   REGIONAL TRANSPORTATION IMPACT FEE POLICY BOARD (RTIF POLICY BOARD). Those
members of the MCAG governing board whose appointing jurisdiction has adopted
this chapter.
   REGIONAL TRANSPORTATION PLAN. The document adopted by the Merced County
Association of Governments on May 17, 2007.
   TRIP GENERATION RATE. The number of average weekday peak hour trips
generated by a particular land use. The land use categories correspond to those
used in the regional travel model maintained by MCAG. The TRIP GENERATION RATE
for each land use category is the rate published by the Institute of
Transportation Engineers, 6th edition. The land use categories and peak hour
trip generation rates are as follows:
      1.   Residential, single-family (ITE code 210): 1.00 trip per dwelling
unit;
      2.   Residential, multi-family (ITE code 220): 0.61 trip per dwelling
unit;
      3.   Retail commercial, general (ITE codes 800 - 912 except those listed
below): 1.86 trips per 1,000 square foot floor area;
      4.   Retail commercial, high turnover (ITE codes 831 - 837, 844 - 847,
851 through 853, 911 through 912): 10.86 trips per 1,000 square foot floor
area;
      5.   Retail commercial, low turnover (ITE codes 814, 823, 848, 860, 862,
890): 1.25 trips per 1,000 square foot floor area;
      6.   Retail commercial, over 50,000 square foot gross floor area (ITE
code 820, and any 800 through 999 with 50,000+ square feet): 3.58 trips per
1,000 square foot floor area;
      7.   Office commercial (ITE codes 710 - 770): 1.79 trips per 1,000 square
foot floor area; and
      8.   Industrial (ITE code 110 - 170): 0.75 trip per 1,000 square foot
floor area.
(Ord. 613, passed 5-20-2014)
§ 4-7-5 APPLICABILITY.
   This chapter shall apply only to new development and to any reconstruction
of existing buildings that will generate additional vehicular trips. The
provisions of this chapter shall take effect November 20, 2014.
(Ord. 613, passed 5-20-2014)
§ 4-7-6 ESTABLISHMENT OF REGIONAL TRANSPORTATION IMPACT FEE.
   (A)   The regional transportation impact fee is not intended to be the sole
source of funding for construction of the regional system. Furthermore, the
total amount of fees collected pursuant to this chapter shall not exceed the
cost of construction of the regional system;
   (B)   The Merced County Association of Governments has calculated the
regional transportation impact fee according to the following procedure:
      1.   MCAG determined the total costs of the regional transportation
improvements;
      2.   MCAG established a capital improvements program. This will include
each regional transportation improvement project with its total project cost,
and sources of funds to pay for the project, specifically showing the amount
for each project to be funded through the regional transportation impact fee;
      3.   MCAG determined the total amount to be funded by the fee by summing
the fee shares of each project in the capital improvements program;
      4.   MCAG determined the total number of peak hour trips associated with
new development, for each land use category listed in §
4-7-4 of this chapter, by using the MCAG traffic model and subtracting the
number of peak hour trips generated in Merced County by each category in the
year 2005 from the number of such trips generated by the same category in the
year 2030;
      5.   MCAG determined a per trip cost by dividing the total amount to be
funded by the fee by the total number of trips associated with new development;
      6.   MCAG determined a cost per unit of development for the land use
categories listed in §
4-7-4 of this chapter. This cost will be calculated by multiplying the per trip
cost by the average peak hour trips per unit of development. Units of
development will be dwelling units for residential land uses, and 1,000 square
feet of floor area for commercial, industrial, and other land uses; and
      7.   The fee for each new development is calculated by multiplying the
cost per unit of development by the number of units being developed.
   (C)   As shown in the Regional Transportation Impact Fee Study, MCAG has
determined that the cost per peak hour trip is $3,115;
   (D)   The regional transportation impact fee study has calculated the
following transportation impact fee schedule for these land use categories:
Residential, single-family            $3,115 per dwelling unit
Residential, multi-family             $1,892 per dwelling unit
Retail commercial, general            $4,146 per 1,000 square foot floor area
Retail commercial, high turnover      $12,082 per 1,000 square foot floor area
Retail commercial, low turnover       $2,780 per 1,000 square foot floor area
Retail commercial, over 50,000 square $7,161 per 1,000 square foot floor area
feet
Office commercial                     $3,337 per 1,000 square foot floor area
Industrial/ag processing              $1,409 per 1,000 square foot floor area
 
   (E)   Should the applicant believe the land use category in subsection (D)
of this section is not appropriate for their application, the applicant may
propose a more appropriate development category, subject to the approval of the
City Manager or their designee, and alternative trip generation rate from the
ITE trip generation code noted in this chapter for use in calculation of the
appropriate trip generation rate; or
   (F)   Should the applicant believe the land use category in subsection (D)
of this section is not appropriate for their application, the applicant may
have prepared, at their own expense, a trip generation study conducted by a
licensed traffic engineer that forecasts the anticipated peak hour trips for
the proposed development. The study procedure and results shall require the
approval of the City Manager or his or her designee.
(Ord. 613, passed 5-20-2014)
§ 4-7-7 FINDINGS.
   The City Council finds that the RTIF:
   (A)   Identifies the purpose of the RTIF;
   (B)   Identifies the use to which the fee will be put, including specific
facilities;
   (C)   Demonstrates a reasonable relationship between the fee’s use and the
type of development project on which the fee is imposed;
   (D)   Demonstrates a reasonable relationship between the need for the public
facility and type of development project on which the fee is imposed; and
   (E)   Shows a reasonable relationship between the amount of the fee and the
cost of the public facility or portion of the public facility attributable to
the development on which the fee is imposed.
(Ord. 613, passed 5-20-2014)
§ 4-7-8 EXEMPTIONS.
   The following developments are exempted from payment of the fee required by
this chapter: the reconstruction of any building that has been destroyed by
fire, flood or natural disaster so as the reconstructed building both continues
the prior use and generates the same or fewer trips as the original building.
(Ord. 613, passed 5-20-2014)
§ 4-7-9 CREDITS.
   (A)   Where an applicant, otherwise subject to this chapter dedicates and/or
improves those regional roads, highways or freeways identified in exhibit A of
this section beyond the requirements established in subsection (B) of this
section, the applicant shall receive a credit against his or her regional
transportation impact fee. That credit shall be an amount equal to the land
value of dedicated land and/or the actual engineering and construction costs
incurred at the time of the development to the extent that the MCAG has
included those costs in its estimated cost of constructing the regional system.
   (B)   The fee required by this chapter shall be supplementary to any fees
and conditions imposed upon projects under the provisions of the Subdivision
Map Act, being Govt. Code Subdivision Map Act (Cal. Govt. Code §§ 66410 et
seq.), California Environmental Quality Act, being Cal. Public Resources §§
21000 et seq., and other state and local laws, ordinances, or administrative
policy which may authorize the imposition of conditions or contributions on
development and the applicant shall not be entitled to any credits for such
contributions or conditions.
   (C)   The in lieu of fee credit for any land dedications shall be based on
the fair market value of the land dedicated as determined by an appraisal
process with consultation with MCAG.
   (D)   Should the in lieu of fee credit exceed the applicant’s total fee, the
difference may be credited against any of the applicant’s future development
which would be subject to the fee, or a reimbursement agreement may be entered
into.
   (E)   Should a developer be required to provide improvements which benefit
adjacent undeveloped land, the developer may be reimbursed for a proportionate
share of the cost of such improvements under special agreements with MCAG and
contingent upon future fees contributed from other benefitted developments. In
all cases, however, reimbursements under such special agreements must be timed
to coincide with construction of the transportation project as scheduled in the
capital improvement plan adopted by MCAG.
   EXHIBIT A
   LIST OF PROJECTS ON THE REGIONAL SYSTEM
   The following transportation projects are those which when completed will
together mitigate the traffic impacts on the regional transportation system of
future growth to the year 2030 throughout Merced County. The City Council, upon
adoption of this chapter, shall amend the circulation element of the general
plan to include these regional projects and any amendments.
   The regional transportation impact fee shall be solely for funding
environmental clearance analysis and reports, design engineering, right-of-way
acquisition, construction, fund management, project support, and other
necessary expenses for the delivery of regional system projects and any other
purpose consistent with this chapter. The fee may not be used for system
maintenance.
RTIF Project List
RTIF Project List
A Bellevue Rd - connection to 99 - from new interchange to Atwater
B Mission Avenue - improvement - from 59 to 99 (not adding lanes)
C SR 59 “Atwater-Merced Highway” realign from SR 99 to Bellevue Road with new SR 99
  interchange
D SR 59 - widen to 4 lanes - from Mission Avenue to Childs Avenue
E SR 59 - widen to 4 lanes - from 152 to Mission Avenue
F SR 140 “Bradley Overhead” - widen to 4/5 lanes - from Parsons to Santa Fe Avenue
G SR 140 - widen to 4/5 lanes - from Santa Fe Avenue to Campus Parkway
H SR 140/33 “Gustine Truck Route” - bypass Gustine
I SR 152 “Los Banos Bypass”
J SR 165 - widen to 4/5 lanes - from Hilmar to Stanislaus County or alternate
  project to reduce traffic on SR 165 through Hilmar
K Dos Palos road improvements
L Winton Parkway interchange improvements and widening
M Campus Parkway from SR 99 to Yosemite Avenue
 
(Ord. 613, passed 5-20-2014)
§ 4-7-10 COLLECTION OF FEE.
   (A)   The RTIF shall be collected at the time when the city grants an
occupancy permit for residential structures or at the time of the issuance of a
building permit for nonresidential structures.
   (B)   For nonresidential structures, the RTIF may be paid in up to five
equal annual installments that shall include interest subject to the approval
of the city.
   (C)   For a change of use or other development subject to this chapter, that
would not require a building permit, the fee shall be collected at the time of
the issuance of a use, development or business license permit, whichever occurs
first.
(Ord. 613, passed 5-20-2014)
§ 4-7-11 REGIONAL TRANSPORTATION IMPACT FEE FUND.
   (A)   All monies collected from payments of the regional transportation
impact fee shall be deposited with the County Treasurer of Merced County in the
Trust Fund.
   (B)   All monies in the trust fund shall be used solely for the delivery of
the regional transportation projects identified in this chapter. Project
delivery includes preparation of environmental and engineering documents,
right-of-way acquisition, construction, project support, and fund
administration. All interest or other earnings of the Trust Fund shall be
credited to the Trust Fund.
(Ord. 613, passed 5-20-2014)
§ 4-7-12 APPEAL PROCESS.
   An applicant who disputes the amount of impact fee may file a written notice
of appeal with the City Manager or his or her designee. Within 15 days of the
appeal, the City Manager or his or her designee shall provide written
notification of his or her decision. If unsatisfied with the decision of the
City Manager or his or her designee, the applicant may resubmit a written
appeal to the City Council which shall be filed with the City Clerk’s office
within ten days of the date of the mailing of the Development Services
Director’s decision. Thereafter, the City Council shall render its decision by
a majority vote of those members present within 60 days of the filing of the
appeal.
(Ord. 613, passed 5-20-2014)
§ 4-7-13 ANNUAL FEE AND PROGRAM REVIEW.
   (A)   The City Council shall annually review, pursuant to Cal. Gov’t Code §
66006, and if necessary amend the regional transportation impact fee program to
ensure that it continues to be a fair and equitable method to distribute the
costs of improvements necessary to accommodate traffic volumes generated by
future growth. This review will coincide with the adoption of the five year
capital improvement program pursuant to Cal. Gov’t Code § 66006. In adjusting
the fee program, the following shall be considered:
      1.   Adding new transportation projects that meet program criteria;
      2.   Deleting projects that have been completed;
      3.   Adjust the average per trip cost to reflect changes in construction
costs;
      4.   Adjust the average per trip cost to reflect changes in land values
as indicated in an annual survey of local government costs for land subject to
right-of-way acquisition; and
      5.   Revise the average per trip cost to reflect changes in the list of
regional projects as that list may be amended from time to time by the RTIF
Policy Board.
   (B)   Unless otherwise amended by the City Council, the fees listed in §
4-7-6(D) of this chapter shall be adjusted on July 1 of each year based upon
the engineering construction cost index as published by the Engineering News
Record.
   (C)   Changes in the regional transportation impact fee resulting from the
annual review will have no effect on fees already paid into the trust fund.
   (D)   At the time of the annual review, the City Council shall make findings
for any fees remaining unexpended and uncommitted in the Trust Fund for five or
more years after deposit demonstrating a reasonable relationship between the
fee and the purpose for which it was charged. Unless a need for such fees can
be demonstrated, the unexpended or uncommitted portion, including interest that
has accrued, shall be refunded to the current record owner of the development
project on a prorated basis.
(Ord. 613, passed 5-20-2014)
§ 4-7-14 SEVERABILITY.
   If any one or more of the terms, provision or sections of this chapter shall
to any extent be adjudged invalid, unenforceable or void, by a court of
competent jurisdiction, each and all of the remaining terms, provisions and
sections of this chapter shall not be affected thereby and shall be valid and
enforceable.
(Ord. 613, passed 5-20-2014)
CHAPTER 8: SMALL RESIDENTIAL ROOFTOP SOLAR ENERGY SYSTEM REVIEW PROCESS
Section
4-8-1 Definitions
4-8-2 Applicability
4-8-3 Solar energy system requirements
4-8-4 Permit review
§ 4-8-1 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   ELECTRONIC SUBMITTAL. The utilization of one or more of the following:
      1.   E-mail;
      2.   The internet; and
      3.   Facsimile.
   SMALL RESIDENTIAL ROOFTOP SOLAR ENERGY SYSTEM. All of the following:
      1.   A solar energy system that is no larger than ten kilowatts
alternating current nameplate rating or 30 kilowatts thermal;
      2.   A solar energy system that conforms to all applicable state fire,
structural, electrical and other building codes as adopted or amended by the
city and Cal. Civil Code § 714(c)(3), as such section or subdivision may be
amended, renumbered or redesignated from time to time;
      3.   A solar energy system that is installed on a single- or duplex
family dwelling; and
      4.   A solar panel or module array that does not exceed the maximum legal
building height as defined by the city’s maximum legal building height.
   SOLAR ENERGY SYSTEM. Has the same meaning set forth in Cal. Civil Code §
801.5(a)(1) and (a)(2), as such section or subdivision may be amended,
renumbered or redesignated from time to time.
(Ord. 624, passed 10-20-2015)
§ 4-8-2 APPLICABILITY.
   (A)   This chapter applies to the permitting of all small residential
rooftop solar energy systems in the city.
   (B)   Small residential rooftop solar energy systems legally established or
permitted prior to the effective date hereof are not subject to the
requirements of this chapter unless physical modifications or alterations are
undertaken that materially change the size, type or components of the small
rooftop solar energy system in such a way as to require new permitting. Routine
operation and maintenance or like-kind replacements shall not require a permit.
(Ord. 624, passed 10-20-2015)
§ 4-8-3 SOLAR ENERGY SYSTEM REQUIREMENTS.
   (A)   All solar energy systems permitted under this chapter and application
procedures shall meet applicable health and safety standards and requirements
imposed by the state and the city.
   (B)   Solar energy systems for heating water in single-family residences and
for heating water in commercial or swimming pool applications shall be
certified by an accredited listing agency as defined by the California Plumbing
and Mechanical Code.
   (C)   Solar energy systems for producing electricity shall meet all
applicable safety and performance standards established by the California
Electrical Code, the Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers, and
accredited testing laboratories such as Underwriters Laboratories and, where
applicable, rules of the Public Utilities Commission regarding safety and
reliability.
   (D)   Prior to submitting an application, the applicant shall:
      1.   Verify, to the city’s reasonable satisfaction and at the applicant’s
expense, through the use of standard engineering evaluation techniques that the
support structure for the small residential rooftop solar energy system is
stable and adequate to transfer all wind, seismic and dead and live loads
associated with the system to the building foundation;
      2.   At the applicant’s cost, verify to the city’s reasonable
satisfaction using standard electrical inspection techniques that the existing
electrical system including existing line, load, ground and bonding wiring as
well as main panel and subpanel sizes are adequately sized, based on the
existing electrical system’s current use, to carry all new photovoltaic
electrical loads;
      3.   All documents required for the submission of a solar energy system
application shall be made available on the city’s publicly accessible website;
      4.   Applicants may submit the required permit application and documents
in person at the city’s Building Department or may use electronic submittal;
      5.   An applicant’s electronic signature shall be accepted on all forms,
applications and other documents in lieu of a wet signature;
      6.   The city’s chief building official is hereby authorized by Council
and shall adopt a standard plan and checklist of all requirements with which
small residential rooftop solar energy systems shall comply to be eligible for
expedited review;
      7.   The small residential rooftop solar energy system permit process,
standard plan(s), and checklist(s) shall substantially conform to
recommendations for expedited permitting, including the checklist and standard
plans contained in the most current version of the California Solar Permitting
Guidebook adopted by the Governor’s Office of Planning and Research; and
      8.   All fees prescribed for the permitting of small residential rooftop
solar energy systems must comply with Cal. Gov’t Code §§ 65850.55, 66015, 66016
and Cal. Health and Safety Code § 17951.
   (E)   An application that satisfies the information requirements in the
checklist, as determined by the city, shall be deemed complete. Upon receipt of
an incomplete application, the city shall issue a written correction notice
detailing all deficiencies in the application and any additional information
required to be eligible for expedited permit issuance.
(Ord. 624, passed 10-20-2015)
§ 4-8-4 PERMIT REVIEW.
   (A)   For a small residential rooftop solar energy system eligible for
expedited review, only one inspection shall be required, which shall be done in
a timely manner and may include a consolidated inspection by the building
official and Fire Chief, or their designees. If a small residential rooftop
solar energy system fails inspection, a subsequent inspection is authorized;
however, the subsequent inspection need not conform to the requirements of this
subsection (A).
   (B)   Upon confirmation by the city of the application and supporting
documents being complete and meeting the requirements of the checklist, the
city shall administratively approve the application and issue all required
permits or authorizations. Such approval does not authorize an applicant to
connect the small residential rooftop energy system to the local utility
provider’s electricity grid. The applicant is responsible for obtaining such
approval or permission from the local utility provider.
   (C)   The city’s review of the application shall be limited to review of
whether the application meets all local, state and federal health and safety
requirements.
(Ord. 624, passed 10-20-2015)
CHAPTER 9: ELECTRIC VEHICLE CHARGING STATION PERMITS
Section
4-9-1 Intent and purpose
4-9-2 Definitions
4-9-3 Expedited permitting process
4-9-4 Permit application processing
4-9-5 Technical review
4-9-6 Electric vehicle charging station installation requirements
4-9-7 Right of appeal
§ 4-9-1 INTENT AND PURPOSE.
   The purpose and intent of this chapter is to promote and encourage the use
of electric vehicles by creating an expedited, streamlined, permitting process
for electric vehicle charging stations while promoting public health and
safety, and preventing specific adverse impacts in the installation and use of
such charging stations. This chapter is also intended to comply with the
requirements of Cal. Gov’t Code § 65850.7, as may be amended from time to time.
(Ord. 631, passed 9-19-2017)
§ 4-9-2 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   BUILDING OFFICIAL. The building official for the City of Livingston or the
building official’s designee.
   CITY. The City of Livingston.
   ELECTRIC VEHICLE CHARGING STATION or CHARGING STATION. Any level of electric
vehicle supply equipment station that is designed and built in compliance with
Cal. Code of Regulations, Building Standards Code Title 24, Part 3, Electrical
Code Article 625, as it reads on the effective date of this chapter, and
delivers electricity from a source outside an electrical vehicle into a plug-in
electric vehicle.
   ELECTRONIC SUBMITTAL. The utilization of one or more of the following:
      1.   Email;
      2.   The internet; or
      3.   Facsimile.
   EXPEDITED PERMITTING PROCESS OR EXPEDITED REVIEW. The process outlined in §
4-9-3  of this chapter for permit review and inspection requirements.
   SPECIFIC ADVERSE IMPACT. A significant, quantifiable, direct and unavoidable
impact, based on objective, identified and written public health or safety
standards, policies or conditions as they existed on the date the application
was deemed complete.
(Ord. 631, passed 9-19-2017)
§ 4-9-3 EXPEDITED PERMITTING PROCESS.
   The building official shall implement an expedited, streamlined permitting
process for electric vehicle charging stations, and adopt a checklist of all
requirements with which electric vehicle charging stations shall comply with in
order to be eligible for expedited review. The expedited streamlined permitting
process and checklist may refer to the recommendations contained in the most
current version of the Plug-In Electric Vehicle Infrastructure Permitting
Checklist of the Zero-Emission Vehicles in California: Community Readiness
Guidebook as published by the Governor’s Office of Planning and Research. The
city’s adopted checklist shall be published on the city’s website and shall be
accessible to the public.
(Ord. 631, passed 9-19-2017)
§ 4-9-4 PERMIT APPLICATION PROCESSING.
   (A)   Prior to submitting an application for processing, the applicant shall
verify that the installation of an electric vehicle charging station will not
have specific, adverse impact to public health and safety and building
occupants. Verification by the applicant includes but is not limited to:
electrical system capacity and loads; electrical system wiring, bonding and
overcurrent protection; building infrastructure affected by charging station
equipment and associated conduits; and areas of charging station equipment and
vehicle parking.
   (B)   A permit application that satisfies the information requirements in
the city’s adopted checklist shall be deemed complete and be promptly
processed. Upon confirmation by the building official that the permit
application and supporting documents meet the requirements of the city adopted
checklist, and is consistent with all applicable laws and health and safety
standards, the building official shall, consistent with Cal. Gov’t Code §
65850.7, approve the application and issue all necessary permits.
   (C)   Approval does not authorize an applicant to energize or utilize the
electric vehicle charging station, unless and until approval is granted by the
county and/or utility carrier.
   (D)   Inspections may be required and performed by the building official
prior to issuance of all necessary permits. If an inspection is required, the
inspection shall be done in an efficient and timely manner, and should include
consolidated inspections; and inspection measures taken should be consistent
with safety requirements to ensure that the electric vehicle charging stations
are properly installed. If the electric vehicle charging station fails the
initial inspection, a subsequent inspection may be required.
   (E)   If the building official determines that the permit application is
incomplete, he or she shall issue a written correction notice to the applicant
detailing all deficiencies in the application and any additional information
required to be eligible for an expedited permit issuance.
   (F)   The building official shall allow for electronic submittal of permit
applications covered by this chapter and associated supporting documentations.
(Ord. 631, passed 9-19-2017)
§ 4-9-5 TECHNICAL REVIEW.
   (A)   If the building official makes a finding based on substantial evidence
that the electric vehicle charging station could have a specific adverse impact
upon the public health or safety, as defined in this chapter, the city may
require the applicant to apply for a use permit.
   (B)   In the technical review of an electric vehicle charging station, the
building official shall not condition the approval for any electric vehicle
charging station permit on the approval of such a system by an association, as
that term is defined by Cal. Civil Code § 4080.
(Ord. 631, passed 9-19-2017)
§ 4-9-6 ELECTRIC VEHICLE CHARGING STATION INSTALLATION REQUIREMENTS.
   (A)   Electric vehicle charging station equipment shall meet the
requirements of the California Electrical Code, the Society of Automotive
Engineers, the National Electrical Manufacturers Association, and accredited
testing laboratories such as Underwriters Laboratories, and rules of the Public
Utilities Commission or a municipal electric utility company regarding safety
and reliability.
   (B)   Installation of electric vehicle charging stations and associated
wiring, bonding, disconnecting means and overcurrent protective devices shall
meet the requirements of Cal. Code of Regulations, Building Standards Code,
Title 24, Part 3, Electrical Code Article 625 and all applicable provisions of
that Code.
   (C)   Installation of electric vehicle charging stations shall be
incorporated into the load calculations of all new or existing electrical
services and shall meet the requirements of the California Electrical Code.
Electric vehicle charging equipment shall be considered a continuous load.
   (D)   Anchorage of either floor-mounted or wall-mounted electric vehicle
charging stations shall meet the requirements of the California Building or
Residential Code as applicable per occupancy, and the provisions of the
manufacturer’s installation instructions. Mounting of charging stations shall
not adversely affect building elements.
(Ord. 631, passed 9-19-2017)
§ 4-9-7 RIGHT OF APPEAL.
   Any person having any record title or legal interest in the building may
appeal from any action or decision of the building official under this chapter
by filing an appeal to the City Council in accordance with the procedures set
forth in §
4-1-3-1 of this title, or as may be amended.
(Ord. 631, passed 9-19-2017)
TITLE 5: ZONING REGULATIONS
CHAPTER 1: GENERAL ZONING PROVISIONS
Section
5-1-1 Short title
5-1-2 Purpose
5-1-3 Application
5-1-4 Base zoning districts
5-1-5 Zoning map
5-1-6 Accessibility for persons with physical disabilities
§ 5-1-1 SHORT TITLE.
   This title shall be known as, may be cited and referred to as, the “City of
Livingston Zoning Ordinance”.
(Ord. 533, passed 8-16-2005)
§ 5-1-2 PURPOSE.
   The purpose of this title is to provide for specific guidelines for the
development of the city in such a manner as to achieve progressively the
general arrangement of land uses and implement the policies indicated in the
general plan. More specifically, this title is:
   (A)   To regulate the use of buildings, structures and land as between
industry, business, residences, open space, including agriculture, recreation,
enjoyment of scenic beauty, use of natural resources and other purposes;
   (B)   To regulate all of the following:
      1.   The location, height, bulk, number of stories, and size of buildings
and structures;
      2.   The size and use of lots, yards, courts and other open spaces;
      3.   The percentage of a lot which may be occupied by a building or
structure; and
      4.   The intensity of land use.
   (C)   To establish requirements for off-street parking and loading;
   (D)   To establish and maintain building setbacks lines;
   (E)   To divide the city into zones of such number, shape and areas as may
be deemed best suited to carry out these regulations and provide their
enforcement to promote the safe, effective traffic circulation system, the
provision of adequate off-street parking and truck loading facilities;
   (F)   To create civic districts around civic centers, public parks, public
buildings or public grounds, and establish regulations for those districts; and
   (G)   To promote, protect and preserve the general public health, safety and
welfare all as part of the general plan of the city.
(Ord. 533, passed 8-16-2005)
§ 5-1-3 APPLICATION.
   (A)   This title shall apply to all real property, together with all
improvements located thereon, and uses thereof with the exception of: public
streets and alleys; public utility distribution and transmission lines, which
shall be permitted in all districts with city engineer approval; provided,
however, that such facilities shall be installed in such a manner as to conform
to all rules and regulations prescribed by the California Public Utilities
Commission; and provided further, however, that the routes of proposed
telephone transmission lines shall be submitted to the Planning Commission for
recommendation prior to acquisition of rights-of-way therefor.
   (B)   This title, or any portion, section or part thereof, shall not be
deemed or construed to make lawful any act, omission or course of conduct
otherwise considered to be unlawful.
      1.   Regulations. All regulations in this title pertaining to the zoning
districts established by this title are subject to the general provisions,
conditions and exceptions contained in these chapters.
      2.   Uses not allowed. Any use not allowed in any district as a regular
principal use, conditional use, special use or accessory use is absolutely
prohibited unless and until so authorized in accordance with the procedures,
requirements and provisions of this title.
      3.   Conflicts. Where conflict may occur between the regulations of this
title and any building code or other regulations and statutes effective within
the city, the more restrictive of any regulations shall apply.
      4.   Restrictions. It is not intended that this title shall interfere
with or annul any easement or other agreement now in effect; provided, however,
that where this title imposes greater restrictions than are imposed or required
by other ordinances, rules or regulations of the city, or by easements or
agreements, the provisions of this title shall apply.
      5.   No action within six months. If an applicant shall fail to take
substantive action with the city in any six-month period to advance an
application in the process, the application shall be deemed withdrawn and all
fees will be forfeited; provided, however, that no application shall be deemed
withdrawn if the applicant is incapable of advancing its application due to any
statutory or other legal requirement.
      6.   No action within 24 months of site plan approval. If an applicant
shall fail to take substantive action (i.e., apply for a grading or building
permit) with the city within 24 months of site plan approval to advance in the
process, the approval shall be deemed withdrawn; provided however that no
approval shall be deemed withdrawn if the applicant is incapable of advancing
its project due to any statutory or other legal requirement.
(Ord. 533, passed 8-16-2005)
Cross-reference:
   Building Code, see Title 4, Chapter 1
§ 5-1-4 BASE ZONING DISTRICTS.
   (A)   Generally. In order to carry out the purposes and provisions of this
title, the city is hereby divided into the following districts:
R-E  Estate Residential
R-1  Low Density Residential
R-2  Medium Density Residential
R-3  High Density Residential
C-1  Neighborhood Commercial
DTC  Downtown Commercial
C-2  Community Commercial
C-3  Highway Service Commercial
M-1  Limited Industrial
M-2  General Industrial
P-F  Public or Quasi-public Facilities
P/OS Parks and Open Space
PD   Planned Development Overlay
VEH  Vehicle Sales Overlay
 
   (B)   Base zoning districts and relationship to general plan. The city shall
be divided into zoning districts that implement the city’s general plan and are
designed to regulate and classify the allocation of building types, development
and other aspects of urban design and land use that are most appropriate for
the city. Table 1 of this section identifies consistency between the base
zoning districts and their corollary general plan land use designations.
Table 1: Zoning Designations and General Plan Correlation
Base District Designator Base District Name Code Section Corollary General Plan
                                                         Land Use Designation
Table 1: Zoning Designations and General Plan Correlation
Base District Base District Name       Code Section Corollary General Plan
Designator                                          Land Use Designation
R-E           Estate Residential       5-3-1        Estate/low density
                                                    residential
R-1           Low Density Residential  5-3-2        Estate/low density
                                                    residential
R-2           Medium Density           5-3-3        Medium density
              Residential                           residential
R-3           High Density Residential 5-3-4        High density residential
C-1           Neighborhood Commercial  5-3-5        Downtown commercial/
                                                    professional office
DTC           Downtown Commercial      5-3-6        Downtown commercial/
                                                    professional office
C-2           Community Commercial     5-3-7        Community commercial/
                                                    neighborhood commercial
C-3           Highway Service          5-3-8        Service commercial/
              Commercial                            highway commercial
M-1           Limited Industrial       5-3-9        Limited industrial
M-2           General Industrial       5-3-10       General industrial
P-F           Public or Quasi-public   5-3-11       Public facility
              Facilities
P/OS          Parks and Open Space     5-3-12       Open space/park
PD            Planned Development      5-3-13       Residential/commercial/
              Overlay                               industrial
                                                    Service commercial/
VEH           Vehicle Sales Overlay    5-3-14       highway commercial/
                                                    limited industrial
 
(Ord. 533, passed 8-16-2005)
§ 5-1-5 ZONING MAP.
   (A)   That particular map entitled “zoning map for the City of Livingston”
which identifies those districts enumerated in §
5-1-4 of this chapter is hereby adopted as the official zoning map of the city,
and is made a part of this title by reference. Said map shall be and remain on
file in the office of the City Clerk. The City Council may from time to time
republish all or any part of said zoning map to incorporate any amendments
thereto.
   (B)   Except as otherwise provided in this title, land, structures and
premises in any district shall hereafter be used only for the purposes listed
herein as permitted in that district, and in accordance with any conditions and
requirements which may have been established for that district in connection
with the authorization of any variance or granting of any conditional use
permit or special use permit. No structure shall be erected, reconstructed,
relocated or structurally altered to have a greater height or bulk or any
higher proportion of parcel coverage than permissible under the limitations set
forth herein for the district in which said building is located.
      1.   District boundary changes. Changes in the boundaries of any district
shall only be made by ordinance amending the zoning map. If changes occur, in
accordance with the provisions of this title and state statutes, they shall be
indicated on the zoning map promptly after approval of the amendment by the
City Council. No changes of any nature shall be made in the zoning map or
matters shown therein except in conformity with the procedures set forth in
this title.
      2.   Zoning of annexed areas. Any property which is annexed to the city
shall possess the zoning classification indicated on the detailed prezoning
map; such portions of the prezoning map shall become a part of the city’s
official zoning map and be subject to all provisions of this title.
      3.   Prezoning of unincorporated areas. The city may prezone that
unincorporated territory recognized as the general planning area for the
purpose of predetermining the zoning district that shall apply to such property
in the event of annexation to the city. For this purpose, a detailed prezoning
map may be prepared and adopted as part of this title.
(Ord. 533, passed 8-16-2005)
§ 5-1-6 ACCESSIBILITY FOR PERSONS WITH PHYSICAL DISABILITIES.
   Regulations as set out in the California Building Code regarding
accessibility for persons with physical disabilities shall be followed wherever
they are applicable. The city supports and encourages compliance with the
federal government mandated accessibility regulations for persons with physical
disabilities, the Americans with Disabilities Act of 1990 (ADA), being 42
U.S.C. §§ 12101 et seq. Provisions within this zoning ordinance do not preclude
providing reasonable accommodations for persons with disabilities.
(Ord. 533, passed 8-16-2005)
CHAPTER 2: USE CLASSIFICATIONS
Section
5-2-1 Applicability
5-2-2 Residential
5-2-3 Commercial
5-2-4 Industrial
5-2-5 Public or quasi-public facilities
5-2-6 Temporary uses
§ 5-2-1 APPLICABILITY.
   A use classification describes a land use or activity that may be
appropriately included within that zoning district. The Planning Director may
determine that a specific use is or is not within a use classification, whether
or not it is named, and if its operational characteristics are substantially
compatible or incompatible with those uses named within the classification.
(Ord. 533, passed 8-16-2005)
§ 5-2-2 RESIDENTIAL.
   (A)   Apartment house. A building or portion thereof other than a hotel or
motel, designed and/or used to house three or more households, living
independently of each other.
   (B)   Daycare, residential. The nonmedical care and supervision of eight or
fewer persons on a less than 24-hour a day basis. The use includes childcare
operations.
   (C)   Dwelling, duplex (two-family). A building containing exclusively two
dwelling units under a common roof, designed and/or used as separate living
units.
   (D)   Dwelling, multiple-family. A building or portion thereof containing
three or more separate dwelling units, including apartments and flats, but
excluding, boarding houses, motels, mobilehome parks and hotels.
   (E)   Dwelling, single-family. A building containing exclusively one
dwelling unit that may include one or more habitable rooms designed for living
and sleeping purposes.
   (F)   Dwelling unit, accessory. An attached or detached residential dwelling
unit which provides complete independent living facilities for one or more
persons. It shall include permanent provisions for living, sleeping, eating,
cooking and sanitation on the same parcel as the single-family dwelling or
multi- family dwelling is or will be situated. An accessory dwelling unit also
includes:
      1.   An efficiency unit; and
      2.    A manufactured home.
   (G)   Dwelling unit, junior accessory. A unit that is no more than 500
square feet in size and contained entirely within a single-family residence. A
junior accessory dwelling unit may include separate facilities, or may share
sanitation facilities within the existing structure.
   (H)   Home occupation. A commercial enterprise that is clearly incidental
and secondary to the residential use of a property, and defined herein.
   (I)   Housing, boarding. A building, other than a hotel, or where meals or
lodging or both are provided for compensation.
   (J)   Housing, farm labor. Premises used for residential purposes for
temporary or seasonal periods by six or less unrelated persons employed to
perform agricultural labor.
   (K)   Housing, transitional. Housing containing sleeping, kitchen and
bathroom facilities that is used to ease the transition of homeless individuals
to independent living. Usually provided with supportive services to assist in
finding and keeping permanent housing.
   (L)   Mobilehome.
      1.   In accordance with Cal. Health and Safety Code §§ 18007 and 18008, a
MOBILEHOME is a transportable structure, which is built on a permanent chassis
and designed as a dwelling when connected to the required utilities, and
includes the plumbing, heating, air conditioning and electrical systems
contained therein. The minimum dimensions for a mobilehome structure are eight
feet wide, 40 feet long, and a total area of 320 square feet.
      2.   Consistent with the California Health And Safety Code definitions,
mobilehome is included in the definition of manufactured home.
   (M)   Mobilehome park. Any area or tract of land where two or more
mobilehome sites are rented or held out for rent. The use does not include
placement of unoccupied mobilehomes for storage or sales.
   (N)   Rooming house. Same as boarding house.
(Ord. 533, passed 8-16-2005; Ord. 649, passed 6-21-2022)
§ 5-2-3 COMMERCIAL.
   (A)   Agricultural. The cultivation and tillage of soil; the production,
irrigation, cultivation (including horticultural), growing, harvesting and
processing of any commercial agricultural commodity, including farming,
dairying, pasturage, agriculture, husbandry and timber; the lawful application
of chemicals including, but not limited to, the application of pesticides, the
raising of livestock, fish or poultry, and any practices performed by a farmer
and on a farm incidental to or in conjunction with such operations, including
preparation for market, delivery to storage or to market, or to carriers for
transportation to market, and all activities or facilities related thereto.
Such operations may occur during any 24-hour period of the day.
   (B)   Amusement center. A facility providing indoor amusement and
entertainment services for an admission fee. Uses may include theme parks,
arcades, bingo, bowling alleys, bocce ball, dance halls, laser tag and similar
games.
   (C)   Automobile repair. The repair, rebuilding or reconditioning of engines
or transmissions, including the removal of the same; issuance of smog
certificates; glass repair; and overall painting. Use can also include minor
repair such as upholstering, detailing, replacement of parts, including
batteries, mufflers, brakes, starters, generators, radiators, stereos and the
like, adjusting of engines, transmission, electrical systems, air conditioning
equipment, brakes and motor service.
   (D)   Bar, cocktail lounge. Establishments, including brewpubs, which are
primarily designed, maintained, operated, used or intended to be used for the
selling and on site consumption of beer, wine and/or distilled spirits. Food
sales may be incidental to the bar use. Live entertainment may also be offered
as an incidental use if conducted within a building.
   (E)   Body art establishment. BODY ART ESTABLISHMENT or ESTABLISHMENT means
a location, place or business that has been granted a use permit by the city,
whether public or private, where the practice of physical body adornment by
permitted establishment and practitioners using, but not limited to, the
following techniques: body piercing; tattooing; and cosmetic tattooing. This
use does not include practices that are considered medical procedures such as
implants under the skin scarification, branding, beading or braiding, which are
prohibited.
   (F)   Business service. Establishments providing document delivery, mail
receiving and boxes, blueprinting, copying, printing, photographic and related
services. Use includes parcel delivery sales and service. Use also includes
business/office support services, such as janitorial, window cleaning and
indoor plant maintenance.
   (G)   Commercial cannabis activity. See §
5-7-2 of this title for all definitions related to commercial cannabis activity
and uses.
   (H)   Commercial services. Uses include commercial laundry and dry cleaning
works; bakery and carpet cleaning plants; production of dairy products; ice
dealers; cabinet shops; food lockers; beverage bottling plants. Only very
limited manufacturing activities are permitted under this use category.
   (I)   Daycare center. Commercial or nonprofit daycare facilities designed
and approved to accommodate eight or more persons providing nonmedical care for
periods of less than 24 hours. The use includes childcare operations.
   (J)   Emergency shelter. A building providing temporary shelter for persons
in distressed circumstances, including temporary housing for homeless persons.
   (K)   Equipment sales, rental and repair. A business establishment engaged
in the rental, sale, leasing and/or repair of vehicles, tools and large
equipment. Uses include boat and truck sales and service. This classification
also includes sale of appliances, tools, home improvement merchandise and
similar equipment.
   (L)   Financial institution, bank. An establishment for the custody, loan,
exchange or issue of money, extension of credit, and facilitating the
transmission of funds, for use by the general public.
   (M)   Horticultural nursery. The retail handling of any article, substance
or commodity related to the occupation of gardening, including the sale, both
indoor and outdoor, of aboveground plants, shrubs, trees, packaged fertilizers,
soils, chemicals, and other nursery goods and related products.
   (N)   Hospital. A building or any portion thereof used or designed for the
housing of sick, mentally ill, injured, convalescent or infirm persons;
provided, that this definition shall not include rooms in any one-, two- or
three-family dwelling, boarding house, hotel or motel not ordinarily intended
to be occupied by said persons.
   (O)   Hotel. A building designed for occupancy for individuals who are
lodged, for compensation, with or without meals, in which there are four or
more guestrooms, and in which no provision is made for cooking in any
individual room or suite.
   (P)   Laboratory, research institute. Facilities for scientific research,
investigation and materials testing or experimentation, but not facilities for
the manufacture or sale of products.
   (Q)   Licensed community care facility. The rooming and boarding of up to
six physically, mentally or developmentally disadvantaged persons for which a
license is required by a county, state or federal agency, and which provides
resident staff. Such a facility shall not be included in the definition of a
boarding house, foster care home, rest home or other similar term which differs
in any other way from a single-family dwelling.
   (R)   Mixed use. A project that combines multiple uses in the same structure
or on the same project site, including residential, office and commercial uses.
   (S)   Motel. A building or group of attached or detached buildings
containing individual guestrooms where a majority of such room opens
individually and directly to the outside, and where a garage is attached or
parking space is conveniently located to each unit, for the temporary use by
automobile tourists or transients.
   (T)   Office, business, professional and medical. An office engaged in
management, administrative, consulting or medical, dental or related services.
This classification includes accounting, advertising, architectural,
chiropractic, dental and doctors offices, medical laboratories, commercial
technical schools, computer software development and data processing,
construction, engineering, environmental analysis, insurance, law, real estate,
secretarial, social work, and tree and landscaping services.
   (U)   Outdoor sales. Any retail business whose sales are conducted primarily
outside of an enclosed building. The use may include general contractors yards
and equipment sales.
   (V)   Recreation. Recreation and amusement uses and facilities compatible
with surrounding uses, other than those classified under public parks, and
which are conducted indoors or outdoors. Typical uses include bowling alleys,
health clubs, ice and roller skating rinks, movie theaters, poolrooms, video
arcades and dance halls, private golf courses and golf driving ranges, and
swimming and tennis clubs.
   (W)   Recreational vehicle site/trailer court. Any facility on which two or
more recreational vehicle sites are located, established or maintained for
occupancy by recreational vehicles of the general public as temporary living
quarters for vacationers, campers, recreationalists and travelers. Includes a
trailer court which is designed to be used for the temporary accommodation or
parking of auto trailers, trailer coaches or mobilehomes, for compensation or
profit.
   (X)   Residence, manager/owner. Permanent or temporary housing on a
nonresidential property that is secondary or accessory to the primary use of
the property. Such housing is used for managers or owners living on the site
where a caretaker is needed for security or to provide 24 hour care or
monitoring of facilities, equipment or other conditions on the site.
   (Y)   Rest home. Services oriented toward the healing, recovery, care or
support of seven or more sick, injured or terminally ill people. Use shall
include assisted living residential projects involving seven or more units.
   (Z)   Restaurant. A use providing preparation and primarily on site
consumption of food and beverages, including cafés, coffee shops,
delicatessens, ice cream parlors and similar uses, and may include the
incidental service of alcoholic beverages for consumption on the premises.
Outdoor dining/seating is also included in this classification.
   (AA)   Restaurant, drive-in. A restaurant which serves food and drinks from
a pass-through opening to customers in their vehicles or delivery of food to a
diner remaining in their vehicle.
   (BB)   Retail sales. The retail sale or rental of merchandise. Typical of
this classification is a business engaged in the sale of items. Uses include
bookstores, rental libraries, stationery stores, newsstands, art and antique
shops, variety and hardware stores, department and clothing stores, furniture
dealers, pet shops, pawnshops and secondhand stores, groceries, supermarkets,
dairies, bakeries and drugstores.
   (CC)   Service station/gas. Any building, structure, premises or other place
used primarily for the retail sale and dispensation of motor fuels, lubricants
and motor vehicle accessories, and the rendering of minor services and/or
repairs to such vehicles, but not including painting or body and fender repair.
May be combined with retail sales and similar operations.
   (DD)   Smoke shop and/or smoking lounge.
      1.   A location, place or business, store, stand or booth that has been
granted a conditional use permit by the city and devotes 30% or more of its
display area to tobacco products, or to the display and sale of tobacco,
electronic smoking devices or drug paraphernalia to purchasers for consumption
or use. For the purposes of this use, the definition of TOBACCO PRODUCTS means
any substance that contains tobacco or is derived from tobacco, and any and all
electronic smoking devices. ELECTRONIC SMOKING DEVICE means an electronic and/
or battery operated device that can be used to deliver an inhaled dose of
vapors including nicotine and/or other substances.
      2.   For purposes of this use SMOKING LOUNGE means a business
establishment that is dedicated, in whole or in part, to the smoking of tobacco
or other substances, including, but not limited to, establishments known
variously as cigar lounges, hookah cafés, tobacco clubs, tobacco bars and the
like (collectively referred to as SMOKING LOUNGE(S)).
   (EE)   Vehicle sales. The sales, storage and repair of automobiles, trucks,
motorcycles, all-terrain vehicles, boats, recreational vehicles and similar
motor vehicles. This use is intended to occur in an auto mall setting, which
may include a series of individual dealerships. Use includes outside storage of
vehicles, vehicle washing, and any interior vehicle repair operations. Auto
body repairing and similar operations are not included in this use category.
(Ord. 533, passed 8-16-2005; Ord. 541, passed 4-18-2006; Ord. 589, passed 6-15-
2010; Ord. 622, passed 1-20-2015; Ord. 626, passed 1-19-2016; Ord. 632, passed
12-19-2017)
§ 5-2-4 INDUSTRIAL.
   All industrial uses may include either direct or incidental (accessory)
outdoor storage and uses.
   (A)   Auto body repair. Uses include motor vehicle, truck or trailer
collision services, including body frame or fender straightening or repair.
   (B)   Auto storage. The storage of motor vehicles. Uses include vehicle
towing lots. Does not include wrecking, dismantling or repair.
   (C)   Auto wrecking. The wrecking or dismantling of used motor vehicles or
trailers, or the storage of, sale of, or dumping of dismantled, partly
dismantled, obsolete or wrecked motor vehicles or their parts, not to include
auto storage.
   (D)   Body art establishment. BODY ART ESTABLISHMENT or ESTABLISHMENT means
a location, place or business that has been granted a use permit by the city,
whether public or private, where the practices of body art are performed,
whether or not for profit. BODY ART means the practice of physical body
adornment by permitted establishment and practitioners using, but not limited
to, the following techniques: body piercing; tattooing; and cosmetic tattooing.
This use does not include practices that are considered medical procedures such
as implants under the skin, scarification, branding, beading or braiding, which
are prohibited.
   (E)   Finished goods assembly. A use engaged in the assembly of
premanufactured components, packaging, incidental storage, sales and
distribution of finished products and/or parts. The use includes assembly of
electrical and mechanical equipment and structural fabrication.
   (F)   Heavy terminal. A location where trucks, buses and heavy equipment are
stored when not in use, where cargo may be transshipped from one vehicle to
another, and may include related repair facilities and dispatch operations.
   (G)   Kennel. Any lot, premises, building or structure, whereon or wherein
are kept three or more dogs whether such keeping is for profit, breeding or
exhibition and including places where dogs are boarded, maintained, trained,
kept for sale or hire.
   (H)   Manufacturing, beverage/bottling plant. A manufacturing establishment
producing beverages for human consumption. Use does not include a tasting
facility separate from the manufacturing facility.
   (I)   Manufacturing, heavy general. The manufacture, processing,
fabrication, assembly, treatment and packaging of products or parts, and
incidental storage, sales and distribution of such products. The use
specifically excludes heavy manufacturing uses involving hazardous wastes.
   (J)   Manufacturing, light general. The manufacturing, predominantly from
previously prepared materials, of finished products or parts, including light
processing, fabrication, assembly treatment and packaging of such products
producing no detectable levels of the emissions.
   (K)   Recycling facility. A structure or enclosed space used for the
collection and/or processing of recyclable materials, including California
redemption value (CRV) glass and plastic containers, scrap aluminum, paper,
pulp and nonferrous materials, for shipment, or to an end users specifications,
by such means as bailing, briquetting, cleaning, compacting, crushing,
flattening, grinding, mechanical sorting, remanufacturing and shredding. Does
not include hazardous or contaminated waste.
   (L)   Salvage yards. The use of any parcel lot or contiguous lot as a place
where imported waste, discarded or salvaged materials are disassembled,
handled, baled, packed, processed or stored. Includes auto wrecking yards,
scrap metal yards, wrecking yards, junkyards, used lumber yards, tire shredding
operations, and places or yards for the storage of salvaged materials or
miscellaneous construction and structural steel materials, boxes, paper or
trash and equipment.
   (M)   Smoke shop and/or smoking lounge.
      1.   A location, place or business, store, stand or booth that has been
granted a conditional use permit by the city and devotes 30% or more of its
display area to tobacco products, or to the display and sale of tobacco,
electronic smoking devices or drug paraphernalia to purchasers for consumption
or use. For the purposes of this use, the definition of TOBACCO PRODUCTS means
any substance that contains tobacco or is derived from tobacco, and any and all
electronic smoking devices. ELECTRONIC SMOKING DEVICE means an electronic and/
or battery operated device that can be used to deliver an inhaled dose of
vapors including nicotine and/or other substances.
      2.   For purposes of this use SMOKING LOUNGE means a business
establishment that is dedicated, in whole or in part, to the smoking of tobacco
or other substances, including, but not limited to, establishments known
variously as cigar lounges, hookah cafés, tobacco clubs, tobacco bars and the
like (collectively referred to as SMOKING LOUNGE(S)).
   (N)   Storage. The leasing or rental of storage units, including self-
storage facilities.
   (O)   Warehouse, wholesale. A facility where goods are bought in bulk,
stored temporarily, and then reshipped. The use may include incidental storage
and repair of trucks.
(Ord. 533, passed 8-16-2005; Ord. 622, passed 1-20-2015)
§ 5-2-5 PUBLIC OR QUASI-PUBLIC FACILITIES.
   (A)   Cemeteries. Burial grounds for the interment of the dead.
   (B)   Communication equipment facility. A building or facility housing
electrical and mechanical equipment necessary for the conduct of a public
utility communications business, with or without personnel. The use includes
telecommunications operations, including cellular, wireless or digital
telephone facilities, and related installation of antennas, poles, wires and
similar improvements or equipment corollary to the use.
   (C)   Community hall/services. A building or portion of a building, often
for large scale gatherings. The use includes lodges, social clubs and youth
centers, offering social, religious or recreational programs that may be open
to the public.
   (D)   Government facilities. Any facility owned, leased or operated by the
city, the county, the state and/or the government of the United States. Use
also includes administrative and clerical offices of a federal, state or local
government agency. The use includes municipal corporation yards.
   (E)   Public buildings and land. Uses include schools (both public and
private), parks and playgrounds compatible with the general plan. The use also
includes community education activities involving public or private schools.
   (F)   Public utility buildings. Uses shall include public utility buildings
and substations.
   (G)   Utility services. The erection, construction, alteration or
maintenance of minor public utilities such as minor underground or overhead
gas, electrical, steam or other transmission or distribution systems or
collection, communication, supply or disposal systems, including poles, wires,
drains, sewers, pipes, conduits, cables, fire alarm boxes, police call boxes,
traffic signals, hydrants and other similar equipment and accessories in
connection therewith, reasonably necessary for furnishing adequate services by
such public utilities or municipal or other governmental agencies, or for the
public health, safety or general welfare. Use can also include large scale
public utilities typically requiring substantial commitment of land and/or
having the potential of creating impacts on the surrounding area, such as sewer
treatment plants, electrical substations and water storage/reservoirs, subject
to appropriate permitting and environmental review.
(Ord. 533, passed 8-16-2005)
§ 5-2-6 TEMPORARY USES.
   (A)   The uses set forth in this section are classified as temporary uses
subject to the authority of the Planning Director, under §
5-6-1 of this title, and a temporary use permit, under §
5-6-9 of this title. Uses that do not fall into those categories defined below
shall comply with the use and development regulations and planning permit
requirements that otherwise apply to the property.
   (B)   Temporary uses include:
      1.   Arts and crafts shows;
      2.   Carnivals (also see §
3-2-3, License Tax; Flat Fee, of this code);
      3.   Circuses (also see §
3-2-3, License Tax; Flat Fee, of this code);
      4.   City sponsored activities and uses, not occupying a structure and
occurring at regular periodic intervals;
      5.   Construction office or mobilehome for temporary caretaker quarters
during the construction of a subdivision, multi-family or nonresidential
project, while a valid building permit is in force;
      6.   Grand opening/weekend special event, such as a parking lot sale,
craft fair or auction. Flea markets are not permitted;
      7.   Model home;
      8.   Outdoor displays/sales (sidewalk sales) in association with a
permitted business for which there is an enclosed building (also see §
3-2-7, Outdoor Display, Sales And Promotions, of this code);
      9.   Outdoor seasonal sales (such as pumpkins at Halloween and Christmas
tree sales);
      10.   Temporary real estate office, including sales trailers and related
facilities;
      11.   The temporary use of property by nonprofit or charitable
organizations;
      12.   The use of shipping containers as accessory structures; and
      13.   Other uses similar in nature. Uses not listed under this section
will require the Planning Commission to determine, through adoption of a
resolution, that the proposed use is similar in nature to the uses listed in
this section.
(Ord. 619, passed 6-17-2014)
CHAPTER 3: DISTRICT REGULATIONS
Section
5-3-1 R-E Estate Residential District
5-3-2 R-1 Low Density Residential District
5-3-3 R-2 Medium Density Residential District
5-3-4 R-3 High Density Residential District
5-3-5 C-1 Neighborhood Commercial District
5-3-6 DTC Downtown Commercial District
5-3-7 C-2 Community Commercial District
5-3-8 C-3 Highway Service Commercial District
5-3-9 M-1 Limited Industrial District
5-3-10 M-2 General Industrial District
5-3-11 P-F Public Or Quasi-Public Facilities District
5-3-12 P/OS Parks And Open Space District
5-3-13 PD Planned Development Overlay District
5-3-14 VEH Vehicle Sales Overlay District
5-3-15 Land use regulations (zoning matrix)
5-3-16 Lot development standards
5-3-16-1 Setback exceptions
5-3-17 Residential densities
§ 5-3-1 R-E ESTATE RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT.
   (A)   Applicable provisions. The provisions of Chapter 1 of this title are
made applicable to all R-E Districts, subject to the specific provisions of
this section.
   (B)   Intent. The Estate Residential District is intended to provide living
areas within the city where development is limited to low density
concentrations of single-family dwellings with large lot sizes, generally
between 10,000 to 12,500 square feet. This zone is appropriately used to
promote larger lot homes and when the overall density of an area should be
limited due to public facility, safety or aesthetic concerns. This designation
also provides for innovative designs and shall conform to design guide
standards.
   (C)   Permitted uses and development standards. Please refer to §§
5-3-15  through
5-3-17 , Tables 2 through 9, of this chapter for an indication of permitted
uses and development standards for the R-E District.
(Ord. 533, passed 8-16-2005)
§ 5-3-2 R-1 LOW DENSITY RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT.
   (A)   Applicable provisions. The provisions of Chapter 1 of this title are
made applicable to all R-1 Districts, subject to the specific provisions of
this section.
   (B)   Intent. The Low Density Residential District is intended to provide
living areas within the city where development is limited to low density
concentrations of single-family dwellings and where regulations are designed to
promote and encourage a suitable environment for living, provide space for
community facilities needed to compliment urban residential areas and provide
for the safety, health and general welfare of its inhabitants. This designation
also provides for innovative designs and shall conform to design guide
standards.
   (C)   Permitted uses and development standards. Please refer to §§
5-3-15  through
5-3-17 , Tables 2 through 9, of this chapter for an indication of permitted
uses and development standards for the R-1 District.
(Ord. 533, passed 8-16-2005)
§ 5-3-3 R-2 MEDIUM DENSITY RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT.
   (A)   Applicable provisions. The provisions of Chapter 1 of this title are
made applicable to all R-2 Districts, subject to the specific provisions of
this section.
   (B)   Intent. The Medium Density Residential District is intended to provide
living areas within the city where the development provides for medium density
concentrations of two-family dwelling units. These designations are typically
integrated throughout the community and occur adjacent to transportation,
community services and commercial developments. New development shall be
subject to general plan provisions and conform to design guide standards.
   (C)   Permitted uses and development standards. Please refer to §§
5-3-15  through
5-3-17 , Tables 2 through 9, of this chapter for an indication of permitted
uses and development standards for the R-2 District.
(Ord. 533, passed 8-16-2005)
§ 5-3-4 R-3 HIGH DENSITY RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT.
   (A)   Applicable provisions. The provisions of Chapter 1 of this title are
made applicable to all R-3 Districts, subject to the specific provisions of
this section.
   (B)   Intent. The High Density Residential District is intended to provide
living areas within the city where development provides for high density
concentrations of dwelling units in various housing types and styles with
provisions for on site recreational amenities. New development shall conform to
design guide standards.
   (C)   Permitted uses and development standards. Please refer to §§
5-3-15  through
5-3-17 , Tables 2 through 9, of this chapter for an indication of permitted
uses and development standards for the R-3 District.
(Ord. 533, passed 8-16-2005; Ord. 594, passed 8-16-2011)
§ 5-3-5 C-1 NEIGHBORHOOD COMMERCIAL DISTRICT.
   (A)   Applicable provisions. The provisions of Chapter 1 of this title are
applicable to all C-1 Districts, subject to the specific provisions of this
section.
   (B)   Intent.
      1.   The Neighborhood Commercial District is intended to improve and
protect the commercial characteristics of the downtown wherein a full range of
retail services and professional and governmental offices may be accommodated.
This designation provides for a maximum ten acre grouping of commercial
establishments serving the everyday convenience goods and personal service
needs of a defined neighborhood. The service radius of a neighborhood
commercial use is typically one-half mile.
      2.   As per the general plan, all C-1 sites should be located at or near
the intersection of collector and/or arterial streets with a minimum of overlap
with other existing or planned neighborhood commercial uses. Only one
neighborhood commercial development should be located at any one intersection.
Such development should also be accessible from adjacent residential
development. New development shall conform to design guide standards.
   (C)   Permitted uses and development standards. Please refer to §§
5-3-15  through
5-3-17 , Tables 2 through 9, of this chapter for an indication of permitted
uses and development standards for the C-1 District.
(Ord. 533, passed 8-16-2005)
§ 5-3-6 DTC DOWNTOWN COMMERCIAL DISTRICT.
   (A)   Applicable provisions. The provisions of Chapter 1 of this title are
applicable to the DTC District, subject to the specific provisions of this
section.
   (B)   Intent.
      1.   The Downtown Commercial District is intended to recognize the unique
differences of the downtown area from the other C-1 District areas. The City
Council finds that the downtown area requires special consideration under this
title to encourage the downtown area’s rehabilitation and development. This
designation allows for the provision of mixed use activity in the downtown
area.
         2.   Vertical mixed use projects, where residential uses are located
above commercial or office uses, are encouraged. Professional office uses are
permitted to allow construction of new office unified centers, as well as the
redevelopment of existing areas to office use. Multilevel parking garages can
provide for shared use parking needs within the downtown area. New development
shall conform to design guide standards.
   (C)   Permitted uses and development standards. Please refer to §§
5-3-15  through
5-3-17 , Tables 2 through 9, of this chapter for an indication of permitted
uses and development standards for the DTC District.
(Ord. 533, passed 8-16-2005; Ord. 594, passed 8-16-2011)
§ 5-3-7 C-2 COMMUNITY COMMERCIAL DISTRICT.
   (A)   Applicable provisions. The provisions of Chapter 1 of this title are
made applicable to all C-2 Districts, subject to the specific provisions of
this section.
   (B)   Intent. The Community Commercial District is intended for the
development of retail commercial shopping centers that are located outside of
or peripheral to the Downtown Commercial District. This designation provides
for a general ten acre or larger grouping of commercial establishments serving
a market area within ten miles. Such facilities should be located in each
residential quadrant of the community. All C-2 uses shall utilize common access
and parking for commercial uses. New development shall conform to design guide
standards.
   (C)   Permitted uses and development standards. Please refer to §§
5-3-15  through
5-3-17 , Tables 2 through 9, of this chapter for an indication of permitted
uses and development standards for the C-2 District.
(Ord. 533, passed 8-16-2005)
§ 5-3-8 C-3 HIGHWAY SERVICE COMMERCIAL DISTRICT.
   (A)   Applicable provisions. The provisions of Chapter 1 of this title are
made applicable to all C-3 Districts, subject to the specific provisions of
this section.
   (B)   Intent. The Highway Service Commercial District is intended for
commercial activities and services, including transient residential uses, which
are appropriate to highway locations and dependent upon highway travel. This
designation allows for commercial uses, which, due to space requirements, the
proximity to the highway, or the distinctive nature of their operation, are not
compatible with or not usually located in other commercial designations. New
development shall conform to design guide standards.
   (C)   Permitted uses and development standards. Please refer to §§
5-3-15  through
5-3-17 , Tables 2 through 9, of this chapter for an indication of permitted
uses and development standards for the C-3 District.
(Ord. 533, passed 8-16-2005)
§ 5-3-9 M-1 LIMITED INDUSTRIAL DISTRICT.
   (A)   Applicable provisions. The provisions of Chapter 1 of this title are
made applicable to all M-1 Districts, subject to the specific provisions of
this section.
   (B)   Intent. The Limited Industrial District is intended for land
designated for restricted, nonintensive manufacturing and storage activities
that are found not to have significant detrimental effects on immediately
surrounding property and the general environment of the planning area. This
designation assumes that materials and equipment storage is conducted mostly
indoors. The M-1 District is appropriate as a buffer between heavy industrial
and nonindustrial uses and where the site is visible from residential areas or
major streets. Industrial park development is intended on larger parcels to
create distinct districts and shall have high quality landscaping and
architectural design requirements. New development shall conform to design
guide standards.
   (C)   Permitted uses and development standards. Please refer to §§
5-3-15  through
5-3-17 , Tables 2 through 9, of this chapter for an indication of permitted
uses and development standards for the M-1 District.
(Ord. 533, passed 8-16-2005)
§ 5-3-10 M-2 GENERAL INDUSTRIAL DISTRICT.
   (A)   Applicable provisions. The provisions of Chapter 1 of this title are
made applicable to all M-2 Districts, subject to the specific provisions of
this section.
   (B)   Intent. The General Industrial District is intended to provide working
areas within the city for the manufacture, assembly, repair and fabrication of
goods and products; to protect areas appropriate for industrial uses from
intrusion of inharmonious uses and to provide the opportunity for certain types
of uses to locate in mutually beneficial locations. Areas developed under this
designation shall be located with direct access to major streets or rail
service. New development shall conform to design guide standards.
   (C)   Permitted uses and development standards. Please refer to §§
5-3-15  through
5-3-17 , Tables 2 through 9, of this chapter for an indication of permitted
uses and development standards for the M-2 District.
(Ord. 533, passed 8-16-2005)
§ 5-3-11 P-F PUBLIC OR QUASI-PUBLIC FACILITIES DISTRICT.
   (A)   Applicable provisions. The provisions of Chapter 1 of this title are
made applicable to all P-F Districts, subject to the specific provisions of
this section.
   (B)   Intent. The Public or Quasi-Public Facilities District is intended for
the accommodation of governmental, public, public utility, medical offices and
educational facilities.
   (C)   Permitted uses. Please refer to the tables in §
5-3-15 of this chapter for an indication of permitted uses for the P-
F District.
   (D)   Development standards. Minimum requirements or lot area, lot width,
height limits, yards and lot coverage shall be those regulations of the most
restrictive abutting district. Exceptions shall be eligible for consideration
under variances as described in §
5-6-10 of this title.
(Ord. 533, passed 8-16-2005; Ord. 587, passed 6-15-2010)
§ 5-3-12 P/OS PARKS AND OPEN SPACE DISTRICT.
   (A)   Applicable provisions. The provisions of Chapter 1 of this title are
made applicable to all P/OS Districts, subject to the specific provisions of
this section.
   (B)   Intent. The Parks and Open Space District is intended primarily for
application to those areas where it is necessary and desirable to provide
permanent open spaces, parks and related recreational facilities which are
intended to safeguard the health, safety and welfare of the people; to provide
spaces for preservation of unusual land masses, historical sites and areas
which provide energy, water and recreational activities. This designation may
also include a storm drain basin as a dual use, if consistent with city master
plans.
   (C)   Permitted uses. Please refer to the tables in §
5-3-15 of this chapter for an indication of permitted uses for the P/OS
District.
(Ord. 533, passed 8-16-2005)
§ 5-3-13 PD PLANNED DEVELOPMENT OVERLAY DISTRICT.
   (A)   Applicable provisions. The provisions of Chapter 1 of this title are
made applicable to all PD Overlay Districts, subject to the provisions of this
section.
   (B)   Purpose and intent. The purpose of this Planned Development Overlay
District is to encourage a desired level of preplanning for the development or
redevelopment of land and to establish innovative design solutions while
retaining good land use relationships and compatibility with adjoining
property. This district’s function is to facilitate the variation of standards
of the zoning ordinance under proper planning and to achieve, where
appropriate, unique and imaginative community design whenever it can be
demonstrated that such variation will result in an environment superior to that
possible under the normal application of city standards.
   (C)   Application process. A planned development (PD) permit may be
requested for any proposed project and may be established in any area suitable
for and of sufficient size (one acre minimum) to contain a planned development,
and may include residential, commercial or industrial uses where appropriate
findings can be made. A PD permit application shall be filed and considered
concurrently with the zoning request and project plan application (§
5-6-11-1  of this title) for a PD Overlay District. The Planning Commission
shall provide a recommendation on the PD permit and PD Overlay District to the
City Council, who shall take action on the proposal. Public hearings shall be
held pursuant to §
5-6-6  of this title. After the establishment of a PD Overlay District, an
application for a development plan (§
5-6-11-2  of this title), which is in conformance with the approved project
plan, shall be filed with the Planning Department and the applicable filing fee
or processing deposit paid.
   (D)   Permit process. Please refer to §
5-6-11 of this title for PD permit process requirements.
(Ord. 533, passed 8-16-2005)
§ 5-3-14 VEH VEHICLE SALES OVERLAY DISTRICT.
   (A)   Applicable provisions. The provisions of Chapter 1 of this title are
made applicable to all VEH Overlay Districts, subject to the provisions of this
section.
   (B)   Purpose and intent. The purpose of this Vehicle Sales Overlay District
is to allow for a future auto mall in that portion of the city, once annexed,
known as the Sultana area. The VEH Overlay District would restrict the use of
all auto, truck, RV and boat sales to the areas designated service commercial,
highway commercial or limited industrial along the SR 99 corridor, west of
Sultana Drive and east of Dwight Way. Uses will be regulated to provide for
vehicle sales lots with limited provisions for service.
   (C)   Permitted uses. Establishment of a VEH Overlay District shall be for
the sole purpose of designating a future auto mall. Any vehicle sales activity
will require a use permit and is subject to a site plan/design review under the
provisions of this title.
   (D)   Development standards. Development within the VEH Overlay District
shall comply with all applicable requirements of the primary zoning district.
(Ord. 533, passed 8-16-2005)
§ 5-3-15 LAND USE REGULATIONS (ZONING MATRIX).
   (A)   Range of uses. Uses within the city shall be consistent with the land
use/zoning matrix contained in the tables of this section.
      1.   Permitted uses:. Permitted uses are indicated on the land use/zoning
matrix by the letter “P” in the box defined by a use and zone designation.
These uses are allowed in the districts indicated without discretionary review,
subject to determination of compliance with the development, parking,
landscaping and other standards of the zoning ordinance by the city.
      2.   Conditional uses. Conditional uses are indicated on the land use/
zoning matrix by the letter “C” in the box defined by a use and zone
designation. Conditional uses may be permitted subject to obtaining a use
permit from the Planning Commission or Planning Director, as regulated
elsewhere in this title. For commercial cannabis uses, the letter “C” in the
box defined by a use and zone designation indicates the requirement of a
cannabis permit, as required under §
5-5-14 of this title.
      3.   Accessory uses. Accessory uses are secondary to a primary or
principal use on a site. Accessory uses are permitted in all zoning districts.
      4.   Prohibited uses. A blank space in a box on the land use/zoning
matrix indicates that the use is prohibited. Any private drilling operations
including, but not limited to, oil, water, mineral and metal are prohibited.
Also, any cannabis or medical cannabis dispensary is prohibited, as well as any
other commercial cannabis activity, except as specifically established in this
title.
   (B)   Uses not listed. The land use/zoning matrix is not intended to be a
comprehensive list of all possible uses, but rather identifies the more common
uses likely to be proposed in the city. Uses not specifically covered by any
use category, but which appear to be similar in nature to permitted or
conditional uses, shall be reviewed by the Planning Director, who shall
determine the use classification based upon activity characteristics of the
proposed use. The Planning Director may also consult with the Planning
Commission in determining if a proposed use is a permitted activity. A proposed
use shall otherwise be considered a prohibited use where it is not provided for
within a district.
   (C)   Land use/zoning matrix.
 
Key                      Zoning Designations
C - Conditional use      (R-E) Estate Residential  (C-2) Community Commercial
P - Permitted use        (R-1) Low Density         (C-3) Highway Service
                         Residential               Commercial
Blank - Unless otherwise (R-2) Medium Density
indicated, use is not    Residential               (M-1) Limited Industrial
allowed
                        (R-3) High Density        (M-2) General Industrial
                         Residential
                        (C-1) Neighborhood        (P-F) Public or Quasi-Public
                         Commercial                Facilities
                        (DTC) Downtown Commercial (P/OS) Parks and Open Space
 
Table 2: Residential Uses
 R-E10 R-110 R-    R-    C-    DTC9,10 C-    C-    M-19,10 M-29,10 P-F10 P/OS10
             29,10 39,10 19,10         29,10 39,10
Table 2: Residential Uses
             R-  R-  R-    R-    C-    DTC9,10 C-    C-    M-    M-    P-  P/
             E10 110 29,10 39,10 19,10         29,10 39,10 19,10 29,10 F10 OS10
Residential Uses
Daycare,     P   P   P
residential
Dwelling,        C1  P
duplex
Dwelling,
multiple-            C2    P3          C
family/
apartment
Dwelling
unit,        P   P   P     P           P
accessory
Dwelling
unit, junior P   P
accessory5
Dwelling,
single-      P   P   C
family
Home         P   P   P     C
occupation
Housing,                   C     C     C
boarding
Housing,     P   P   P     P           P
farm labor6
Mobilehome   P4  P4
Mobilehome           C     C
park
Personal
cannabis     P   P   P     P     P     P       P     P     P     P     P   P
cultivation8
Public uses,
schools/     P   P   P     P           C                   C           P   P
parks/
playgrounds7
Shipping
container    C   C   C     C     C     C       C     C     C     C     C   C
accessory
structure
Notes:
1.   General plan provisions for low density residential allow for innovative
designs, which utilize clustering, duplexes or halfplexes on corner lots, zero
lot line or planned development features, in the R-1 Zone
2.   Multi-family or group dwellings are permitted in R-2 Districts on corner
lots, subject to a conditional use permit, provided that in no case shall any
dwelling contain more than 4 living units; multi-family dwellings in the R-
2 District shall meet development standards of §
5-3-16 of this chapter
3.   Projects in excess of 25 units or with a density in excess of 24 units per
gross acre on R-3 lots require a conditional use permit
4.   See §
5-5-3-1 of this title for mobilehomes on private lots
5.   See §
5-5-6 of this title for accessory dwelling unit provisions
6.   Farm labor housing that serves 6 or fewer persons shall be treated as a
single-family unit and is permitted by right in all R-E, R-1, R-2, R-3 and DTC
Districts
7.   Joint use of school multipurpose facilities and open space is encouraged
8.   See §
5-5-15 of this title for personal cannabis cultivation use provisions; this use
is only allowed inside a private residence by individuals 21 years of age and
older or at least 18 years of age and either a qualified patient or a primary
caregiver according to regulations
9.   Site plan/design review is required for all uses involving new
construction, significant exterior alterations to existing structures or
significant site plan alterations in the R-2, R-3, C-1, DTC, C-2, C-3, M-1 and
M-2 Zones
10.   Transitional and supportive housing are permitted in all zones subject to
normal requirements and restrictions; see Chapter 7, Definitions, of this title
 
Table 3: Commercial Uses
 R-E R-1 R-29 R-39 C-19 DTC9 C-29 C-39 M-19 M-29 P-F P/OS
Table 3: Commercial Uses
                       R-E R-1 R-29 R-39 C-19 DTC9 C-29 C-39 M-19 M-29 P-F P/OS
Commercial uses
Agricultural                                                               C
Amusement center                                        C    C
Automobile repair                                  P    P    P    P
Bar, cocktail lounge                     C    C5   C    C
Body art establishment                                       C
Business service                         P    P    P    P
Commercial cannabis
activity/uses:
Cannabis dispensary/
retail activity with
or without
storefront11
Commercial cannabis                                          C    C
cultivation - indoor11
Commercial cannabis
cultivation - mixed                                          C    C
light (enclosed)11
Commercial cannabis
cultivation -                                                C    C
outdoor11
Commercial cannabis                                          C    C
distribution11
Commercial cannabis
manufacturing                                                C    C
(volatile/
nonvolatile)11
Commercial cannabis -
microbusiness (no                                            C    C
retail; no outdoor
cultivation)11
Commercial cannabis
nursery - indoor or                                          C    C
mixed light/
greenhouse11
Commercial cannabis                                     C    C    C
testing11
Medical cannabis
delivery only          C   C   C    C    C    C    C    C    C    C    C   C
(originating from
outside the city)11
Nonmedical cannabis
delivery only11
Commercial services                      P    P    P    P    P    P
Cultivation8           C   C   C    C    C    C    C    C    C    C    C   C
Daycare center             C   C    C         C
Emergency shelter                   C         P                        P
Equipment sales,                                   P    P    P
rental, repair
Financial institution,                   P    P    P    P
bank
Horticultural nursery                                        P    P
Hospital                                           C
Hotels, motels                                C    C    P
Laboratory, research                                    P    P    P
institute
Licensed community         P6  P6   C         C
care facility1
Mixed use2                               C    C
Office, professional/                    P    P    P    P    C7
business and medical
Outdoor sales                                      P    P    P    P
Public utility             C   C    C    C         C    C              P
building/substation
Recreation                               C    C    C    C    C             C
Recreational vehicle                               C    C
site/trailer court
Residence/manager/                       C    C    C    C    C    C
owner3
Rest home                           C         C
Restaurant/café                         P    P    P    P
Restaurant, drive-in                               C    C
Retail and                               P    P    P    P    P
professional services
Retail sales                             P    P    P    P
Service stations,                             C    C    C
gasoline
Shipping container     C   C   C    C    C    C    C    C    C    C    C   C
accessory structure
Social halls                             C    C    C    C    C             C
Smoke shop/smoking                            C              C
lounge10
Storage                                                      P    P
Vehicle sales4                                          C    C
Notes:
1.    The adopted housing element allows facilities serving 7 or more persons
in single-family R-1 Zones, subject to a conditional use permit
2.    Mixed-use development is permitted in DTC and C-1 Zones, subject to
securing a conditional use permit, and shall encourage projects that contain
affordable housing units; development standards in these districts shall allow
for a maximum density of 29 du/ac for residential units above ground floor
commercial
3.    Residential uses limited to a manager or the owner of the establishment
shall be permitted on the premises; such uses shall require a use permit and
the yard requirements, density and other matters relative to yard and area
shall be subject to the Planning Commission’s approval and shall not be less
than those normally required for residential uses
4.    Vehicle sales shall refer to an established vehicle sales (“VEH”) Overlay
District as per §
5-3-14 of this chapter
5.    All retail establishments serving alcoholic beverages for consumption on
premises within the Downtown Commercial District (“DTC”) shall be located no
closer than 2 city blocks between similar establishments; 2 city blocks for
purposes of this title, shall consist of 1,000 feet measured in all directions
from an existing retail establishment serving alcoholic beverages for
consumption on the premises
6.    A conditional use permit shall be required for care facilities serving 7
to 14 persons in residential districts; facilities serving 15 or more persons
shall not be permitted at all in single-family residential districts
7.    May be permitted with a use permit as part of mixed-use operations
8.    See §
5-5-12 of this title for cultivation use provisions; “cultivation” as a stand-
alone use does not include cannabis cultivation, which is addressed in §§
5-5-14 and
5-5-15 of this title
9.    Site plan/design review is required for all uses involving new
construction, significant exterior alterations to existing structures, or
significant site plan alterations in the R-2, R-3, C-1, DTC, C-2, C-3, M-1 and
M-2 Zones
10.    See §
5-5-13 of this title for smoke shop and/or smoking lounge use provisions
11.    See §
5-5-14 of this title for the regulations on commercial cannabis activity
 
Table 4: Industrial Uses
 R-E R-12 R-22 R-32 C-12 DTC2 C-22 C-32 M-12 M-22 P-F P/OS
Table 4: Industrial Uses
                     R-E R-12 R-22 R-32 C-12 DTC2 C-22 C-32 M-12 M-22 P-F P/OS
Industrial uses
Auto body repair                                       P    P    P
Auto storage                                                P    P
Auto wrecking                                                    P
Body art                                                    C
establishment
Cultivation1         C   C    C    C    C    C    C    C    C    C    C   C
Finished goods                                              P    P
assembly
Heavy equipment                                             P
terminal, truck
Kennel                                                      C
Manufacturing,
beverage/bottling                                 C    P    P
plant
Manufacturing, heavy                                             P
general
Manufacturing, light                                        P    P
general
Recycling facility                                          P    P
Salvage yards                                                    C
Shipping container   C   C    C    C    C    C    C    C    C    C    C   C
accessory structure
Smoke shop/smoking                           C              C
lounge3
Warehouse, wholesale                                   C    P    P
Notes:
1.   See §
5-5-12 of this title for cultivation use provisions
2.   Site plan/design review is required for all uses involving new
construction, significant exterior alterations to existing structures, or
significant site plan alterations in the R-1, R-2, R-3, C-1, DTC, C-2, C-3, M-
1 and M-2 Zones
3.   See §
5-5-13 of this title for smoke shop and/or smoking lounge use provisions
 
Table 5: Public or Quasi-Public Facilities Uses
 R-E R-1 R-2 R-3 C-1 DTC C-2 C-3 M-1 M-2 P-F P/OS
Table 5: Public or Quasi-Public Facilities Uses
                              R-E R-1 R-2 R-3 C-1 DTC C-2 C-3 M-1 M-2 P-F P/OS
Public or quasi-public facilities
Airport                                                               C
Cemeteries                                                            C   C
Communication equipment                                                   C
facility
Community hall/services           C   C   C   C   C                   C
Government facilities                             C                   P
Public buildings and land         P   P   P       C                   P   C
Public or private colleges or                                         C
universities
Public, park                      P   P   P       C                   P   P
Shipping container accessory  C   C   C   C   C   C   C   C   C   C   C   C
structure
Utility services                                                          C
 
(Ord. 533, passed 8-16-2005; Ord. 602, passed 3-19-2013; Ord. 622, passed 1-20-
2015; Ord. 632, passed 12-19-2017; Ord. 659, passed 6-21-2022; Ord. 661, passed
10-21-2025)
§ 5-3-16 LOT DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS.
   (A)   All buildings or structures or portions of structures developed or
modified under the terms of this title shall comply with the development
standards of Tables 6, Development Standards, 7, Lot Configurations, and 8,
Building Structure Setback Requirements, of this section.
   (B)   Street frontage/lot width in the case of a lot fronting on a curving
street or around a curving portion of a cul-de-sac street shall be the distance
between the side lot lines measured along the chord at the front setback line.
   (C)   Some developments within the city contain standards regulating issues
such as building/structure height, yard setbacks, floor area ratio and fencing,
which may be less or more restrictive than the development standards contained
within this section. Such individualized standards, typically prescribed by
conditions of approval of the underlying subdivisions or planned developments,
shall prevail over the standards contained within this section, except where,
as determined by the Planning Director, application of standards unique to a
particular development would be inconsistent with the general plan. In such
cases, the Planning Director shall consult with the Planning Commission in
determining if current standards from this title should be applied.
Table 6: Development Standards
     Maximum Site Maximum Structure Maximum Accessory  Maximum Floor Area
Zone Coverage (%) Height (In Feet)  Structure Height,  Ratio (FAR)
                                    Detached (In Feet)
Table 6: Development Standards
     Maximum Site Maximum Structure Maximum Accessory  Maximum Floor Area
Zone Coverage (%) Height (In Feet)  Structure Height,  Ratio (FAR)
                                    Detached (In Feet)
R-E  N/A          30                15                 N/A
R-1  0.55         30                15                 0.60
R-2  0.40         30                15                 0.50
R-3  0.40         40                15                 0.50
C-1  N/A          301               15                 N/A
DTC  N/A          501               20                 N/A
C-2  N/A          351               201                0.503
C-3  N/A          351               201                0.503
M-1  N/A          451               351                0.503
M-2  N/A          551               451                0.503
PD   See note 2   See note 2        See note 2         See note 2
Notes:
1.   An additional 10 feet in height may be permitted with site plan/
design review approval
2.   As determined by PD Overlay permit
3.   An additional 0.10 FAR may be permitted with site plan/design review
approval and determination of traffic and circulation impacts
 
Table 7: Lot Configurations
                      Minimum Corner Lot Minimum Lot Width/  Minimum Corner Lot
Zone Minimum Lot Area Area (Sq. Ft.)     Street Frontage (In Width/Street
                                         Feet)               Frontage (In Feet)
Table 7: Lot Configurations
                      Minimum Corner Lot Minimum Lot Width/ Minimum Corner Lot
Zone Minimum Lot Area Area (Sq. Ft.)     Street Frontage    Width/Street
                                         (In Feet)          Frontage (In Feet)
R-E  10,000 sq. ft.   10,500             100                105
R-12 7,000 sq. ft.    7,500              70                 75
     6,000 sq. ft.    6,500              60                 65
     5,500 sq. ft.
R-2  (2,750 sq. ft.   6,500              60                 65
     per dwelling
     unit)
     6,500 sq. ft.
R-3  (1,500 sq. ft.   6,500              60                 65
     per dwelling
     unit)
C-1  10,000 sq. ft.   N/A                N/A                N/A
DTC  6,000 sq. ft.    N/A                N/A                N/A
C-2  1 acre           N/A                N/A                N/A
C-3  6,000 sq. ft.    N/A                N/A                N/A
M-1  10,000 sq. ft.   N/A                N/A                N/A
M-2  2 acres          N/A                N/A                N/A
PD   See note 1       See note 1         See note 1         See note 1
Notes:
1.   As determined by PD Overlay permit
2.   For lots located in the old section of the city, bounded by the railroad
tracks on the north, 9th Street on the west, Peach Avenue on the south, and
Prusso Street on the east, lot configurations shall remain at the 6,000 square
feet minimum lot size; legally conforming lots in this area shall remain
legally conforming lots after the adoption of the updated zoning ordinance on
July 19, 2005
 
Table 8: Building Structure Setback Requirements
(All Setbacks Measured in Feet)
                          Minimum             Minimum    Minimum     Minimum
     Minimum    Minimum   Corner    Minimum   Front Yard Front Yard  Rear Yard
Zone Front Yard Side Yard Side Yard Rear Yard Setback -  Setback -   Setback -
     Setback    Setback   Setback   Setback   Porches    Side Loaded Covered
                                                         Garage      Patios
Table 8: Building Structure Setback Requirements
(All Setbacks Measured in Feet)
                          Minimum              Minimum    Minimum     Minimum
     Minimum    Minimum   Corner    Minimum    Front Yard Front Yard  Rear Yard
Zone Front Yard Side Yard Side Yard Rear Yard  Setback -  Setback -   Setback -
     Setback    Setback   Setback   Setback    Porches    Side Loaded Covered
                                                          Garage      Patios
R-E  251        10        15        20         15         15          10
R-1  20         5         15        15 (first  10         10          10
                                    floor)
                                    20 (second
                                    floor)
R-2  15         52        15        20         10         10          10
R-3  15         53        153       15         10         10          10
C-1  N/A4       N/A5      N/A5      N/A6       N/A        N/A         N/A
DTC  N/A4       N/A5      N/A5      N/A6       N/A        N/A         N/A
C-2  N/A4       N/A5      N/A5      N/A6       N/A        N/A         N/A
C-3  N/A4       N/A5      N/A5      N/A6       N/A        N/A         N/A
M-1  N/A7       N/A8      208       N/A9       N/A        N/A         N/A
M-2  N/A4       N/A5      20
PD   N/A10      N/A10
Notes:
1.   Setback requirements for R-E Districts shall include a 40 foot minimum
garage setback
2.   In no instance shall residence on adjoining R-2 lots be closer than 8 feet
from primary structure to primary structure, except on the side next to a
street on a corner lot, which shall be 15 feet deep; if a garage is present, or
if developing on a reverse corner lot, street side yard setback shall be 20
feet
3.   Each interior lot in an R-3 District shall have a minimum side yard of 5
feet; corner lots shall have 15 feet, except in the case of a reverse corner
lot or a garage; then it shall be 20 feet
4.   No minimum, except where the frontage in a block is partially in a
residential district; in which case the front yard shall be the same as
required in such residential district
5.   No minimum, except where the side of a lot abuts a residential district;
in which case the side yard shall not be less than 5 feet
6.   No minimum, except where the rear of a lot abuts a residential district;
in which case a rear yard of 15 feet shall be required
7.   Where any of the lots within the same block are already developed with
front yards less than 15 feet, then a minimum of 10 feet shall be required for
the front yard depth
8.   On corner and reverse corner lots in the M-1 district, the side yard which
faces the street shall be 20 feet
9.   When no alley intervenes between the rear property lines, each lot in the
M-1 District shall maintain a rear yard of not less than 10 feet, except the
rear yard may be less than 10 feet when the building is built in compliance
with the requirements of the fire code after approval from the Planning
Commission is obtained
10.   As determined by Planned Development Overlay permit
 
(Ord. 549, passed 8-15-2006; Ord. 605, passed 6-4-2013; Ord. 610, passed 2-18-
2014; Ord. 661, passed 10-21-2025)
§ 5-3-16-1 SETBACK EXCEPTIONS.
   (A)   Encroachment into setbacks. Certain architectural features may extend
from a building structure into a required setback.
      1.   Canopies, doorway covers not exceeding 12 square feet, eaves, bay
windows, stairways/landings and chimneys may extend into required front, side
or rear yards a distance not exceeding three feet and shall have a minimum
three-foot setback to all property lines.
      2.   Where an accessory building is attached to the main building, it
shall be considered a portion of the main building and shall comply in all
respects with the requirements of this title applicable to the main building.
      3.   (a)   Freestanding accessory buildings and structures in residential
districts, whether or not requiring a building permit (such as a metal shed,
garage, greenhouse, gazebo, carport, play structure, tree house, trellis, arbor
or patio cover), may not be located in the required front yard of the
particular zone unless provided for elsewhere in this title. A trellis or arbor
is permitted in the front yard covering a walkway. The trellis or arbor may not
exceed a height of eight feet or width of six feet.
         (b)   Freestanding accessory buildings and structures, whether or not
requiring a building permit, may be located within required side yards, subject
to the following standards.
            (1)   A minimum five-foot side setback shall be required for
garages and carports, including prefabricated metal structures. Prefabricated
tarp structures are prohibited.
            (2)   A minimum three-foot setback shall be required for that
portion of any freestanding accessory building or structure exceeding a height
of eight feet.
            (3)   A five-foot setback shall be required for that portion of any
freestanding accessory building or structure exceeding a height of ten feet.
            (4)   A maximum 15-foot height limit shall apply to any
freestanding accessory structure or building located in the area between five
feet from the rear property line and the standard full rear yard setback
required of the district.
            (5)   No more than 30% of a required rear yard may be covered by
accessory structures. Accessory structures are prohibited within the five-foot
rear yard setback in the R-1 Zoning District.
            (6)   Separation from the main building, consistent with city
adopted building and safety codes.
      4.   The conversion of existing, open structures to enclosed structures
(such as conversion of a carport to a garage or enclosure of a covered porch)
shall be subject to all yard setback requirements of this title.
      5.   Ground mounted heating and air conditioning units may be permitted
in required side or rear yards.
      6.   In all instances, buildings and structures must provide adequate
clearance from property lines and/or between buildings and structures to ensure
adequate access for emergency personnel and equipment.
(Ord. 605, passed 6-4-2013)
§ 5-3-17 RESIDENTIAL DENSITIES.
   (A)   Residential development must provide at least the minimum number of
units per gross acre indicated in the general plan.
   (B)   Density of residential development is prescribed by the land use
designations within the general plan, with corollary zoning districts, as shown
in Table 9 of this section.
Table 9: Residential Densities
                                                   Residential Density (In
General Plan Designation Corollary Zoning District Dwelling Units per Gross
                                                   Acre)
Table 9: Residential Densities
                                                     Residential Density (In
General Plan Designation   Corollary Zoning District Dwelling Units per Gross
                                                     Acre)
Estate residential         R-E                       1.0—5.0
Low density residential    R-1, PD                   1.0—7.5
Medium density residential R-2, PD                   7.6—11.9
High density residential   R-3, PD                   12—29
Downtown commercial/       DTC                       291
professional office
Note:
1.   Maximum density of 29 dwelling units per gross acre for residential
units above ground floor commercial shall be allowed in DTC District
 
(Ord. 533, passed 8-16-2005)
CHAPTER 4: GENERAL SITE DEVELOPMENT REGULATIONS
Section
5-4-1 Accessory uses
5-4-1-1 Swimming pools
5-4-2 Fences, walls and hedges
5-4-3 Height limits
5-4-4 Landscaping; requirements
5-4-5 Off-street parking and loading
5-4-5-1 Bicycle parking standards
5-4-6 Performance standards
5-4-7 Street development
5-4-8 Tree preservation
5-4-9 Outdoor dining areas
5-4-9-1 Outdoor dining areas on private property, permanent and accessory
5-4-9-2 Outdoor dining areas on public property, permanent and accessory
§ 5-4-1 ACCESSORY USES.
   (A)   Permitted uses. Accessory buildings may be permitted where uses of
such buildings are incidental and subordinate and do not alter the character of
the premises in respect to permitted usage in that district.
   (B)   Attached. Attached accessory buildings shall be made structurally a
part of and have a common wall or roof with the main building and shall be
allowed in all districts and shall provide and maintain the same yard setbacks
as the main building.
(Ord. 533, passed 8-16-2005)
§ 5-4-1-1 SWIMMING POOLS.
   (A)   Swimming pools in any residential district shall be constructed in the
rear one-half of the lot or 50 feet from the front property line, whichever is
the lesser. Filter and heating systems for such pools shall be a minimum of
five feet from property lines. No pool shall be located closer than five feet
to any side lot line and any rear lot line. No pool shall occupy over 40% of
the required rear yard.
   (B)   Coverage by a swimming pool should not be considered in measuring
maximum lot coverage. The swimming pool shall be completely surrounded by a
fence and provided with gates and locks consistent with state building and
safety codes.
(Ord. 533, passed 8-16-2005)
§ 5-4-2 FENCES, WALLS AND HEDGES.
   (A)   Fences. Fences are permissible for all residential districts and are
mandatory for other specific uses and shall be erected as required in this
section.
   (B)   Prohibited materials.
      1.   Electrical. No electrically charged fences shall be permitted in the
city.
      2.   Barbed wire. No barbed wire or other sharp pointed material shall be
used in the construction of a fence unless the Planning Director or the
Planning Commission gives approval. Industrial and commercial districts permit
fencing up to seven feet in height with the top one foot composed of three-
strand barbed wire. When security fencing is required, it should be a
combination of solid pillars, or short solid wall segments, and wrought iron
grillwork.
      3.   Wrought iron. No wrought iron containing sharp pointed material
shall be used for either fencing or window coverings in any residential
district.
   (C)   Public enclosures. Fences that enclose school grounds, public
playgrounds, tennis courts, public swimming pools or other public areas may be
erected to a height in excess of six feet.
   (D)   Building permit/inspection. The following fences shall require a
building permit and/or inspection as appropriate for compliance with adopted
fencing specifications:
      1.   All masonry and brick fences and walls above six feet; and
      2.   All fences that incorporate electrical wiring.
   (E)   Approved materials.
      1.   Residential fences will be constructed of wood, masonry block,
brick, stucco, vinyl and any combination of these materials or other approved
materials as is encouraged in the city design guide. Redwood is highly
encouraged. Cyclone fencing is discouraged.
      2.   Sound walls will be constructed of masonry block, brick, stucco and
any combination of these materials or other approved materials as is encouraged
in the city design guide. Redwood is highly encouraged. Cyclone and vinyl
fencing are discouraged. All masonry walls shall be provided with a decorative
capping material.
   (F)   Permit/agreement. An encroachment permit and hold harmless agreement
shall be required to permit installation of fences, subject to city code,
within the street right-of-way.
   (G)   Nonconforming. The city shall reserve the right to abate any
nonconforming nuisance fence by city code. The property owner will incur all
costs and responsibilities of fence removal.
   (H)   Fire hydrant. A minimum three-foot clear space shall be maintained
around the circumference of a fire hydrant except as otherwise required or
approved by the Fire Chief.
   (I)   Fence site plan. All proposed construction of subdivision, commercial
or industrial fences shall require submittal of a fence site plan. That plan
shall identify the fencing’s location, height, composition, relationship to
other structures, fencing and landscaping. Uniform fencing materials shall be
used in subdivisions where possible.
   (J)   Residential. In all residential districts (R-E, R-1, R-2 and R-3) the
requirements for fences and hedges are as follows.
      1.   Front yards. Maximum height above grade shall not exceed 36 inches
except that the fence may be erected to a maximum height of 48 inches for
residences, or 72 inches for nonresidential uses that are permitted or
conditionally permitted in residential districts, provided that any fence which
exceeds 36 inches is uniformly open to the extent of 33-1/3%. UNIFORMLY OPEN
shall be construed to mean that the interstices between the solid material of
the fence are evenly spaced so as to make vision through the fence possible.
      2.   Rear yards. Maximum height shall be six feet above grade.
      3.   Side yards. Maximum height shall be six feet above grade.
      4.   Adjacent to major street. A minimum six foot solid decorative
masonry fence may be required for residential lots that are adjacent to a major
street.
      5.   Exceptions.
         (a)   Corner lots. On corner lots which are not reversed corner lots,
no fence or hedge exceeding 36 inches in height shall be permitted closer than
five feet behind sidewalk or along side street lot line, whichever is greater.
         (b)   Reversed corner lots. On reversed corner lots, no fence or hedge
exceeding 36 inches in height shall be permitted closer than 20 feet to the
side street lot line.
   (K)   Corner lot.
      1.   On a corner lot or reversed corner lot in any district, no fence
shall be erected or plants permitted to grow in such a manner as to materially
impede vision between the height of two and one-half feet and ten feet above
the centerline grades in the sight distance area.
      2.   No fence, hedge, wall or obstruction three feet in height shall be
erected within the “vision triangle” of a corner lot created by measuring the
appropriate distance, set forth as follows: 20 feet along the front street
property line and 20 feet from the side street property line starting from the
point at which the front street property line intersects the side street
property line. “Vision triangle” requirements will also apply to rear street
side property lines.
   (L)   Nonresidential. The development of any property fence of a
nonresidential nature in a C-1, DTC, C-2, C-3, M-1 or M-2 District shall
include a minimum six-foot masonry or other fence or wall along the rear and
side property lines which abuts property zoned for residential purposes.
   (M)   Industrial/commercial. A seven-foot decorative heavy masonry wall or
fence shall be required for industrial and commercial districts that are
adjacent to major streets and expressways, or to separate delivery areas from
residential or school uses.
   (N)   Landscaping. Fences, walls and hedges may be incorporated with
landscaped mounds to meet height requirements contained within this chapter.
   (O)   Diagram. Diagram depicting fencing regulations, is as follows:
   Figure 1: Diagram Depicting Fence Regulations
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/bfbdf7ef948580a5f83ee4a174cfd5b656b27a6b/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2976.png]
 
(Ord. 533, passed 8-16-2005; Ord. 600, passed 3-19-2013)
§ 5-4-3 HEIGHT LIMITS.
   (A)   Use permit. Chimneys, flagpoles, monuments, gas storage holders, radio
or other towers, water tanks and other similar structures and mechanical
apparatus may be permitted in excess of the maximum height limit allowed in the
district in which they are located, provided site plan/design review approval
is first secured in each case.
   (B)   Television antennas. Conventional television antennas, not exceeding
40 feet in height above grade level, are permitted in residential districts.
(Ord. 533, passed 8-16-2005)
§ 5-4-4 LANDSCAPING; REQUIREMENTS.
   (A)   Any front yard or side yard facing a public right-of-way of any new
single-family dwelling or two-family dwelling shall be landscaped in accordance
with the water efficient landscaping and irrigation standards set forth in
Title 9, Chapter 11 of this code.
   (B)   All commercial development and retail establishments shall require a
ten-foot perimeter of landscaping along property lines, including front, side
and rear yard setbacks, and along street frontages, and shall be subject to a
site plan/design review. All landscape plans shall comply with Title 9, Chapter
11 of this code. Said areas shall be planted with substantial plantings that
include a mix of shrubs, evergreens and deciduous tree varieties (reference §
9-11-3 of this code). Landscaped areas shall be well maintained in good
condition.
   (C)   Where new residential development is proposed that adjoins existing
commercial or industrial development, the residential developer shall be
required to provide an appropriate architectural transition. This transition
may include such provisions as building setbacks, landscaping and masonry
walls.
   (D)   All new residential development shall include a ten-foot landscaped
meandering parkway adjacent to the street curb where public right-of-way and
lot design allows.
   (E)   Landscaping in all commercial and industrial areas shall be used to
define areas such as entrances to buildings and parking lots and edges of
various land uses, provide a transition between neighboring properties, and
provide screening for outdoor storage, loading and equipment areas.
   (F)   Landscaping shall be in scale with adjacent buildings and be of
appropriate size at maturity to accomplish its intended purpose.
   (G)   Portions of a site not utilized for structures, parking, circulation,
storage or other uses, shall be landscaped.
   (H)   Parking lots shall incorporate landscaping for all areas not used for
vehicle storage, access or circulation.
   (I)   The planting of street trees for existing and new residential,
commercial and industrial development is encouraged.
   (J)   All roadway medians shall be landscaped.
   (K)   Landscape plans shall comply with applicable provisions of the city’s
design guide.
(Ord. 533, passed 8-16-2005)
§ 5-4-5 OFF-STREET PARKING AND LOADING.
   (A)   General regulations. Accessible off-street parking and loading areas
shall be provided and maintained, as set forth in this title, to provide
minimum parking and maneuvering room for automobiles and for pedestrian safety
based upon the anticipated occupancy of a given building, structure or area of
land.
      1.   When any building or structure, except any accessory building, is
erected, enlarged or increased in capacity, minimum off-street parking space
shall be provided as required by this title.
      2.   When a change in use creates an increase in the amount of parking
required, additional parking space shall be provided, or an in lieu fee paid or
other arrangement made with the city.
      3.   Parking spaces and access driveways shall be graded and drained in
accordance with city standards to alleviate the creation of flooding and
drainage problems for the subject property.
      4.   Parking spaces and access driveways shall be surfaced in accordance
with city standards to eliminate dust and maintain a passable surface at all
times.
      5.   Posts, bumpers, wheel stops or other acceptable devices shall be
provided on all parking spaces located along property lines.
      6.   Whenever a parking area is lighted, such lighting shall be directed
away from residential areas and public streets so as not to produce a glare in
order to ensure the privacy and well being of residential areas and safety of
vehicular traffic.
      7.   Parking areas in front or side yards will not exceed 20 feet in
width.
      8.   No sale, storage, repair work, dismantling or servicing of any kind
shall be permitted in required parking spaces.
      9.   Inoperable vehicles shall be prohibited to park in the front yard of
any residential district. All parked vehicles shall be licensed and operable.
      10.   Parking areas of commercial or industrial districts shall be fenced
along property lines when abutting residential districts by a solid masonry or
other solid material fence. The height of said fence shall be a minimum of six
feet, or a lesser height as approved by the Planning Commission.
      11.   Within residential districts, covered or enclosed parking spaces
may be converted for living purposes, provided covered replacement parking is
made available.
      12.   Parking shall be provided within a reasonable distance from the
dwelling unit the parking is intended to serve in multiple-family residential
districts.
      13.   Adequate off-street parking shall be required of all commercial and
industrial land uses to accommodate parking demand, without the use of on
street parking. Parking shall be provided within a reasonable distance from the
building the parking is intended to serve.
      14.   Parking lots shall be screened from public streets and visually
subordinate to the development.
      15.   Parking standards shall be evaluated for new downtown development
to ensure that parking requirements are satisfied within walking distance of
development.
      16.   Parking standards shall be evaluated to assess the potential for
offering reduced parking requirements to development that incorporates measures
proven to reduce commute or customer trips.
      17.   Driveway encroachments shall be limited to one per residential lot,
with a maximum width per the city’s development standards specifications.
Residential driveway encroachments shall form a direct route from the street to
a garage or other acceptable parking space.
      18.   All residential parking shall be limited to a paved driveway
serving the garage. There shall be no parking on any unpaved area of the front
yard setback.
      19.   There shall be a maximum 50% paving of front yard setback.
   (B)   Screening and landscaping. All parking areas having four or more
spaces shall be provided with screening and landscaping along all street side
property lines not occupied by driveways. The following standards shall apply:
      1.   A planter not less than 36 inches in width provided with an
acceptable irrigation system and planted with evergreen shrubs;
      2.   A screen 36 inches in height of either solid or uniformly open
materials, with evergreen plants, decorative woods or other materials; and
      3.   One minimum size 15 gallon tree shall be provided for every four
parking spaces and shall be provided with a means of irrigation and maintained
in a living condition.
   (C)   Parking area standards. All parking areas shall comply with the
standards provided below. Unless otherwise noted, all figures are per square
foot of gross building floor area, and shall include areas devoted to hallways,
mechanical rooms, storage rooms, restrooms and the like. Where more than one
use is proposed from a site or facility, the on site parking requirement shall
be the sum of each use activity.
      1.   Parking area standards. All parking areas shall comply with the
standards provided below:
   Figure 2: Parking Standards
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/bfbdf7ef948580a5f83ee4a174cfd5b656b27a6b/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2982.png]
 
Figure 2 Parking Layout Dimensions
DEGREES “A”  “B”  ONE-WAY TRAFFIC “C”  TWO-WAY TRAFFIC “C”  “D”
        (FEET)   (FEET)   (FEET)                   (FEET)
Figure 2 Parking Layout Dimensions
DEGREES “A”  “B”  ONE-WAY TRAFFIC “C”  TWO-WAY TRAFFIC “C”  “D”
        (FEET)   (FEET)   (FEET)                   (FEET)
0       22.5     8.0      12                       20                       -
20      26.3     15.3     12                       20                       22.1
25      21.3     16.6     12                       20                       25.0
30      18.0     17.8     12                       20                       27.8 46.6 55.6
35      15.7     18.8     12                       20                       30.2 49.6 57.6
40      14.0     19.8     12                       20                       32.7 51.6 59.6
45      12.7     20.5     12                       20                       34.6 53.0 61.0
50      11.7     21.1     12                       20                       36.4 54.2 62.2
55      11.0     21.5     12                       20                       37.8 55.0 63.0
60      10.4     21.8     15                       20                       39.1 58.6 63.6
65      9.9      21.9     17                       21                       40.0 60.8 64.8
70      9.6      21.9     20                       22                       40.7 63.8 65.8
75      9.3      21.6     23                       23                       40.9 66.2 66.2
80      9.1      21.3     24                       24                       41.0 66.6 66.6
85      9.0      20.7     24                       24                       40.6 65.4 65.4
90      9.0      20       24                       24                       40.0 64.0 64.0
NOTES:
1. Parking stall dimensions other than 9' x 20' giving a total area of 180 sq. ft. may be
used subject to approval by the city engineer.
2. Minimum parking stall dimensions for compact car shall be 8' x 17'.
3. Absolute minimums: Length = 17.0', Width = 8.0', One-Way aisle = 12.0', Two-way aisle =
20.0'.
4. These details shall be considered the minimum requirements and the city may increase
these requirements in certain instances.
5. Landscaping shall be provided pursuant to section 5-4-4: Landscaping and section 5-4-5:
Off-Street Parking And Loading.
6. Twenty-five percent of required off-street parking may be designated as compact car
spaces and shall have a minimum parking shall dimensions as described in note number 2.
7. The number of handicap parking spaces shall be determined by the adopted building code.
 
 
   Figure 3: Parking Layout
   90 Degree Parking Layout
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/bfbdf7ef948580a5f83ee4a174cfd5b656b27a6b/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2980.png]
 
      2.   Bumpers. Where bumpers overhang planters on raised walkways, the
depth of parking stalls may be reduced by two feet to 18 feet.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/bfbdf7ef948580a5f83ee4a174cfd5b656b27a6b/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2978.png]
 
   x = Stall not accessible in certain layouts
      3.   Parking layout dimension. Parking layout dimension (in feet) for
eight feet six-inch stalls at various angles.
 Dimensions   80 70 60 50 45 40 30 20
 (in degrees)
  Dimensions           80      70     60     50     45     40     30     20
  (in degrees)
A Stall width,         8 ft.   9 ft.  9 ft.  11 ft. 12 ft. 13 ft. 17 ft. 21 ft.
  parallel to aisle    8 in.   1 in.  10 in. 1 in.  0 in.  3 in.  9 in.  10 in.
B Stall length of line 21 ft.  23 ft. 25 ft. 27 ft. 28 ft. 30 ft. 34 ft. 43 ft.
                       6 in.   1 in.  0 in.  2 in.  6 in.  2 in.  9 in.  4 in.
C Stall depth to wall  21 ft.  21 ft. 22 ft. 20 ft. 20 ft. 19 ft. 17 ft. 14 ft.
                       2 in.   8 in.  0 in.  9 in.  2 in.  4 in.  4 in.  10 in.
D Aisle width (bot.    24 ft.  20 ft. 14 ft. 12 ft. 12 ft. 12 ft. 12 ft. 12 ft.
  stall lines)         0 in.   0 in.  6 in.  0 in.  0 in.  0 in.  0 in.  0 in.
E Stall depth,         120 ft. 20 ft. 20 ft. 18 ft. 17 ft. 18 ft. 13 ft. 10 ft.
  interlock            5 in.   0 in.  0 in.  1 in.  2 in.  2 in.  9 in.  10 in.
F Module, wall to      65 ft.  61 ft. 54 ft. 50 ft. 49 ft. 47 ft. 43 ft. 37 ft.
  interlock            7 in.   11 in. 6 in.  10 in. 4 in.  6 in.  1 in.  8 in.
G Module, interlocking 64 ft.  60 ft. 54 ft. 48 ft. 46 ft. 44 ft. 39 ft. 33 ft.
                       10 in.  6 in.  6 in.  2 in.  4 in.  4 in.  6 in.  8 in.
H Module, interlock to 63 ft.  59 ft. 54 ft. 48 ft. 47 ft. 46 ft. 42 ft. 36 ft.
  curb face            1 in.   6 in.  2 in.  8 in.  4 in.  0 in.  1 in.  8 in.
I Bumper overhang      2 ft.   2 ft.  2 ft.  2 ft.  2 ft.  1 ft.  1 ft.  1 ft.
  (typical)            6 in.   5 in.  5 in.  2 in.  0 in.  6 in.  0 in.  0 in.
J Offset               0 ft.   1 ft.  2 ft.  4 ft.  6 ft.  7 ft.  12 ft. 21 ft.
                       3 in.   1 in.  10 in. 7 in.  0 in.  9 in.  9 in.  11 in.
K Setback              3 ft.   6 ft.  9 ft.  12 ft. 14 ft. 15 ft. 17 ft. 18 ft.
                       6 in.   10 in. 7 in.  10 in. 2 in.  4 in.  3 in.  9 in.
L Cross aisle (one-    14 ft.  14 ft. 14 ft. 14 ft. 14 ft. 14 ft. 14 ft. 14 ft.
  way)                 0 in.   0 in.  0 in.  0 in.  0 in.  0 in.  0 in.  0 in.
 
      4.   Off-street parking requirements.
Off-Street Parking Requirements
Off-Street Parking Requirements
Residential land uses
                                                                            At least 1
                                                                            garage,
                                                                            carport or
                                                                            off-street
   Boarding houses                                                       space for
                                                                            each 2
                                                                            occupants of
                                                                            a boarding
                                                                            house
                                                                            At least 1
   Home occupations                                                      off-street
                                                                            parking
                                                                            space
                                                                            2 parking
                                                                            spaces for
   Mobilehomes                                                           each
                                                                            mobilehome
                                                                            unit
                                                                            At least 2
                                                                            garage,
                                                                            carport or
                                                                            off-street
                                                                            parking
                                                                            spaces for
                                                                            each
   Multi-family dwellings                                                dwelling
                                                                            unit in
                                                                            multiple-
                                                                            family
                                                                            projects
                                                                            consisting
                                                                            of 3 to 6
                                                                            units
                                                                            At least 1
                                                                            garage,
                                                                            carport or
                                                                            off-street
                                                                            parking
                                                                            space for
                                                                            each
                                                                            dwelling
                                                                            unit in
                                                                            multiple-
                                                                            family
                                                                            projects
                                                                            consisting
                                                                            of 7 or more
                                                                            units; the
                                                                            Planning
                                                                            Commission
                                                                            may require
                                                                            the
                                                                            provision of
                                                                            visitor
                                                                            parking in
                                                                            addition to
                                                                            the required
                                                                            parking for
                                                                            multiple-
                                                                           family
                                                                            projects of
                                                                            7 or more
                                                                            units, based
                                                                            on a finding
                                                                            of need due
                                                                            to factors
                                                                            such as
                                                                            available on
                                                                            street
                                                                            parking,
                                                                            distance of
                                                                            units to the
                                                                            street, and
                                                                            the type and
                                                                            size of the
                                                                            units; such
                                                                            visitor
                                                                            parking
                                                                            shall be
                                                                            marked and
                                                                            will be
                                                                            provided at
                                                                            a minimum of
                                                                            1 space per
                                                                            each 10
                                                                            units
                                                                            1 parking
   Residential care facilities                                           space for
                                                                            each 1
                                                                            employee
                                                                            At least 1
                                                                            parking
   Rest homes                                                            space for
                                                                            each 3 beds
                                                                            in any rest
                                                                            home
                                                                            1 off-street
                                                                            parking
   Second unit dwellings                                                 space for
                                                                            each bedroom
                                                                            in unit
                                                                            At least 2
                                                                            garage,
                                                                            carport or
                                                                            off-street
                                                                            (driveway)
   Single-family and two-family dwellings                                parking
                                                                            spaces for
                                                                            each
                                                                            dwelling
                                                                            unit on the
                                                                            same lot
Public and quasi-public land uses
   Cemeteries                                                            As per use
                                                                            permit
                                                                            At least 1
                                                                            parking
                                                                            space for
                                                                            every 5
   Churches                                                              seats for
                                                                            all churches
                                                                            (18 in. of
                                                                            bench = 1
                                                                            seat)
                                                                            1 parking
                                                                            space for
   Communication facility                                                each 500 sq.
                                                                            ft. of gross
                                                                            floor area
                                                                            At least 1
                                                                            parking
                                                                            space for
                                                                            each 100 sq.
                                                                            ft. of floor
   Community center                                                      area of any
                                                                            community
                                                                            center or
                                                                            related
                                                                            public use
                                                                            facility
                                                                            1 parking
                                                                            space for
                                                                            each 1
   Daycare center                                                        employee,
                                                                            plus 1 space
                                                                            for each 4
                                                                            clients
                                                                            1 parking
                                                                            space for
   Government offices                                                    each 300 sq.
                                                                            ft. of floor
                                                                            area
                                                                            1 parking
                                                                            space for
   Libraries                                                             each 300 sq.
                                                                            ft. of floor
                                                                            area
                                                                            1 parking
                                                                            space for
   Lodges, for social halls, union halls and private clubs               every 50 sq.
                                                                            ft. of gross
                                                                            floor area
                                                                            For active
                                                                            recreational
                                                                            areas over 5
                                                                            acres in
                                                                            size, at
                                                                            least 5% of
   Parks                                                                 the total
                                                                            area shall
                                                                            be provided
                                                                            for off-
                                                                            street
                                                                            parking
                                                                            facilities
                                                                            At least 1
                                                                            parking
                                                                            space for
                                                                            every 3
                                                                            employees in
   Public buildings                                                      public
                                                                            buildings
                                                                            and public
                                                                            utility
                                                                            buildings
                                                                            and
                                                                            substations
                                                                            At least 1
                                                                            parking
                                                                            space for
                                                                            each
                                                                            employee in
                                                                            schools; in
                                                                            addition, 1
                                                                            parking
                                                                            space for
                                                                            each 3 seats
   Schools                                                               in the main
                                                                            auditorium
                                                                            or assembly
                                                                            hall in
                                                                            intermediate
                                                                            schools; and
                                                                            1 parking
                                                                            space for
                                                                            every 7
                                                                            students in
                                                                            senior high
                                                                            schools
Commercial recreational land uses
                                                                            1 space for
                                                                            every 200
                                                                            sq. ft. of
   Amusement center                                                      floor area,
                                                                            plus 1 space
                                                                            for each
                                                                            employee
                                                                            4 parking
   Bowling alleys                                                        spaces for
                                                                            each lane
                                                                            At least 10
                                                                            off-street
                                                                            parking
   Golf courses                                                          spaces for
                                                                            each hole on
                                                                            a golf
                                                                            course
                                                                            1 parking
   Overnight recreation vehicle parks                                    space for
                                                                            each rental
                                                                            unit
                                                                            1 parking
                                                                            space for
   Skating rinks                                                         every 100
                                                                            sq. ft. of
                                                                            skating area
                                                                            1 parking
                                                                            space for
   Swimming pools                                                        each 100 sq.
                                                                            ft. of pool
                                                                            deck area
                                                                            2 parking
   Tennis courts                                                         spaces for
                                                                            each court
Commercial and industrial land uses
                                                                            1 parking
                                                                            space for
                                                                            each 300 sq.
   Beauty shops and barbershops                                          ft. of floor
                                                                            area for all
                                                                            personal
                                                                            retail
                                                                            services
                                                                            2 parking
                                                                            spaces per
                                                                            use, plus 1
   Commercial, light industrial use                                      space per
                                                                            750 sq. ft.
                                                                            of gross
                                                                            floor area
                                                                            A minimum of
   Drive-ins                                                             15 parking
                                                                            spaces
                                                                            To be
                                                                            considered
                                                                            on an
                                                                            individual
                                                                            basis, based
                                                                            on number of
                                                                            employees
                                                                            and size of
   Drive-through facilities                                              facility;
                                                                            shall
                                                                            include
                                                                            provisions
                                                                            for drive-up
                                                                            queue out of
                                                                            driveway
                                                                            circulation
                                                                            areas
                                                                            1 parking
                                                                            space for
                                                                            each
                                                                            employee;
                                                                            areas
   Gas stations                                                          devoted to
                                                                            retail or
                                                                            food sales
                                                                            shall be
                                                                            determined
                                                                            separately
                                                                            1 parking
                                                                            space for
   Health/fitness facilities                                             each 300 sq.
                                                                            ft. of floor
                                                                            area
                                                                            At least 1
                                                                            off-street
   Hotel                                                                 parking
                                                                            space for
                                                                            each room of
                                                                            a hotel
                                                                            1 off-street
                                                                            parking
                                                                            space for
                                                                            each 1
                                                                            employee, or
                                                                            1 space for
                                                                            each 250 sq.
                                                                            ft. of
                                                                            office area;
                                                                            plus, 1
   Industrial uses                                                       space for
                                                                            each 1,000
                                                                            sq. ft. of
                                                                            building
                                                                            area devoted
                                                                            to other
                                                                            than office,
                                                                            and 1 space
                                                                            for each
                                                                            company
                                                                            vehicle
                                                                            1 parking
                                                                            space for
   Laboratory research                                                   each 500 sq.
                                                                            ft. of gross
                                                                            floor area
                                                                            1 parking
                                                                            space for
   Laundries and dry cleaning                                            each 300 sq.
                                                                            ft. of floor
                                                                            area
                                                                            1 parking
                                                                            space for
                                                                            each 200 sq.
                                                                            ft. of gross
                                                                            floor area,
   Medical and dental office                                             plus 1
                                                                            additional
                                                                            space for
                                                                            each
                                                                            employee or
                                                                            staff member
                                                                            At least 1
                                                                            off-street
                                                                            parking
                                                                            space for
   Motel                                                                 each
                                                                            sleeping or
                                                                            dwelling
                                                                            unit of a
                                                                            motel
                                                                            1 parking
                                                                            space for
                                                                            each 400 sq.
                                                                            ft. of floor
                                                                            area and 1
                                                                            for each
                                                                            vehicle used
                                                                            in conduct
                                                                            of the
   Motor vehicle, machinery and garage repairs                           business; as
                                                                            for outdoor
                                                                            motor
                                                                            vehicle or
                                                                            machinery
                                                                            sales lots,
                                                                            3 parking
                                                                            spaces, plus
                                                                            1 for each
                                                                            employee for
                                                                            each lot
                                                                            At least 1
                                                                            parking
                                                                            space for
                                                                            every 300
                                                                            sq. ft. of a
   Professional office for banks, law firms, repair stores and the like  business or
(except for medical and dental offices)                                     professional
                                                                            office, plus
                                                                            1 additional
                                                                            space for
                                                                            each
                                                                            employee or
                                                                            staff member
                                                                            2 parking
   Recycling collection center                                           spaces per
                                                                            collection
                                                                            area
                                                                            1 parking
                                                                            space for
                                                                            each 50 sq.
                                                                            ft. of
   Restaurants, cafés and bars                                          dining,
                                                                            indoor/
                                                                            outdoor
                                                                            seating,
                                                                            waiting and
                                                                            lounge areas
                                                                            1 parking
                                                                            space for
                                                                            each 300 sq.
   Retail commercial                                                     ft. of gross
                                                                            floor area
                                                                            for retail
                                                                            sales
                                                                            1 space for
                                                                            each 2
                                                                            employees,
                                                                            plus 1 space
                                                                            for each
                                                                            10,000 sq.
   Salvage yards                                                         ft. of lot
                                                                            area, or 2
                                                                            spaces for
                                                                            each 100 sq.
                                                                            ft. of floor
                                                                            area,
                                                                            whichever is
                                                                            the greater
                                                                            4 parking
                                                                            spaces per
                                                                            station,
   Service repair stations                                               plus 1 space
                                                                            per 300 sq.
                                                                            ft. of floor
                                                                            area
                                                                            1 parking
                                                                            space for
   Theaters, auditoriums and sports arenas                               every 5
                                                                            seats (18
                                                                            in. of bench
                                                                            = 1 seat)
                                                                            1 parking
                                                                            space for
   Veterinary services/kennel                                            each 400 sq.
                                                                            ft. of gross
                                                                            floor area
                                                                            1 parking
                                                                            space for
                                                                            every 1
                                                                            employee or
   Wholesale                                                             1 parking
                                                                            space for
                                                                            every 2,000
                                                                            sq. ft. of
                                                                            gross floor
                                                                            area
 
   (D)   Uses not specified. Where the off-street parking requirements for a
use are not specifically defined herein, the Planning Commission shall
determine the minimum requirements for such use.
   (E)   In lieu payments for off-street parking. The minimum off-street
parking spaces required in all commercial districts may be satisfied in whole
or in part by obtaining approval from the City Council under the following
conditions.
      1.   Applications for in lieu parking spaces shall be approved by the
City Council. Approval shall be determined by availability and need.
      2.   In lieu of furnishing the parking spaces required by the provisions
of this section, the requirements thereof may be satisfied by the payment to
the city of a sum for each required parking space as determined by the city,
plus annual interest. Payments to the city shall be made per a city approved
payment plan.
      3.   The maximum payment period shall be five years. The first minimum
payment shall be made prior to the issuance of a building permit. Each
additional payment shall be due on each anniversary date of the building permit
until the total sum due the city is paid in full.
         (a)   Said funds shall be deposited with the city in a special fund
and shall be used and expended exclusively for the purpose of acquiring and
developing off-street parking facilities located insofar as practicable in the
general vicinity of the buildings for which in lieu payments were made.
         (b)   Should any owner fail or refuse to pay to the city the amount of
any annual payment due under subsection (E)2. of this section, the amount due
and payable shall constitute a special assessment against said real property
and shall be a lien against said real property, and the amount of such special
assessment shall be added to the next regular bill for taxes levied against
said real property for municipal purposes. The amount of the special assessment
shall be collected at the same time and in the same manner ordinary municipal
taxes are collected. If delinquent, the amount is subject to the same penalties
and the same procedure of foreclosure and sale provided for in ordinary
municipal taxes.
         (c)   At the beginning of each fiscal year, all fees outlined in
subsection (E)2. of this section shall be subject to an annual increase equal
to the consumer price index (CPI) for the preceding calendar year.
   (F)   Off-street loading space. In every C-1, DTC, C-2, C-3, M-1 and M-
2 District, private off-street loading space for the handling of all goods,
materials and equipment shall be provided with the location and design of said
off-street loading space being no less than 15 feet by 25 feet with a minimum
14-foot height clearance. Loading areas shall be designed to accommodate trucks
without having to back onto or otherwise use the adjoining street. The loading
area shall not be a part of the required off-street parking space and shall be
provided with easy access to an alley or street. Loading and delivery areas
shall be clearly marked with directional signage where multiple access points
are provided. The Design Review Committee shall approve number, location and
design of off-street loading space in advance.
(Ord. 533, passed 8-16-2005)
Cross-reference:
   Site plan and design review, see §
5-6-7
§ 5-4-5-1 BICYCLE PARKING STANDARDS.
   Secure bicycle parking facilities shall be required as conditions of
approval for all new major activity centers, public and private places of
assembly, and commercial or industrial developments.
(Ord. 533, passed 8-16-2005)
§ 5-4-6 PERFORMANCE STANDARDS.
   (A)   Commercial and industrial regulations and conditions. All uses
permitted in the C-1, DTC, C-2, C-3, M-1 and M-2 Districts shall be subject to
the following regulations.
   (B)   Regulations. These regulations shall be conditions of all permitted
uses of §§
5-3-9  and
5-3-10  of this title.
      1.   Odors, glare or heat created by or resulting directly or indirectly
from any use shall not be perceptible at any point beyond the lot boundaries
where it abuts residential districts.
      2.   Discharge into the atmosphere of air contaminants, including, but
not limited to, sulfur compounds, smoke, charred paper, dust, soot, grime,
carbon, noxious acids, fumes, gases, mist, odors or particulate matter or any
combination thereof, from any single source of emission whatsoever, shall not
be permitted which exceeds the legally permissible discharge limits, if any,
established by state or local code and enforced by the air pollution control
district of the county.
      3.   Industrial activities shall be of such nature as not to cause damage
or substantial jeopardy to the health or safety of persons, animals, vegetation
or other forms of property.
      4.   Outdoor storage shall be screened with a solid decorative masonry
wall, and shall not be visible beyond the required height of the screening.
      5.   Water supply, drainage, rubbish and waste disposal systems and
practices shall reflect conformance with all applicable codes and standards
relating to public safety, health and sanitation and public works of the city.
      6.   Noise or vibration created by or resulting from any industrial
machinery or process shall not be discernible without instruments at the lot
boundaries.
      7.   Roof mounted and detached mechanical equipment shall be acoustically
baffled to prevent noise from exceeding 55 dB(A) measured at the nearest
residential property line.
(Ord. 533, passed 8-16-2005)
§ 5-4-7 STREET DEVELOPMENT.
   (A)   Applicability. The provisions of this section are applicable in all
zones of the city without exception or limitation.
   (B)   Intent. The intent of this section is to provide a uniform procedure
for the installation of improvements in the city, to impose reasonable property
development requirements as a condition of the approval or issuance of any
occupancy permit, building permit, use permit, variance or rezoning, and to
require orderly development and improvement of property consistent with public
health and safety for the good of the general public.
   (C)   When improvements are required.
      1.   Except as provided in subsection (E) of this section, no occupancy
permit, building permit, use permit, variance or rezoning shall be issued or
approved unless the applicant’s plans approved by the city include provisions
for the construction of curb, gutter, sidewalk, surface drainage improvements
or any other public improvements required for the property by any other
ordinance.
      2.   No occupancy permit for any building shall be approved unless the
required public improvements have been installed and approved by the city.
Standards for new street development can be altered or refined through the
specific plan or planned unit development process when it can be demonstrated
that the projected traffic flows can be accommodated.
   (D)   Street development agreement. If the Planning Department determines
that the applicant does not have to construct the required street improvements
on or about the time the permit, variance or rezoning is issued or approved,
then the applicant shall sign a recordable street improvement agreement which
will provide that the applicant agrees to construct the improvements when
required by the city and that if applicant fails to construct the improvements
when required the city shall have the right to have those improvements
constructed at applicant’s expense and to have those costs become a lien upon
applicant’s property, added to the next tax bill, and collected in the same
manner as real property taxes on the property are collected.
   (E)   Exceptions.
      1.   This section shall not apply to occupancy permits and building
permits where the owner and/or tenant of the property intends to have
construction work performed to the property and where:
         (a)   The cost of such construction work (labor and materials
included) is considered normal by the city;
         (b)   The construction work involves only ordinary repairs and
maintenance (including the repair or replacement of nonbearing walls, fixtures,
wiring or plumbing) provided that the cost of all such repairs (labor and
materials included) do not exceed 10% of the then current replacement cost of
the structure and provided that the existing square footage or height of the
structure shall not be increased; or
         (c)   Energy conservation improvements.
      2.   For purposes of this section, the cost of the construction of motor
vehicle parking lots shall be included in the cost calculation of subsection
(E)1. of this section.
   (F)   Appeal. Any applicant for any permit, variance, rezoning or building
permit who is dissatisfied by the application of this section shall have the
right to appeal to the City Council provided notice of appeal is filed within
ten days of the decision of the Planning Commission.
   (G)   Effective date. This section shall be and is hereby declared to be in
full force and effect from and after 30 days after the date of passage and
adoption and shall be published by one insertion in the Livingston Chronicle, a
newspaper of general circulation in the city within 15 days from and after its
final passage.
(Ord. 533, passed 8-16-2005; Ord. 610, passed 2-18-2014)
§ 5-4-8 TREE PRESERVATION.
   (A)   Intent. The purpose of this section is for the preservation and
protection of mature trees on private property.
   (B)   Applicability. The provisions of this section are applicable in all
zoning districts of the city. Any planting, replacement and/or maintenance of
street trees shall be subject to the provisions of Title 9, Chapter 2 of this
code.
   (C)   Requirements. A tree permit shall be required for the removal of any
mature tree measuring at least six inches in diameter, as measured four feet
above grade at the base of the tree.
   (D)   Replacement. Any tree removal shall require the replacement of new
plantings at the discretion of the city. The city requires a five to one (5:1)
replacement ratio for removal of any protected tree. Each replacement tree
shall be a minimum 24 inch box size, though the city may, as part of the tree
permit process or as part of any required site plan/design review, require
installation of larger trees. When trees larger than 24 inch box size are
installed, the tree replacement ratio of five to one (5:1) may be reduced at
the discretion of the city.
   (E)   Prohibited trees. Any tree that may create unsafe conditions by
excessive dropping of leaves, bark, fruit or seeds shall not be allowed as a
replacement tree. Compliance with §
9-2-7 of this code shall also apply. Unlawful trees include: sycamore, poplar,
willow, American elm, walnut, fruitless mulberry, eucalyptus, conifers, pepper,
palm acacia and Modesto ash. Fruiting trees are prohibited in city easements.
   (F)   Permit issuance. The Planning Department shall issue a tree permit for
the removal of any mature tree upon approval of an application and payment of
required fee.
   (G)   Protection. It shall be unlawful for any person to remove, injure, or
cause death or substantial damage to any tree protected by this section.
   (H)   Conservation. Tree disturbing activities include excessive cutting or
pruning and/or damage to the root zone of live trees. Adverse effects from
grading activities or use of extensive impervious surfaces shall require
protective measures as set forth in this section. All new trees shall be
provided with appropriate irrigation systems and maintenance activities to
ensure tree survival.
   (I)   Exceptions.
      1.   Exceptions to the provisions outlined in this section shall be made
for the following:
         (a)   Removal of trees which are dead or severely diseased; and
         (b)   Removal of trees which present a significant safety risk.
      2.   The city may require a property owner or project applicant to
provide a report prepared by a professional arborist or urban forester to
address when the exception findings can be made.
   (J)   New development. When any new development requires the removal of an
orchard, the developer shall be required to comply with the provisions of §
6-10-27 of this code.
(Ord. 533, passed 8-16-2005)
§ 5-4-9 OUTDOOR DINING AREAS.
§ 5-4-9-1 OUTDOOR DINING AREAS ON PRIVATE PROPERTY, PERMANENT AND ACCESSORY.
   (A)   Purpose and intent.
      1.   While it is the intent of this title to require that businesses be
conducted completely within an enclosed building, the city recognizes the need
to allow certain outdoor facilities which help achieve the goals of the city’s
general plan. Outdoor dining areas, when accompanying indoor restaurants, are
just such facilities; they enhance the village/pedestrian atmosphere of an
area. In recognition of this, it is the purpose of this section to provide for
outdoor dining facilities on private property which add to the pedestrian
ambiance, while mitigating potential visual impacts, parking impacts, traffic
congestion, accessibility and noise impacts. This section also aims to
integrate such activities into the appropriate zones with the least impact to
the surrounding community.
      2.   This section applies to outdoor dining facilities on private
property. For provisions for outdoor dining facilities on public property,
please refer to §
5-4-9-2, Outdoor Dining Areas On Public Property, Permanent And Accessory, of
this chapter.
   (B)   Applicability. This section shall apply only to outdoor dining
facilities on private property which have not been approved by the city as of
November 21, 2006.
   (C)   Review requirements. Outdoor dining areas for all new structures shall
be reviewed as part of the site plan/design review process prior to
construction and only require a conditional use permit for amplified live
entertainment and the service of beer, wine and hard alcohol outdoors. All
outdoor dining facilities for existing structures on private property shall
require an outdoor dining permit, reviewed by the following authorities through
the indicated administrative or discretionary action:
Table 10: Review Requirements for Outdoor Dining Areas for Existing
Structures on Private Property
Threshold for Review Planning Director/    Planning Commission Review/CUP
                     Administrative Review
Table 10: Review Requirements for Outdoor Dining Areas for Existing Structures
on Private Property
Threshold for Review         Planning Director/    Planning Commission Review/
                             Administrative Review CUP
Activities associated with
outdoor dining (per
restaurant, including only   Outdoor dining permit Conditional use permit
outdoor dining on private
property)
Outdoor dining               X
Service of beer and wine                           X
outdoors
Service of hard alcohol                            X
outdoors
Live entertainment           X
nonamplified
Live entertainment amplified                       X
 
   (D)   Minimum standards. The following restrictions shall apply to all
outdoor dining areas on private property in nonresidential and mixed use zones.
      1.   Accessibility, horizontal. Outdoor dining facilities shall not block
access to businesses or to the sidewalk or street. Facilities must comply with
minimum Title 24 of the Cal. Code of Regulations disabled access requirements
and ADA (Americans with Disabilities Act of 1990, being 42 U.S.C. §§ 12101 et
seq.) standards, as determined by the city.
      2.   Encroachment into parking. No outdoor dining area shall occupy any
part of a required parking area.
      3.   Encroachment into public right-of-way. No outdoor dining area shall
encroach upon public right-of-way, unless the dining area has received an
encroachment permit in accordance with §
5-4-9-2 , Outdoor Dining Areas on Public Property, Permanent and Accessory, of
this chapter.
      4.   Height. No outdoor dining area shall exceed the height limit of the
zone, except that tables, chairs, and umbrellas and any safety related
guardrails located on rooftop decks may exceed the height limits of the zone so
long as the permanent structures on which they are located comply with the
height limits of the zone.
      5.   Location. Outdoor dining areas are allowed only when all of the
following criteria apply:
         (a)   The outdoor dining area is accessory to an indoor restaurant
complying with the definition of restaurants as found in §
5-7-2, Definitions of Words and Phrases, of this title; and
         (b)   The restaurant is permitted or conditionally permitted in the
zone in which it is located, as listed in the land use/zoning matrix, §
5-3-15, Table 3 of this title.
      6.   Parking.
         (a)   If outdoor dining is considered, parking requirements for
outdoor dining facilities may be modified or waived by the Planning Commission
or the Planning Director, in accordance with Table 10, Review Requirements for
Outdoor Dining Areas for Existing Structures on Private Property, of this
section, or §
5-4-9-2, Table 11, Review Requirements for Outdoor Dining Areas for Existing
Structures on Public Property, of this chapter if all of the following findings
can be made in addition to the required findings:
            (1)   Public parking is available in close proximity to the
restaurant; and
            (2)   Given the specific conditions of the site and the adjacent
area, the waiver or modification of requirements will not result in inadequate
parking.
      7.   Property owner agreement. The property owner shall provide written
consent for the outdoor dining facilities.
      8.   Sight distance problems. Outdoor dining areas shall not create any
sight distance problems to or from the appropriate streets, parking areas and
loading areas.
      9.   Conditions. Conditions may be added to the project including, but
not limited to, hours of operation, the removal and storage of furniture at
night, decorative fencing, additional landscaping and restrictions on lighting.
   (E)   Required findings. Prior to the approval of an outdoor dining permit
and/or conditional use permit, the following findings shall be made:
      1.   The outdoor dining area contributes to the village/pedestrian
ambiance of the city, in accordance with the city’s general plan;
      2.   The outdoor dining area complies with the standards of this section;
      3.   Any negative visual, noise, traffic, accessibility and parking
impacts associated with the outdoor dining area have been reduced to an
acceptable level, as determined by the city; and
      4.   The outdoor dining facility is compatible with the existing building
to which the facility is attached.
   (F)   Approvals valid for one year. The outdoor dining permit and/or
conditional use permit shall be valid for one year, at which point the
applicant may request, in writing, a permanent permit. No permit/application
fee shall be required for this request. The Planning Director shall renew the
permits, without benefit of a public hearing, if the original findings for the
permit apply. If the original findings for the permit cannot be made, the
outdoor dining permit and/or conditional use permit must be reviewed by the
Planning Commission, for the purpose of modification or revocation of the
permit.
(Ord. 619, passed 6-17-2014)
§ 5-4-9-2 OUTDOOR DINING AREAS ON PUBLIC PROPERTY, PERMANENT AND ACCESSORY.
   (A)   Purpose and intent.
      1.   While it is the intent of the zoning ordinance to require that
businesses be conducted within enclosed buildings, the city recognizes the need
to allow certain outdoor facilities on public property which help achieve the
goals of the city’s general plan. Outdoor dining areas, when accompanying
indoor restaurants, are just such facilities; they enhance the village/
pedestrian atmosphere of an area. In recognition of this, it is the purpose of
this section to provide for outdoor dining facilities on public property which
add to the pedestrian ambiance, while mitigating potential visual impacts,
parking impacts, traffic congestion, accessibility, noise impacts, impacts on
pedestrian movement, or public safety impacts. This section also aims to
integrate such activities into the appropriate zones with the least impact to
the surrounding community.
      2.   This section applies to outdoor dining facilities on public
property. For provisions for outdoor dining facilities on private property,
please refer to §
5-4-9-1, Outdoor Dining Areas on Private Property, Permanent and Accessory, of
this chapter.
   (B)   Applicability. This section shall apply only to outdoor dining
facilities on public property which have not been approved by the city as of
November 21, 2006.
   (C)   Review requirements. Outdoor dining areas for all new structures shall
be reviewed as part of the site plan/design review process prior to
construction and only require a conditional use permit for amplified live
entertainment and the service of beer, wine and hard alcohol outdoors. All
outdoor dining facilities for existing structures on public property shall
require an encroachment permit, reviewed by the following authorities through
the indicated administrative or discretionary action:
Table 11: Review Requirements for Outdoor Dining Areas for Existing
Structures on Public Property
Threshold for Review Director of Public Works/ Planning Commission Review/CUP
                     Administrative Permit
Table 11: Review Requirements for Outdoor Dining Areas for Existing
Structures on Public Property
Threshold for Review       Director of Public Works/ Planning Commission
                           Administrative Permit     Review/CUP
Activities associated with
outdoor dining facility
(per restaurant, including Encroachment permit       Conditional use permit
only outdoor dining on
public property)
Outdoor dining             X
Service of beer and wine                             X
outdoors
Service of hard alcohol                              X
outdoors
Live entertainment         X
nonamplified
Live entertainment                                   X
amplified
 
   (D)   Minimum standards. The following restrictions shall apply to outdoor
dining areas on public property in nonresidential and mixed use zones, where
allowed.
      1.   Accessibility, vertical. Umbrellas and similar objects related to
the facilities must be located so that they do not endanger the safety of
pedestrians or block access to businesses or to the sidewalk or street. A
minimum seven-foot clearance, as measured from the ground below an umbrella or
similar object to the lowest portion of the umbrella shade or ribs, is
recommended as a guideline, with the actual clearance to be determined through
the encroachment permit review process and subject to Title 24 of the Cal. Code
of Regulations disabled access requirements and ADA (Americans with
Disabilities Act of 1990, being 42 U.S.C. §§ 12101 et seq.) standards.
      2.   Indemnification. The permittee shall execute an agreement in a form
acceptable to the City Attorney which defends, indemnifies and holds the city
and its employees harmless from and against any loss or damage arising from the
use or existence of the improvements or encroachment authorized under the
encroachment permit.
      3.   Insurance. The permittee shall obtain and maintain in full force
comprehensive general liability, broad form property damage and blanket
contractual liability insurance in a combined single limit amount, per claim
and aggregate, of at least $1,000,000 covering the permittee’s operations on
the sidewalk. Such insurance shall name, on a special endorsement form, the
city, its elected and appointed boards, officers, agents and employees as
additional insureds. The policy of insurance or special endorsement form shall
state that the insurance is provided on an occurrence basis and is primary to
the city’s insurance. A certificate of insurance shall contain provisions that
prohibit cancellations, modifications or lapse without 30 days’ prior written
notice to the city.
      4.   Maintenance. The public right-of-way will be maintained at a level
acceptable to the city.
      5.   Other standards. Outdoor dining facilities on public property shall
comply with the standards for outdoor dining facilities for private property,
in accordance with §
5-4-9-1(D), Minimum Standards, of this chapter.
      6.   Removal of facilities.
         (a)   All materials associated with the outdoor dining facility on
public property, including, but not limited to, tables, chairs, umbrellas, and
partitions, shall be removed each day at the close of business and not
reestablished until the opening of business the following day; and
         (b)   The permittee shall immediately remove all materials on public
property associated with the outdoor dining facility at the city’s request to
allow the city to perform maintenance, repair, replacement and installation of
new public facilities and private utilities.
      7.   Setback from alley, driveway or street. When an outdoor dining area
is located directly adjacent to an alley, driveway or street, a five-foot
setback shall be maintained from the alley, driveway or street. This setback
may be reduced to zero feet by the approving authority in circumstances where
the public safety may be maintained to the satisfaction of the City Engineer.
For setbacks at street corners, please refer to the following subsection (D)8.
      8.   Setback, street corner. At street intersections, the triangular area
formed by measuring 25 feet along the property line of each frontage from the
intersection of the property lines at the corner shall remain free of outdoor
dining facilities on public property. This setback may be reduced to ten feet
by the approving authority in circumstances where the public safety may be
maintained to the satisfaction of the city, particularly the City Engineer.
      9.   Sidewalk width. A minimum public sidewalk width of five feet shall
be maintained. (Umbrellas and similar objects which comply with subsection
(D)1. of this section may protrude into this minimum sidewalk width.) The
minimum sidewalk width may be reduced to four feet by the approving authority
in circumstances where the public safety may be maintained to the satisfaction
of the City Engineer.
   Figure 4: Street Corner Setbacks for Outdoor Dining Areas on Public Property
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/bfbdf7ef948580a5f83ee4a174cfd5b656b27a6b/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2984.png]
 
      10.   Structures in the public right-of-way. Structures related to the
outdoor dining facility which cannot be removed at the close of business each
day shall only be allowed if specifically allowed by the encroachment permit by
the Director of Public Works.
      11.   Conditions. Conditions may be added to the project including, but
not limited to, hours of operation, the removal and storage of furniture at
night, decorative fencing, additional landscaping and restrictions on lighting.
      12.   Termination of encroachment permit. The public right-of-way shall
be left free of debris, litter or any other evidence of the outdoor dining
facility upon termination or removal of the use, and shall thereafter be used
pursuant to the provisions of this code.
   (E)   Required findings. Prior to the approval of an encroachment permit
and/or conditional use permit, the following findings shall be made:
      1.   The required four findings for the approval of outdoor dining
permit, in accordance with §
5-4-9-1(E), Required Findings, of this chapter;
      2.   The sidewalk’s public use, including pedestrian, transit and
business services needs, not limited to loading zones, bus stops, public phones
and benches, is not restricted by the facility;
      3.   Pedestrian traffic volumes and accessibility are not inhibited by
the facility;
      4.   Street trees, utilities, fire equipment and similar items are not
adversely impacted by the facility; and
      5.   Public parking is not adversely impacted.
   (F)   Approvals valid for one year. The encroachment permit and/or
conditional use permit shall be valid for one year, at which point the
applicant may request, in writing, a permanent permit. No permit/application
fee shall be required for this request. The Director of Public Works shall
renew the permits, without benefit of a public hearing, if the original
findings for the permit apply. If the original findings for the permit cannot
be made, the encroachment permit and/or conditional use permit must be reviewed
by the Planning Commission, for the purpose of modification or revocation of
the permit.
(Ord. 619, passed 6-17-2014)
CHAPTER 5: SPECIFIC USE REGULATIONS
Section
5-5-1 Density bonuses
5-5-2 Home occupations
5-5-3 Mobilehomes, trailers or boats, prefabricated structures
5-5-3-1 Mobilehomes on private lots
5-5-4 Multi-family residential development
5-5-5 Restrictions
5-5-6 Accessory dwelling units
5-5-7 Adult entertainment businesses
5-5-8 Wireless communication facilities
5-5-9 Recycling facilities
5-5-10 Medicinal marijuana dispensaries
5-5-11 Body art establishments
5-5-12 Cultivation of seasonal or annual crops
5-5-13 Smoke shops and/or smoking lounges
5-5-14 Commercial cannabis activity
5-5-15 Personal cannabis cultivation
§ 5-5-1 DENSITY BONUSES.
   (A)   Incentives. It is the purpose of this section to provide incentives
for the production of housing or for the donation of land for housing for very
low income, or affordable households in accordance with Cal. Gov’t Code §§
65915 and 65917. It is the intent of the city to facilitate the development of
low and moderate income housing, including senior housing and special needs
populations, and to implement the goals and policies of the city’s housing
element.
   (B)   Eligibility. In order to be eligible for a density bonus and other
incentives as provided by this section, a proposed residential development
shall consist of five or more dwelling units and can be designed and
constructed so that at least:
      1.   Ten percent of the total units of a housing development are for low
income households;
      2.   Five percent of the total units of a housing development are for
very low income households;
      3.   The total number of dwelling units of a housing development are for
qualifying residents, such as a senior citizen housing development; or
      4.   Ten percent of the total dwelling units in a condominium project for
persons and families of moderate income.
   (C)   Qualifying project. A qualifying project shall be allowed a minimum
20% increase, with a maximum 35% increase, in the maximum number of dwelling
units allowed by the zoning district and general plan land use designation
applicable to the lot(s) as of the date of the permit application. A single
development project shall not be granted more than three density bonuses.
   (D)   Land donation. A developer may donate land for very low income housing
that is sufficient to provide at least 10%, and up to 35%, of the units in the
development for very low income households. For a 10% land donation, a
developer receives a 15% density bonus above the maximum allowable density for
the entire development. The donated land shall be at least one acre in size or
of sufficient size to permit development of at least 40 units, has the
appropriate general plan designation, is appropriately zoned for development as
affordable housing, and is or will be served by adequate public facilities and
infrastructure. The land shall have appropriate zoning and development
standards to make the development of the affordable units feasible.
   (E)   Agreement.
      1.   Pursuant to Cal. Gov’t Code § 65915(b), if a developer seeks and
agrees to construct at least 10% of the total units for lower income
households, at least 5% of the total units for very low income households, a
senior citizen housing development or at least 10% of the total units in a
condominium project for persons and families of moderate income, the developer
is entitled to one density bonus and at least one additional concession or
incentive.
      2.   The developer shall receive two incentives or concessions for
projects that include at least 20% of the total units for lower income
households, at least 10% for very low income households, or at least 20% for
persons and families of moderate income in a condominium or planned
development.
      3.   The developer shall receive three incentives or concessions for
projects that include at least 30% of the total units for lower income
households, at least 15% for very low income households, or at least 30% for
persons and families of moderate income in a condominium or planned
development.
      4.   The City Council shall approve one or more of these incentives,
listed below, unless it makes a written finding that the additional concession
or incentive is not required in order for the sales price or rent for the
targeted dwelling units to be set in compliance with state law (Cal Gov’t Code
§ 65915(c)):
         (a)   A reduction in the site development and/or design standards of
this title (e.g., reduction in setback or parking requirements, or an increase
in building coverage requirements);
         (b)   Approval of mixed use development in conjunction with the
housing project if the nonresidential land uses will reduce the cost of the
housing project, and the nonresidential land uses are compatible with the
housing project and surrounding development; and
         (c)   Other regulatory incentives or concessions proposed by the
developer or the city that will result in identifiable cost reductions.
   (F)   Location of units. The location of density bonus units within the
qualifying project may be at the discretion of the developer. However, the
inclusionary units shall be reasonably dispersed throughout the development
(where feasible), shall contain on average the same number of bedrooms as the
noninclusionary units in the development, and shall be compatible with the
design or use of the remaining units in terms of appearance, materials and
quality finish.
   (G)   Project management plan. Prior to issuance of any building permit for
the project, a project management plan, in the form of a written contract,
shall be executed by and between the applicant/developer, housing agency and
city. The contract shall be a recorded document approved by the City Council as
to form and content, and shall set forth sales, resales and rental restrictions
to ensure that designated units remain available as low and moderate income,
senior housing or special needs units, as applicable, for the term of the
project under Cal. Gov’t Code § 65915(c).
   (H)   Provisions. The management plan shall provide for the housing agency
to ensure the financial or circumstantial eligibility of applicants for
purchase/rental of the low and moderate income or special needs and senior
housing for the term of the project. If requested by the housing agency, the
management plan shall provide for reimbursement by the applicant/developer the
costs to the housing agency of administering the management plan.
   (I)   Requests for approval.
      1.   All requests for density bonuses and other incentives outlined in
this section shall be approved by the City Council. Findings shall be
consistent with applicable provisions of current state law at the time of
permit application.
      2.   Any application for the density bonus shall be in the form and
method prescribed by the Planning Director and accompanied by plot and
development plans necessary to determine compliance with the purpose, intent
and development standards prescribed herein. The development plans shall
contain sufficient cost and market data based upon the land cost per dwelling
unit to assure any density bonus concessions granted are necessary to attain
the affordability targets mandated by Cal. Gov’t Code § 65915 and Senate Bill
1818.
(Ord. 533, passed 8-16-2005)
§ 5-5-2 HOME OCCUPATIONS.
   The conduct of a home occupation shall be subject to securing a home
occupation permit from the Planning Department in accordance with the
provisions of this section.
   (A)   Regulations. Home occupations shall comply with each of the following
regulations.
      1.   The home occupation use shall be confined to one room within the
dwelling unit or accessory building.
      2.   Such occupations shall not require use of mechanical equipment not
customarily found in dwellings and in no case shall employ power driven
equipment using motors of more than one horsepower capacity.
      3.   The use shall not generate vehicular or pedestrian traffic beyond
that normal to the residential use of the structure.
      4.   There shall be no excessive or unsightly storage of materials and/or
supplies indoor or outdoor.
      5.   There shall be no external alteration of appearances of the dwelling
in which the home occupation is conducted which would reflect the existence of
said home occupation, and there shall be no exterior sign except a nameplate
flat mounted against the wall of the building on the parcel; such nameplate
shall not exceed two square feet in surface area.
      6.   Such occupation shall be conducted entirely by resident occupants;
and no person not a resident of the premises shall be employed in connection
therewith.
      7.   No more than one home occupation shall be granted per dwelling unit.
      8.   No home occupation permit shall be issued which involves food
handling, processing or packing.
      9.   There shall be no addition, alteration or remodeling permitted in
connection with any home occupation.
      10.   No home occupation permit shall be permitted which creates noise,
odor, dust, vibration, fumes or smoke readily discernible at the exterior
boundaries of the parcel on which they are situated.
      11.   All home occupations shall comply with all federal, state, county
and local regulations, statutes and provisions.
      12   No home occupation shall be permitted which will create any
electrical disturbance adversely affecting the operation of any equipment
located in any other dwelling unit or on property not owned by the persons
conducting said home occupation.
      13.   The home occupation shall be clearly incidental to the use of a
structure as a dwelling. The floor area used for such occupation shall not
exceed one-fourth of the floor area of the main residence, and shall not be
more than 400 square feet in any case.
      14.   There shall be no sales or display of products not produced on the
premises in connection with such home occupation, and there shall be no window
display to attract customers.
      15.   All commercial advertising includes the words: “by telephone
appointment only” and which shall be prominently emphasized in said
advertisement.
      16.   Any instruction permitted under this section shall be restricted to
a one on one basis.
   (B)   Exception to regulations. Notwithstanding the limitations outlined in
subsection (A) of this section, any person who is severely impaired or
handicapped as defined in the Cal. Welfare and Institutions Code § 12304 may be
allowed in the following, provided a home occupation is otherwise approved:
      1.   Employment of a maximum of one person who does not reside in the
dwelling unit; and
      2.   Use of more than one room in the dwelling.
   (C)   Prohibited uses. The following uses are not permitted as home
occupations:
      1.   Beauty parlors, barbershops or any similar service enterprise;
      2.   Body art establishments, medical, dental and chiropractic clinics
and offices and medicinal marijuana dispensaries;
      3.   Commercial photography studios;
      4.   Music, dancing, business, sewing or other school, which do not
comply with subsection (A)16. of this section;
      5.   Real estate, astrology and palm reading offices or enterprises;
      6.   Repair or conditioning of major household appliances, including
refrigerators, freezers, clothes washers and dryers, dishwashers, stoves,
heating and air conditioning equipment, and lawn mowers, including all small
engine repair;
      7.   Sale of firearms or ammunition;
      8.   Uses that do not meet regulations of subsection (A) of this section;
      9.   Uses that entail the repair, manufacture, processing or alteration
of goods, materials or objects, including upholstering;
      10.   Uses that involve the harboring, training or raising of dogs, cats,
birds or other animals; and
      11.   Uses which involve vehicle painting, repair and/or body and fender
work.
   (D)   Application procedure. Home occupation permit applications shall be
filed by the person responsible for the conduct of the occupation for which the
permit is sought on forms furnished by the Planning Department.
   (E)   Issuance of permit. No home occupation use in a dwelling shall be
established or continued unless and until a home occupation permit shall have
been issued by the Planning Director. The Planning Director shall not issue a
home occupation permit unless the use applied for meets each and every one of
the standards and conditions set forth in subsection (A) of this section.
   (F)   Duration. Each home occupation permit shall be issued for a period not
to exceed one year.
   (G)   Renewal procedure. Renewal of a home occupation permit shall be
treated as a new application.
   (H)   Revocation.
      1.   Upon a violation of any applicable provisions of subsection (A) of
this section or of any requirement or requirements imposed as a condition of
issuance of any home occupation permit, such permit shall be suspended
automatically and the holder of the permit so notified by the Planning
Director. All operations authorized by the terms of the permit shall cease
during the time it is suspended.
      2.   If the holder of the permit does not, within 30 days, satisfy the
Planning Director that all requirements, conditions and regulations will be
complied with, the Planning Director shall revoke the permit.
   (I)   Appeal. Following the denial or revocation of a home occupation permit
by the Planning Director, the applicant may appeal to the Planning Commission.
(Ord. 533, passed 8-16-2005; Ord. 541, passed 4-18-2006)
§ 5-5-3 MOBILEHOMES, TRAILERS OR BOATS, PREFABRICATED STRUCTURES.
   (A)   A MOBILEHOME, TRAILER HOME or RECREATIONAL VEHICLE (RV), subject to
the provisions of this section, is hereby defined as any unit or structure
designed, constructed and/or used for living or sleeping purposes for human
habitation, which is equipped with wheels or similar devices for the purpose of
transporting said unit and/or structure from place to place, whether by motive
power or by other means.
   (B)   Mobilehomes, trailer homes or RVs may be used for human habitation or
occupied for living or sleeping quarters only when installed within a licensed
trailer court, trailer park or mobilehome park. (See §
5-5-3-1 of this chapter for mobilehomes on private lots.) Mobilehomes, trailer
homes, RVs or boats maintained on any lot, piece or parcel of land other than a
trailer court, trailer park or mobilehome park shall comply with the following
conditions.
      1.   Such vehicle, boat or carport shall not be maintained in any
required front yard.
      2.   Such vehicle or boat may be parked within an interior side or rear
yard setback. Prefabricated carports and similar structures shall be situated
not closer than five feet to any side property line and five feet from a rear
property line.
      3.   Such vehicle or boat shall not be used for sleeping quarters nor
shall any sanitary or cooking facilities contained therein be used.
      4.   The Chief of Police of the city may grant permission in writing for
a mobilehome, trailer home or RV to be used for sleeping purposes only for a
reasonable period of time to a bona fide visitor or guest of any resident of
the city if said mobilehome, trailer home or RV is parked on private property
and does not constitute a health hazard or nuisance.
(Ord. 565, passed 3-18-2008)
§ 5-5-3-1 MOBILEHOMES ON PRIVATE LOTS.
   (A)   It is the purpose of this section, to allow the placement of
mobilehomes on R-1 zoned lots only. The mobilehome would have to conform to
minimum lot size and setbacks for the R-1 zone in which it is located and in
addition, meet the criterion set forth in this section.
   (B)   This section reflects the concern over the increased costs of housing
and the need to provide new opportunities for affordable housing.
      1.   General requirements. A mobilehome, under certain conditions, may be
placed on a foundation system on a private lot in the city’s areas zoned for
single-family dwellings (R-1 District).
      2.   Design review requirements. The following requirements for a
mobilehome to be placed upon a permanent foundation on a single-family
residential lot must be met.
         (a)   Eligibility.
            (1)   The mobilehome is five years old or newer on the day of
application, and bears the insignia of approval by the U.S. Department of
Housing and Urban Development, and has not been altered in violation of
applicable codes.
            (2)   The application is determined compatible with the residential
area in which the mobilehome is proposed to be located.
            (3)   Occupancy is only a residential type use.
            (4)   Subject to all provisions of the zoning ordinance applicable
to residential structures.
            (5)   Be attached to a permanent foundation that complies with all
building regulations.
            (6)   Have a minimum width of 24 feet.
            (7)   The exterior covering material shall extend to the ground,
except that where a solid concrete or masonry perimeter foundation is used, the
exterior covering material must extend at least to the top of the foundation.
Exterior wall materials shall be limited to stucco, wood, brick, stone,
decorative concrete block or other materials commonly used in the area. No
shiny or reflective materials shall be permitted which are more reflective than
semigloss paint.
            (8)   Have a roof with a pitch of not less than two inch vertical
use for every 12 inch of horizontal seen and consisting of composition
shingles, shake shingles, rock or concrete or adobe tile, or similar other
materials commonly used in the area. No shiny or reflective materials shall be
permitted which are more reflective than semigloss paint.
            (9)   Have a minimum of 12-inch eave overhang on all four sides.
            (10)   All windows, doors and gable ends shall be architecturally
treated with a trim, with materials no more reflective than semigloss paint.
            (11)   Fascia boards shall be used on all sides of the structure to
screen exposed rafters, vents and the like to give the roof a finished edge.
            (13)   Two enclosed or covered off-street parking spaces of
compatible wall materials and roofing materials of dwelling unit.
            (14)   Screening shall be provided for all mechanical and
electrical equipment so that they are not visible from the public right-of-way.
      3.   Building permit. Prior to the installation of a mobilehome on a
permanent foundation system, the mobilehome owner or a licensed contractor
shall obtain a building permit from the Building Department in accordance with
the requirements of Cal. Health and Safety Code § 18551.
      4.   Appeal. Within ten days following the date of a decision of the city
staff, the decision may be appealed to the Planning Commission by the
applicant, or any other interested party. An appeal shall be filed with the
Planning Commission Secretary. The appeal shall state the basis of appealing.
      5.   Declaration of emergency. It is hereby found and declared that an
emergency affecting the public health, peace or safety exists necessitating the
passage of this section as an emergency measure in that without said passage,
mobilehomes could be allowed in the city without minimal development standards.
(Ord. 533, passed 8-16-2005)
§ 5-5-4 MULTI-FAMILY RESIDENTIAL DEVELOPMENT.
   The following supplemental regulations shall apply to multi-family
residential development.
   (A)   Intent. The purpose of these regulations is to prescribe reasonable
standards for multi-family residential development in addition to other
applicable city ordinances.
   (B)   Development standards.
      1.   Off-street parking. Parking spaces for each dwelling unit shall be
provided consistent with the requirements of §
5-4-5 of this title.
      2.   Private open space. Each dwelling unit shall have at least one
appurtenant private patio, deck, balcony, atrium or other outdoor private area
contiguous to the unit in a single undivided area of not less than 120 square
feet.
      3.   Shared open space. An outdoor common area of at least 100 square
feet per dwelling unit shall be provided for outdoor active and passive group
recreation. Such common areas shall not include driveways, parking areas or
required front yards.
      4.   Private storage space. Each dwelling unit shall have at least 30
cubic feet of enclosed, weatherproofed and lockable storage space.
      5.   Boat and trailer storage. Boat, trailer and recreational vehicle
storage shall be limited as described in §
5-5-3 of this chapter, unless such vehicles are prohibited by restrictive
covenants.
      6.   Laundry facilities. Adequate laundry facilities shall be provided
by:
         (a)   Constructing a laundry room with the equivalent of one standard
washing machine for each five dwelling units and an equivalent in automatic
clothes dryers; or
         (b)   Providing properly designed and plumbed areas within each
dwelling unit for washing and drying clothes.
      7.   Lighting and security. Night and security lighting and security
measures shall be provided as necessary to ensure safe and convenient access
and use of multi-family residential facilities.
      8.   Landscaping. All multi-family residential development shall include
landscape plans which provide for substantial front yard landscape screening
and, as appropriate, side and rear yard landscaping and as prescribed in §
5-4-4 of this title. Landscaping shall be consistent with the design of the
development and enhance the visual quality of the streetscape, and assist in
achieving design consistency with the character of the neighborhood.
      9.   Permitted density. Density limits for multi-family housing shall not
exceed the density limitations as established by the general plan land use
designation for the property. Density bonuses for low and moderate income or
special needs housing shall also be as established by the housing element and
applicable state housing law.
      10.   Design. Site plan and design review shall be as required by §
5-6-7 of this title. Staggered and/or reversed unit plans that provide
variability in the outward appearance of the building is strongly suggested, as
are building materials and design that ensure consistency with adjacent land
uses and structures. Compliance with provisions of the city’s design guide is
required.
      11.   Height limits and setbacks. Yard setback and height limits shall be
as established by the site’s zoning district and the design review process.
Varying front yard setbacks within the same structure is encouraged, as is
limiting second story views to adjacent property.
      12.   Trash enclosures. Trash enclosures shall be located conveniently
for residents and out of vehicular circulation areas. Trash enclosures may not
be located within five feet of side or rear property lines or the front yard
setback of the site. Trash enclosures shall be of a design that is compatible
with the development, is covered, and screened with landscape.
      13.   Gathering rooms. Where eight or more units are proposed, and in
addition to the above requirements, special consideration shall be given to
providing adequate gathering rooms or locations for facility residents, based
on a requirement of at least 30 square feet per dwelling unit.
      14.   Street access. Multi-family residential developments with more than
25 units shall have direct access to a collector or arterial street.
   (C)   Development standards for the interface between multi-family
residential and single-family residential.
      1.   Outdoor recreational areas, game courts, pools and solid waste
collection areas on multi-family properties shall be oriented away from
adjacent properties planned for single-family residential.
      2.   Multi-family parking areas, garages, other structures and access
drives shall be separated from adjacent properties planned for single-family
residential with a ten-foot landscaped setback containing deciduous and
evergreen trees.
      3.   Multi-family buildings greater than 15 feet in height shall be
prohibited within 25 feet of abutting property planned for single-family
residential. An additional ten feet of setback shall be required for each
additional story. Second story views to adjacent residential uses are
prohibited.
(Ord. 533, passed 8-16-2005)
§ 5-5-5 RESTRICTIONS.
   (A)   Outside storage.
      1.   Residential districts. No outside storage which constitutes a
salvage yard (200 square feet or larger in area) is permitted in any
residential district. Additionally, no salvage yard materials collectively
covering an area of 100 square feet or more may be stored in a front yard of a
residential district property unless adequately screened from off site views,
as determined by the Planning Director.
      2.   Commercial and industrial districts. Outside storage shall be
screened from view and shall not be visible above the required screening.
Screening shall consist of solid decorative masonry walls and landscaping.
   (B)   Limitation on permitted uses.
      1.   No operation conducted on the premises shall cause an unreasonable
amount of noise, odor, dust, mud, smoke, vibration or electrical interference,
detectable off the premises.
      2.   Application of pesticides or herbicides with any active ingredients
containing diazinon or chlorpyrifos is prohibited.
   (C)   Development standards for the interface between commercial or office
uses and residential uses.
      1.   A landscaped setback of at least ten feet wide containing deciduous
and evergreen trees shall be planted and maintained along the property line
between commercial and office uses and residential properties that have a
common property line.
      2.   A masonry wall six feet in height shall be erected along the
property line where commercial and office uses have a common property line with
residentially designated properties.
      3.   A masonry wall three and one-half feet in height shall be erected
along the setback line ten feet from the parallel with local streets abutting
planned residential uses.
      4.   All commercial loading and storage areas shall be screened from view
of adjoining residential property by a combination of landscaped planting and a
masonry wall. Loading areas shall be enclosed and be located so that there are
no noise impacts to adjacent residential properties. All storage shall be
within an enclosed structure.
   (D)   Industry standards.
      1.   All industrial activity shall be located with access to major
streets, truck routes and rail service.
      2.   Industrial development shall not create significant off site
circulation, noise, dust, odor, visual and hazardous materials impacts that
cannot be adequately mitigated.
      3.   The minimum building setback from any major street right-of-way line
shall be 40 feet.
      4.   There shall be a minimum 15-foot landscaped area adjacent to any
major street right-of-way.
      5.   The number of driveway approaches shall not be greater than two for
individual parcels.
   (E)   Development standards between industrial properties and residential
uses.
      1.   Where properties planned for industry abut properties planned for
residential uses, the minimum setback for any new industrial building shall be
75 feet.
      2.   On properties planned for industry, a landscaped setback 20 feet
wide containing deciduous and evergreen trees shall be planted and maintained
along the property line with abutting property planned for residential uses and
along abutting local streets.
      3.   A masonry wall shall be erected along the property line between
properties planned for industry and properties planned for residential uses.
Where this wall is in the front yard setback, it shall be three feet;
otherwise, it shall be six feet or such greater distance as may be necessary to
mitigate impacts.
      4.   A masonry wall three feet in height, an earth berm three feet in
height, or any combination of wall and berm shall be erected along the setback
line 20 feet from and parallel with local streets abutting residential uses.
   (F)   Miscellaneous development standards. A right-of-way that is essential
to the circulation system shall be dedicated and/or developed to the
appropriate extent and width when a zone change to a greater density, division
of property or development occurs. Large development occurring in commercial
and industrial districts shall be encouraged to incorporate transit passenger
facilities, bicycle racks or lockers, shower facilities, as well as on site
services for eating, mailing, banking and the like, as ways to encourage
alternative modes for commuter trips.
(Ord. 533, passed 8-16-2005; Ord. 629, passed 2-21-2017)
§ 5-5-6 ACCESSORY DWELLING UNITS.
   (A)   Purpose and intent.
      1.   The purpose of these regulations is to provide clearly stated land
use regulations and development standards that allow for the development of
accessory dwellings in compliance with applicable state regulations and local
land use policy. In accordance with the applicable sections of Cal. Gov’t Code
§§ 65852.2 and 65852.22, this section is intended to define and provide
standards by which the city staff shall evaluate and ministerially approve an
application for the siting and construction of an accessory dwelling unit (ADU)
or junior accessory dwelling unit (JADU).
      2.   These regulations are intended to encourage the development of
accessory dwellings providing for the expanded variety of housing opportunities
for all income levels while retaining compatibility with surrounding uses.
   (B)   Applicability. The regulations set forth in this section shall apply
in all R-E (Estate Residential District), R-1 (Low Density Residential
District), R-2 (Medium Density Residential District), R-3 (High Density
Residential District) and DTC (Downtown Commercial District) zoning districts.
These regulations shall also apply in all PD (Planned Development Overlay
District) zoning districts permitting residential uses.
   (C)   Permitted uses. Accessory dwelling units and junior accessory dwelling
units are permitted by right in residential zoning districts pursuant to §
5-3-15 , in compliance with the regulations herein.
   (D)   Provisions for development. The following provisions shall apply to
permit applications for new accessory dwelling units.
      1.   Permits for ADUs and JADUs shall be in compliance with underlying
zoning requirements and regulations, except as may be provided in this section.
      2.   An accessory dwelling unit shall not be considered a new residential
use unless it is built concurrently with the new construction of a single-
family unit or multi-family building.
      3.   An accessory dwelling unit shall not count towards density
requirements on the lot.
      4.   An accessory dwelling unit shall not count towards determining the
building square footage in calculating the maximum lot coverage percentage.
      5.   Accessory dwelling units shall have independent exterior access from
the primary dwelling. No passageway to the primary dwelling shall be required.
      6.   Accessory dwelling units shall be in compliance with applicable
building, fire and other health and safety codes. Fire sprinklers shall not be
required for an accessory dwelling unit if sprinklers are not required for the
primary dwelling unit.
      7.   Accessory dwelling units are required to provide solar panels if the
unit(s) is a newly constructed, non-manufactured, detached ADU. Per the
California Energy Commission (CEC), the panels can be installed on the ADU or
the primary dwelling unit. Accessory dwelling units that are constructed within
existing space, or as an addition to existing homes, including detached
additions where an existing detached building is converted from non-residential
to residential space, are not subject to the Energy Code requirement to provide
solar panels.
   (E)   Permitted locations and types.
      1.   ADUs are permitted in all zoning districts allowing single-family or
multi-family residential uses on lots with existing or proposed dwellings.
      2.   An ADU may be established in the following methods:
         (a)   Attached to, or located within, an existing or proposed primary
dwelling;
         (b)   As a new detached structure, or located within or attached to an
accessory structure, including garages, storage areas or similar structures;
         (c)   As a conversion of existing attached or detached accessory
structures, including garages, storage areas or similar structures; or
         (d)   As a reconstruction of an existing structure or living area that
is proposed to be converted to an ADU, or a portion thereof, in the same
location and to the same dimensions and setbacks as the existing structure.
      3.   One ADU and one JADU may be established per lot with a proposed or
existing single-family dwelling if all of the following apply:
         (a)   The ADU or JADU is within the proposed space of a single-family
dwelling or existing space of a single-family dwelling or accessory structure
and may include an expansion of not more than 150 square feet beyond the same
physical dimensions as the accessory structure. An expansion beyond the
physical dimensions of the existing accessory structure shall be limited to
accommodating ingress and egress;
         (b)   The space has exterior access from the proposed or existing
single-family dwelling;
         (c)   The side and rear setbacks are sufficient for fire and safety
access; or
         (d)   The junior accessory dwelling unit complies with the
requirements of Cal. Gov’t Code § 65852.22.
      4.   One JADU may be established within the space of an existing or
proposed single-family residence only on a lot that is zoned to allow single-
family residential uses.
      5.   A JADU may be established within the space of the primary dwelling
in combination with the construction of one detached, new construction ADU not
exceeding 1,200 square feet and a height of 16 feet with four-foot side and
rear yard setbacks.
      6.   ADUs shall be permitted only on residentially zoned lots developed
with existing multi- family dwellings subject to the following provisions.
      (a)   A minimum of one ADU may be constructed, or up to 25% of the
existing multi-family dwelling units, within non-livable space, including, but
not limited to, storage rooms, passageways, attics, basements or closets, if
each unit complies with state building standards for dwellings.
      (b)   The construction of two detached ADUs shall have a maximum height
of 16 feet and four-foot side and rear setbacks. In this case, only two
detached ADUs are permitted on lots developed with existing multi-family
dwellings.
   (F)   Development standards.
      1.   ADU type, location and size shall be subject to the following
standards.
         (a)   An ADU attached to an existing primary dwelling shall not exceed
50% of the total existing or proposed living area of the primary dwelling,
except that a one bedroom attached ADU shall be allowed up to 850 square feet,
and 1,000 square feet for attached ADUs with more than one bedroom pursuant to
Cal. Gov’t Code § 65852.2(c)(2)(B).
         (b)    An ADU structurally independent and detached from the existing
or proposed primary dwelling shall not exceed 1,200 square feet.
      2.   JADU location and size shall be subject to the following standards.
         (a)   A JADU shall be constructed entirely within an existing or
proposed primary dwelling and shall not exceed 500 square feet.
         (b)   JADUs shall have an independent exterior entrance from the
primary dwelling but may also include shared access between two units.
         (c)   A JADU, at a minimum, shall include an efficiency kitchen that
includes the following:
            (1)   A cooking facility with appliances; and
            (2)   A food preparation counter and storage cabinets that are of
reasonable size in relation to the size of the junior accessory dwelling unit.
         (d)   The property owner shall reside in either the principal dwelling
unit or the junior accessory dwelling unit.
         (e)   Prior to the issuance of a certificate of occupancy for the
JADU, the property owner shall file with the City a deed restriction for
recordation with the County Recorder, which shall run with the land and include
provisions listed in Cal. Gov’t Code § 65852.22 and state the following:
“The property contains an approved accessory dwelling unit pursuant to Chapter
5 of the Livingston Municipal Code and is subject to the restrictions and
regulations set forth in that chapter. These restrictions and regulations
generally address development regulations, owner occupancy, and lease
requirements, limitations on the size of the accessory dwelling unit, and
parking requirements. Current restrictions and regulations may be obtained from
the City of Livingston planning division. These restrictions and regulations
shall be binding upon any successor in ownership of the property”.
      3.   Setbacks shall be subject to the following standards.
         (a)   The minimum setback for an accessory dwelling unit is four feet
from the side and rear lot lines, ten feet from the street side lot line and 20
feet from the front lot line.
         (b)   No setback shall be required for an existing living area or
accessory structure constructed in the same location and to the same dimensions
as an existing structure that is converted to an accessory dwelling unit or to
a portion of an ADU, and a setback of no more than four feet from the side and
rear lot lines shall be required for an ADU that is not converted from an
existing structure or a new structure constructed in the same location and to
the same dimensions as an existing structure.
         (c)   Where feasible, setbacks from other structures on the lot shall
be consistent with the city-adopted building code for new construction ADUs,
except for a legally established, existing structure that is converted to an
accessory dwelling unit or to a portion of an ADU.
      4.   Utilities and impact fees shall be subject to the following
standards.
         (a)   Adequate roadways, public utilities and services shall be
available to serve the ADU. ADUs shall not be considered a new residential use
for the purpose of calculating connection fees or capacity charges for sewer
and water. Installation of a separate direct connection between an ADU
contained within an existing structure and the utility shall not be required.
ADUs not within an existing structure shall be required to install a new or
separate utility connection and be charged a connection fee and/or capacity
charge. These charges shall be proportionate to the burden imposed by the ADU
on the water or sewer system on either its size or the number of plumbing
fixtures as determined by the city.
         (b)   No impact fee shall be imposed for an accessory dwelling unit
less than 750 square feet. Any impact fees charged for an accessory dwelling
unit of 750 square feet or more shall be charged proportionately in relation to
the square footage of the primary dwelling unit.
   (G)   Mobilehomes or manufactured homes. Mobilehomes or manufactured housing
shall be permitted as an ADU, only if they are installed on permanent
foundations, the mobilehome complies with the 1974 National Manufactured
Housing Construction and Safety Act, and is ten years or newer and connected to
public utilities. Recreational vehicles, including, but not limited to, motor
homes, travel trailers, fifth-wheel trailers and houseboats, do not qualify as
an ADU as defined in this section.
   (H)   Off-street parking.
      1.   At least one additional off-street parking space shall be required
for the ADU or per bedroom, whichever is less, unless otherwise exempt under
this division (H).
      2.   The parking spaces required for the ADU can be in tandem to the
required off-street parking of the main dwelling unit, may be uncovered, and
can be located within the front yard as long as all other yard requirements are
met.
   
      3.   When a garage, carport or covered parking structure is demolished in
conjunction with the construction of an ADU or converted to an ADU, those off-
street parking spaces are not required to be replaced.
   (I)   Off-street parking exemption. Off-street parking shall not be imposed
in any of the following instances:
      1.   The ADU is located within one-half mile walking distance to public
transit;
      2.   The ADU is located within an architecturally and historically
significant historic district;
      3.   The ADU is part of the existing primary residence or an existing
accessory structure;
      4.   When on-street parking permits are required, but not offered to the
occupant of the ADU; and
      5.   When there is a car-share vehicle located within one block of the
ADU.
   (J)   Owner occupancy.
      1.   If the owner occupies the primary residential unit, the owner may
rent the ADU to one party. If the owner occupies the ADU, the owner may rent
the primary residence to one party. The owner may rent both the primary
residential unit and the ADU together to one party who many further sublease
any unit(s) or portion(s) thereof. The owner shall be a signatory to any lease
for the rented unit, for which the City may reasonably require a copy of to
verify compliance with this chapter and shall be the applicant for any permit
issued under this chapter. Owner occupancy for the primary dwelling or the ADU
is not required for ADUs approved between January 2020 and January 2025. The
rental of the ADU shall be longer than 30 days.
      2.   The ADU shall not be sold or held under a different legal ownership
than the primary residence, nor shall the lot containing the ADU be subdivided,
except as provided in Cal. Gov’t Code § 65852.26.
   (K)   Process and timing.
      1.   An ADU or JADU is considered and approve ministerially, without
discretionary review or hearing, if it meets the minimum standards in this
chapter.
      2.   The city must act on a building permit application to create an ADU
or JADU within 60 days from the date that the city receives a completed permit
application, unless either:
         (a)   The applicant requests a delay, in which the 60-day time period
is tolled for the period of the request delay; or
         (b)   If the building permit application to create an ADU or JADU is
submitted is submitted with a permit application to create a new single-family
dwelling on the lot, the city may delay acting on the permit application for
the ADU or the JADU until the city acts on the permit application to create the
new single-family dwelling, but the application to create the ADU or JADU unit
shall still be considered ministerially, without discretionary review or a
hearing.
(Ord. 607, passed 8-20-2013; Ord. 659, passed 6-21-2022)
§ 5-5-7 ADULT ENTERTAINMENT BUSINESSES.
   (A)   Intent. It is the purpose of this section to regulate adult morals,
and general welfare of the citizens of the city. The provisions of this chapter
have neither the purpose nor effect of imposing a limitation or restriction on
the content of any communicative materials, including sexually oriented
materials. Similarly, it is not the intent nor effect of this chapter to
restrict or deny access by adults to sexually oriented materials protected by
the First Amendment, or to deny access by the distributors and exhibitors of
sexually oriented entertainment to their intended market. Neither is it the
intent nor effect of this chapter to condone or legitimize the distribution of
obscene material. Details on regulations can be found in Title 10, Chapter 6 of
this code.
   (B)   Permitted use. No adult entertainment businesses shall be established
or located in any zone district other than the commercial zones.
(Ord. 533, passed 8-16-2005)
§ 5-5-8 WIRELESS COMMUNICATION FACILITIES.
   (A)   Intent. To provide a uniform and comprehensive set of standards for
the development and installation of facilities related to wireless
communication facilities in order to accommodate the needs of citizens and
businesses while protecting the public health, safety and welfare, and the
aesthetic quality of the community.
   (B)   Applicability.
      1.   These regulations apply to:
         (a)   New wireless telecommunication facilities or any additions or
modifications to existing wireless telecommunication facilities approved after
the date of the passing of this zoning ordinance; and
         (b)   Reapprovals after the date of passing of this zoning ordinance
due to expiration, suspension, revocation or other lapse or prior approvals.
      2.   These regulations exempt wireless telecommunications facilities that
are exempt by federal or state law; mobile, new or media units that are
authorized during a declared emergency or disaster; and for special events not
to exceed seven days.
   (C)   Permitted use. Permitted in industrial, commercial and open space
zones. Preference includes installation/collocation on city owned property
where inconspicuous to public view and residential areas.
   (D)   Definitions. For the purpose of this section, the following
definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a
different meaning.
      ANTENNA.
      1.   Any system of wires, poles, rods, reflecting disks or similar
devices used for the transmission or reception of electromagnetic waves when
such system is either external to or attached to the exterior of a structure,
or is portable or movable.
      2.   ANTENNAS shall include devices having active elements extending in
any direction, and directional beam type arrays having elements carried by and
disposed from a generally horizontal boom that may be mounted upon and rotated
through a vertical mast or tower interconnecting the boom and antenna support,
all of which elements are deemed to be a part of the antenna.
      ANTENNA, AMATEUR RADIO. Any antenna which is used for the purpose of
transmitting and receiving radio signals in conjunction with an amateur radio
station licensed by the Federal Communications Commission.
      ANTENNA, BUILDING MOUNTED. Any antenna, directly attached or affixed to a
building, tank, tower or other structure. Building mounted antennas are
identified in two distinct categories herein as follows:
         (a)   Wall mounted attached or affixed to the elevation of the
structure; and
         (b)   Roof mounted attached or affixed to the rooftop or top of the
structure.
      ANTENNA, DIRECTIONAL (also known as a PANEL ANTENNA). An antenna that
transmits and/or receives radio frequency signals in a directional pattern of
less than 360 degrees.
      ANTENNA, GROUND MOUNTED. Any antenna with its base (either single or
multiple posts) placed directly on the ground or a mast 12 feet or less in
height and six inches in diameter.
      ANTENNA, PARABOLIC (also known as SATELLITE DISH ANTENNA).
      1.   Any device incorporating a reflective surface that is solid, open
mesh, or bar configured that is shallow dish, cone, horn, bowl or cornucopia
shaped and is used to transmit and/or receive electromagnetic or radio
frequency communication/signals in a specific directional pattern from orbiting
satellites or ground transmitters.
      2.   This definition is meant to include what are commonly referred to as
television receive only (TVRO) and satellite microwave antennas.
      COLLOCATION. A wireless communication facility owned and operated by a
communication service provider which is located on the same tower, building,
accessory structure or property as another communication facility owned or
operated by a different communication service provider.
      DIRECT BROADCAST SATELLITE SERVICE (DBS). A system in which signals are
transmitted directly from a satellite to a small home receiving dish.
      ELECTROMAGNETIC. An electrical wave propagated by an electrostatic and
magnetic field of varying intensity.
      NIER. Nonionizing electromagnetic radiation (e.g., electromagnetic
radiation primarily in the visible, infrared, and radio frequency portions of
the electromagnetic spectrum).
      RELATED EQUIPMENT. All equipment ancillary to the transmission and
reception of voice and data by means of radio frequencies. Such equipment may
include cable, conduit, connectors, equipment pads, equipment shelters,
cabinets, buildings and access ladders.
      SATELLITE EARTH STATION. A facility consisting of more than a single
satellite dish or parabolic antenna that transmits to and/or receives signals
from an orbiting satellite.
      STEALTH DESIGN. A combination of design style and locational techniques
that blend a wireless telecommunications facility into its environs in a
visually sensitive and unobtrusive manner.
      TOWER. A mast, pole, monopole, lattice tower or other structure designed
and primarily used to support antennas. This definition includes ground mounted
structures 12 feet or greater in height and building mounted structures that
extend above the roofline, parapet wall, or other roof screen with a mast
greater than six inches in diameter supporting one or more antennas, dishes,
arrays, or other associated equipment.
      WIRELESS COMMUNICATION FACILITY. A facility that transmits and/or
receives electromagnetic signals for the purpose of transmitting analog or
digital voice or data communications. It includes antennas, microwave dishes,
horns and other types of equipment for the transmission or receipt of such
signals, telecommunication towers or similar structures supporting said
equipment, equipment buildings, parking area and other accessory development.
   (E)   Permit requirements by zoning district. Unless otherwise exempt from
permit requirements in this code, wireless communication facilities require
permits in accordance with the following table. The following legend of permits
applies to the table below:
      1.   Key. Permitted use subject to site plan/design review permit,
designated as “DR”; conditional use permit required, designated as “CUP”.
Table 12: Permit Requirements for Wireless Communication Facilities
Wireless      Residential Commercial Industrial
Communication Zoning      Zoning     Zoning     P-F Zone P/OS Parks PD Overlay
Facility      Districts   Districts  Districts
Table 12: Permit Requirements for Wireless Communication Facilities
Wireless       Residential Commercial Industrial
Communication  Zoning      Zoning     Zoning     P-F Zone P/OS Parks PD Overlay
Facility       Districts   Districts  Districts
Antenna,       DR          DR         DR         DR       DR         DR
amateur radio
Antenna,
building
mounted
   Roof     DR          CUP1       CUP1       CUP1     DR         DR
mounted
   Wall     DR          DR         DR         DR       CUP1       CUP1
mounted
Antenna,       N/A         CUP        CUP        CUP      CUP        CUP
ground mounted
Parabolic      N/A         CUP        CUP        CUP      CUP        CUP
antenna
Satellite      N/A         DR         DR         DR       DR         DR
earth station
Tower          N/A         DR         DR         DR       DR         DR
Tower,         N/A         DR         DR         DR       DR         DR
collocation2
Notes:
1.   If roof or wall mounted antenna extends above the roofline, parapet wall
or similar roof screen, a conditional use permit is required to authorize the
antenna
2.   A conditional use permit is required if the collocation increases the
height of the existing tower/structure.
 
      2.   Conditions. The designated approving authority for each of the
listed permits may impose conditions on the wireless communication facility
applications to ensure compliance with all provisions and purposes of this
chapter.
      3.   Findings. Findings to deny any permit for a wireless communication
facility as regulated herein shall be done in writing and supported by
substantial evidence contained in the written record. Denial shall not be based
on the environmental effects of radio frequency emissions that comply with the
Federal Communication Commission emission regulation.
   (F)   Exemptions. The following wireless communication facilities are exempt
from the requirements of this chapter as specified below and are subject to
compliance with other provisions of this title.
      1.   A wireless communication facility shall be exempt from the
provisions of this section if and to the extent that a permit issued by the
California Public Utilities Commission (CPUC) or the rules and regulations of
the Federal Communication Commission (FCC) specifically provides that the
antenna is exempt from local regulation.
      2.   Satellite earth station (SES) antennas, which are two meters (2 m)
(6.5616 feet) or less in diameter or in diagonal measurement, located in any
nonresidential zoning district. In order to avoid the creation of an attractive
nuisance, reduce accidental tripping hazards and maximize stability of the
structure, such antennas shall be placed whenever possible on top of buildings
and as far away as possible from the edges of rooftops.
      3.   Parabolic antennas, direct broadcast satellite (DBS) antennas and
multipoint distribution service (MDS) antennas, which are one meter (3.2808
feet) or less in diameter or diagonal measurement and television broadcast
service (TVBS) antennas, so long as said antennas are located entirely on
private property and are not located within the required front yard setback
area. This locational requirement is necessary to ensure that such antenna
installations do not become attractive nuisances and/or result in accidental
tripping hazards if located adjacent to a street or other public right-of-way.
      4.   Amateur radio antenna structures provide a valuable and essential
telecommunication service during periods of natural disasters and other
emergency conditions and are therefore exempt from permit provisions of this
chapter in compliance with the following standards.
         (a)   Height limits. Amateur radio antennas in any district may extend
to a maximum height of 75 feet, provided that the tower is equipped with a
lowering device (motorized and/or mechanical) capable of lowering the antenna
to the maximum permitted height when not in operation.
         (b)   Location parameters. All antenna structures shall be located
outside of required front and street side yard areas. Antenna structures shall
also be setback a minimum distance of five feet from interior property lines.
If any portion of the antenna overhangs any property line, a design review
permit is required to obtain the authorized signature of all affected property
owners on the required application form.
         (c)   Tower safety. All antennas shall be located within an enclosed
fenced area or have a minimum six-foot high tower shield at the tower base to
prevent climbing. All active elements of antennas shall have a minimum vertical
clearance of eight feet.
      5.   Minor modifications (emergency or routine) provided there is little
or no change in the visual appearance as determined by the PIP director.
   (G)   Development standards; general development standards. Unless otherwise
exempt pursuant to subsection (F) of this section, the following general
development standards shall apply to all wireless communication facilities.
      1.   All wireless communication facilities shall comply with all
applicable requirements of the current uniform codes as adopted by the city and
shall be consistent with the general plan, this title, as well as other
standards and guidelines adopted by the city.
      2.   All design review and conditional use permit applications for
wireless communication facilities shall include a description of services
proposed and documentation certifying applicable licenses or other approvals
required by the Federal Communications Commission to provide services proposed
in connection with the application.
      3.   All design review and conditional use permit applications for
wireless communications facilities shall include a map and narrative
description of all telecommunication sites existing, proposed or planned by the
applicant in the city and within a one mile radius of the city border. Such
applications shall also include an analysis of all reasonable and technically
feasible alternative locations and/or facilities (including collocations) which
could provide the proposed communication service.
      4.   To minimize the overall visual impact, new wireless communication
facilities shall be collocated with existing facilities, with other planned new
facilities, and with other facilities such as water tanks, light standards and
other utility structures whenever feasible and aesthetically desirable. To
facilitate collocation when deemed appropriate, conditions of approval for
conditional use permits shall require all service providers to cooperate in the
siting of equipment and antennas to accommodate the maximum number of operators
at a given site when found to be feasible and aesthetically desirable. The
applicant shall agree to allow future collocation of additional antennas and
shall not enter into an exclusive lease for the use of the site.
      5.   At least ten feet of horizontal clearance shall be maintained
between any part of the antenna and any power lines unless the antenna is
installed to be an integral part of a utility tower or facility.
   (H)   Development standards for antennas (excluding radio antennas). Unless
otherwise exempt pursuant to subsection (F) of this section, the following
development standards shall apply to receive-only antennas (ground and building
mounted), parabolic antennas and satellite earth stations as defined in
subsection (D) of this section.
      1.   Maximum number. One antenna per parcel, unless the applicant can
demonstrate the service need for additional antenna.
      2.   Antenna location. Parabolic antenna and satellite earth stations
shall be ground mounted in residential zoning districts. In all nonresidential
zoning districts, the preference is for building mounted antenna. No antenna
shall be located in the required front or street side yard of any parcel unless
entirely screened from pedestrian view of the abutting street rights-of-way
(excluding alleys). In all zoning districts, ground mounted antennas shall be
situated as close to the ground as possible to reduce visual impact without
compromising their function and all portions of the structure/antenna shall be
set back a minimum of five feet from any property line.
      3.   Height limit. The height limit for ground mounted antenna is six
feet. However, the height may be increased to a maximum of 12 feet if the
setback distance from all property lines is at least equal to the height of the
antenna and if the structure is screened in accordance with subsection (H)4. of
this section. Building mounted antennas shall not extend above the roofline,
parapet wall or other roof screen or project beyond a maximum of 18 inches from
the face of the building or other support structure.
      4.   Screening. Ground mounted antenna shall be screened with a fence,
wall or dense landscaping so that the antenna is not visible from the public
right-of-way and to minimize the visual impact on abutting properties. Building
mounted antennas shall be screened as follows.
         (a)   Wall mounted equipment shall be flush mounted and painted or
finished to match to building with concealed cables.
         (b)   Roof mounted equipment shall be screened from view of public
rights-of-way by locating the antenna below the roofline, parapet wall, or
other roof screen and by locating the antenna as far away as physically
feasible and aesthetically desirable from the edge of the building.
      5.   Color. Antennas shall have subdued colors and nonreflective
materials which blend with the materials and colors of the surrounding area or
building.
   (I)   Development standards for amateur radio antennas. Amateur radio
antennas may exceed the height limit and/or amend the setback provisions of the
exempt amateur radio antenna structures (subsection (F) “Exemptions” of this
section) only when said regulation will result in unreasonable limitations on,
or prevent, reception or transmission of signals. The designated approving
authority may issue the design review permit subject to any conditions
necessary or appropriate to minimize the safety or aesthetic impacts of antenna
installations, provided the conditions do not unreasonably prevent or limit
transmission or reception of signals.
   (J)   Development standards for towers. The following development standards
shall apply to towers (including collocation facilities) as defined in
subsection (D), Definitions, of this section.
      1.   Site design. All facilities (including related equipment) shall be
designed to minimize the visual impact to the greatest extent feasible,
considering technological requirements, by means of placement, screening,
camouflage, to be compatible with existing architectural elements, landscape
elements and other site characteristics. The applicant shall use the smallest
and least visible antennas possible to accomplish the owner/operator’s coverage
objective. A visual impact analysis is required to demonstrate how the proposed
facility will appear from public rights-of-way (including public trails).
      2.   Safety design. All facilities shall be designed so as to be
resistant to and minimize opportunities for unauthorized access, climbing,
vandalism, graffiti, and other conditions which would result in hazardous
conditions, visual blight or attractive nuisances.
      3.   Location. Towers shall not be located in any required front or
street side yard in any zoning district. The setback distance from any abutting
street right-of-way, residential property line or public trail shall be equal
to the height of the facility (tower and related equipment). Otherwise, the
minimum setback distance from all other property lines shall be at least equal
to 20% of the height of the tower.
      4.   Height limit. The height limit for towers shall be consistent with
the maximum building height of the zoning district of the subject parcel.
Exceptions to the height limit may be granted when the designated approving
authority finds that reasonable alternatives do not exist to provide the
necessary service. There is no height limit specified for collocations on
existing structures, provided facilities are screened from view of abutting
street rights-of-way or camouflaged by matching the color(s) and/or material(s)
of the structure to which it is attached.
      5.   Lighting. Towers and related equipment shall be unlit except as
provided below:
         (a)   A manually operated or motion detector controlled light above
the equipment shed door may be provided, except that the light shall remain off
except when personnel are present at night;
         (b)   The minimum tower lighting required under FAA regulation; and
         (c)   Where tower lighting is required, said lighting shall be
shielded or directed downward to the greatest extent possible to ensure that
such light does not spill over onto abutting properties, especially residential
zoning districts or uses.
      6.   Landscape. Where appropriate, facilities shall be installed so as to
maintain and enhance existing landscaping on the site, including trees, foliage
and shrubs, whether or not utilized for screening. Additional landscaping shall
be planted around the tower and related equipment and along street frontages to
buffer abutting residential zoning districts or uses, and to buffer public
trails in accordance with the following standards.
         (a)   Perimeter of facility. Landscaping around the perimeter of the
facility shall include dense tree and shrub plantings with necessary
irrigation. Wireless communication facilities shall be developed with an
immediate landscape screen. Trees shall be fast growing evergreen species, a
minimum of 24-inch box in size. Shrubs shall be a minimum 15 gallon size
covering a minimum planter area depth of five feet around the facility. Trees
and shrubs shall be planted no farther apart on center than the mature diameter
of the proposed species.
         (b)   Street frontage. Along all street frontages abutting the subject
parcel, trees shall be fast growing evergreen species, a minimum of 24-inch box
in size, planted no farther apart on center than the mature diameter of the
proposed species.
         (c)   Buffer to residential zoning districts or uses and public
trails. Along the entire length of all residential property lines and public
trails abutting the subject parcel, 24-inch box, fast growing evergreen trees
shall be planted no farther apart on center than the mature diameter of the
proposed species. Additionally, shrub planting along public trails shall be a
minimum five gallon size and species shall be consistent with the native or
other plantings along the trail in that same area.
      7.   Design/finish. The tower and related equipment shall have subdued
colors and nonreflective materials that blend with the colors and materials of
surrounding areas. When located on a parcel abutting a designated scenic
corridor in the city, the tower shall be designed to simulate a tree of similar
species to other trees in the immediate area.
      8.   Advertising. The tower and related equipment shall not bear any
signs or advertising devices other than certification, warning or other
required seals or signs.
      9.   Parking. The off-street parking for wireless communication
facilities shall be determined by the designated approving authority in
conjunction with required development permits.
   (K)   Operation and maintenance standards.
      1.   Noise. All wireless communication facilities shall comply with the
city’s noise ordinance at all times. When facilities are located within 100
feet of any residential property, a noise analysis shall be required to ensure
that all proposed equipment either complies with or employs noise attenuation
measures in compliance with the city’s maximum noise level standards. Backup
generators shall only be operated during power outages and for testing and
maintenance purposes.
      2.   Nonionizing electromagnetic radiation (NIER) exposure. No wireless
communication facility shall be sited or operated in such a manner that it
poses, either by itself or in combination with other such facilities, a
potential threat to public health. To this end, no facility or combination of
facilities shall produce, at any time, power densities in any inhabited area
that exceed the FCC’s maximum permissible exposure (MPE) limits for electric
and magnetic field strength and power density for transmitters or any more
restrictive standard subsequently adopted or promulgated by the city, county,
state or the federal government. To ensure compliance, an RF (radio frequency)
testing report shall be submitted to the PIP director for all proposed
facilities after the initial installation and operation, every five years
thereafter, and any time the MPE limits are modified to demonstrate facility
compliance with government safety standards.
   (L)   Removal provisions. In the event one or more antennas, towers or
related equipment are not operated for the provision of wireless
telecommunication services for a continuous period of three months or more,
such antenna, tower and/or related equipment shall be deemed abandoned. The
owner of same shall remove all such items within 30 days following the mailing
of written notice that removal is required. If two or more providers of
wireless telecommunication services use the antenna support structure or
related equipment, the period of nonuse under this section shall be measured
from the cessation of operation at the location by all such providers. Failure
to remove shall constitute a public nuisance and shall be enforced as such.
   (M)   Transfer of operation. Any carrier/service provider authorized by the
city to operate a specific wireless communication facility may assign the
operation of the facility to another carrier licensed by the FCC for that radio
frequency provided that such transfer is made known to the PIP director in
writing prior to the transfer and all conditions of approval for the subject
installation are carried out by the new carrier/service provider.However, the
carrier/service provider may, without written notification, transfer operations
of the facility to its general partner or any party controlling, controlled by
or under common control with the carrier/service provider.
   (N)   Effects of development. The city shall not be liable if development
within the city, after installation of the antenna impairs antenna reception.
(Ord. 533, passed 8-16-2005; Ord. 591, passed 8-2-2011; Ord. 610, passed 2-18-
2014)
§ 5-5-9 RECYCLING FACILITIES.
   (A)   Intent. This section establishes standards and procedures for the
siting and operation of a recycling facility that will provide for the
collection, sorting and processing of recyclable materials.
   (B)   Permitted use. Recycling facilities shall be permitted in all
industrial districts within the city and are subject to a site plan/design
review process. All collecting and loading of recyclable materials shall be in
accordance with Title 8, Chapter 7 of this code.
   (C)   Development standards. Recycling facilities shall comply with the
following standards:
      1.   Established on a separate parcel not accessory to a main use;
      2.   Not located within 100 feet of a residential use;
      3.   Screened from public rights-of-way by solid, decorative masonry
walls or located within an enclosed structure as approved by the city;
      4.   Structure setbacks, landscaping requirements and performance
standards shall be as required by the zoning district;
      5.   Exterior storage of materials shall be in sturdy containers that are
secured and maintained in good condition. Storage shall not be visible above
the height of the required screening;
      6.   Site shall be maintained in a clean, sanitary and orderly fashion,
free of litter and other undesirable materials. Loose debris shall be removed
daily;
      7.   There shall be no “after hours” donation of recyclable materials.
Facility will be locked and secured when closed for operation; and
      8.   May have up to an average of two outbound truck shipments of
material each day.
(Ord. 533, passed 8-16-2005)
§ 5-5-10 MEDICINAL MARIJUANA DISPENSARIES.
   It shall be unlawful and a misdemeanor for any person to engage in, conduct
or carry on, or to permit to be engaged in, conducted or carried on, in or upon
any premises in the city, the operation of a medical marijuana dispensary.
(Ord. 589, passed 6-15-2010)
§ 5-5-11 BODY ART ESTABLISHMENTS.
   (A)   Intent. To provide for the orderly regulation of body art
establishments and technicians as defined in this code and pursuant to the
Merced County Environmental Health Code and state law. It is in the interest of
public health, safety and welfare that guidelines are set by providing certain
minimum qualifications for body art establishments and the technicians employed
by the establishment itself. For the purposes of this chapter, body art
includes tattoos, body piercings and permanent makeup.
   (B)   Permitted use. No body art establishment shall be established or
located in any zoning district other than the M-1 Limited Industrial Zone. A
use permit is required for each establishment, which will not run with the
land. Body art as a home occupation is strictly prohibited.
   (C)   Development standards. Body art establishments shall comply with the
following standards.
      1.   No persons under the age of 18 shall be permitted within the body
art establishment unless accompanied by a parent or legal guardian for the sole
purpose of having body art removed.
      2.   All body art and financial transactions shall occur at the
establishment. No employee or owner of the establishment may practice or
provide body art to any client at their residence or place of business within
city limits.
      3.   Retail sales of body art associated products on site are only
allowed if specifically allowed by the use permit.
      4.   Hours of operation shall be limited to the hours between 7:00 a.m.
and 10:00 p.m.
      5.   No gang related, racist or pornographic tattoos shall be permitted.
      6.   One body art establishment is allowed for every 10,000 population
upon obtaining said use permit.
      7.   The operator and/or property owner shall be required to report any
illegal activity occurring on the site or associated with the establishment.
      8.   Each body art establishment shall display in a manner legible and
visible to clientele:
         (a)   Notice that persons under the age of 18 are not allowed in the
establishment; and
         (b)   Notice that all illegal activity will be reported to the police.
      9.   The establishment shall be operated in strict compliance with
regulations and processes adopted by Merced County Environmental Health and the
Chief of Police of the city pursuant to Title 10, Chapter 11 of this code.
Client information files, including photos and release forms, shall be
maintained on site and accessible to the city and county for a minimum of two
years.
      10.   The City Council may consider repeated violations related to the
operation of the permittee’s business as cause to revoke the use permit
approved under these regulations.
      11.   Existing permanent cosmetics practitioners shall have six months to
comply with the code and obtain a use permit with fees waived.
   (D)   Exemptions. Physicians licensed in accordance with the state, who
perform body art procedures as part of patient treatment are exempt from these
regulations. Individuals who pierce only the lobe of the ear with a
presterilized single use stud and clasp ear piercing system are exempt from
these regulations.
(Ord. 541, passed 4-18-2006)
§ 5-5-12 CULTIVATION OF SEASONAL OR ANNUAL CROPS.
   (A)   Intent. To conditionally permit the cultivation of seasonal or annual
crops and allow for the orderly regulations of activities associated with such
cultivation. This section does not permit dairying, animal husbandry,
slaughtering, or processing of livestock or animal matter.
   (B)   Permitted use. Cultivation of seasonal or annual crops is
conditionally permitted on parcels larger than five acres in all zoning
districts. A conditional use permit is required prior to the commencement of
cultivation of seasonal or annual crops. All cultivation of seasonal or annual
crops must comply with the development standards set forth in this section as
well as any conditions required by the conditional use permit.
   (C)   Development standards. All cultivation of seasonal or annual crops
must comply with the following standards.
      1.   Cultivation is only permitted on lots larger than five acres.
      2.   Only annual or seasonal crops may be planted. Perennial crops are
prohibited.
      3.   The property has adequate water supply available to support the
proposed activity.
      4.   Aerial spraying of pesticides or herbicides is prohibited.
Additional limitations on the use of chemicals may be imposed in the
conditional use permit.
   (D)   Exemptions. None.
(Ord. 602, passed 3-19-2013)
§ 5-5-13 SMOKE SHOPS AND/OR SMOKING LOUNGES.
   (A)   Intent. To provide for the orderly regulation of smoke shops and/or
smoking lounges as defined in this code, and to conditionally permit that use
and allow for the orderly regulation associated with such activities.
   (B)   Conditional use. Smoke shops and/or smoking lounges are conditionally
permitted only in the Downtown Commercial (DTC) and the Limited Industrial (M-
1) Zoning Districts. A conditional use permit is required prior to the
commencement of operations for this use. The conditional use permit shall not
run with the land, but shall expire when the original holder of the conditional
use permit ceases activity for longer than 30 days.
   (C)   Development standards. All smoke shops and/or smoking lounges must
comply with the following standards.
      1.   Zoning district where use is allowed. The use is not allowed in any
areas other than in the Downtown Commercial (DTC) and Limited Industrial (M-1)
Zoning Districts.
      2.   Location. This use shall not be permitted within 500 feet of another
smoke shop or smoking lounge, elementary school, middle school, high school,
public library, public park or church.
      3.   Location in regard to minors. This use shall not be permitted within
500 feet of a youth oriented establishment characterized by either or both of
the following:
         (a)   An establishment which advertises in a manner that identifies
the establishment as catering to or providing services primarily intended for
minors; or
         (b)   The individuals who regularly patronize, congregate or assemble
at the establishment are predominantly minors. The uses and zones set forth in
this section shall be collectively known as “sensitive uses”. The distance
between a smoke shop and/or smoking lounge and this identified “sensitive use”
shall be made in a straight line, without regard to intervening structures or
objects, from the closest exterior wall of the structure to the property line
of said structure in which the “sensitive use” is identified.
      4.   Accessory use. A smoke shop and/or smoking lounge is not and shall
not be approved as an accessory use to any other use permitted by this code.
      5.   Location within shopping center. If the use is located on a parcel
within a shopping center, the distance between the smoke shop/smoking lounge
and the locations described in subsections (C)2. and (C)3. of this section,
shall be measured from the outermost boundary of the shopping center, including
the boundary of the parking lot, landscaping or sidewalk if applicable.
      6.   Minors. Minors (defined as ages under 18 years) shall be prohibited
from entering the above mentioned establishments.
   (D)   Exemptions. None.
(Ord. 622, passed 1-20-2015)
§ 5-5-14 COMMERCIAL CANNABIS ACTIVITY.
   (A)   Commercial cannabis activity allowed in compliance with this section
only. Only the commercial cannabis activity permitted under this section is
permitted in the city. It is hereby declared to be unlawful and a public
nuisance for any person owning, leasing, occupying or having charge or
possession of any parcel in the city to cause or allow such parcel to be used
for commercial cannabis activity that is not permitted in this section.
   (B)   Allowed commercial cannabis activity. The following commercial
cannabis activity is permitted in the city. See §
5-3-15, Table 3 of this title regarding allowed uses within specific zoning
districts:
      1.   Indoor and fully enclosed mixed light commercial cannabis
cultivation;
      2.   Commercial indoor or greenhouse nursery;
      3.   Commercial medical cannabis delivery, originating from outside the
city only;
      4.   Commercial cannabis manufacturing, volatile and nonvolatile;
      5.   Commercial cannabis testing; and
      6.   Commercial cannabis microbusinesses (outdoor cannabis cultivation
and retail prohibited).
   (C)   Prohibited commercial cannabis activity.
      1.   No retail cannabis activity under state license Type 9, Type 10 or
Type 12, or any subsequently established license, is permitted in the city,
with the exception of the delivery of medical cannabis to qualified patients or
caregivers from a location outside of the city.
      2.   No commercial outdoor cannabis cultivation is permitted in the city.
      3.   Any microbusiness use under a state license Type 12, or subsequently
established license, may not include a retail or outdoor cultivation component.
   (D)   Location and minimum distance requirements for allowed commercial
cannabis uses. The distances set forth in this section shall be measured in a
straight line from property line to property line.
      1.   Commercial cannabis activity and uses are only permitted in zones
identified in §
5-3-15, Table 3, Commercial Uses, of this title, and under the regulations set
forth in this and related sections of this code.
      2.   No commercial cannabis activity may occur within 600 feet of a
school, daycare, childcare or youth center.
      3.   No commercial cannabis activity, with the exception of testing
laboratories, may occur within 400 feet of any residential use, park or
library, or within 400 feet of land zoned for residential uses. Testing
laboratories must be located at least 200 feet from any residential use, park,
library or land zoned for residential uses.
      4.   The distance requirements in this section may be reduced by the
decision maker only when the applicant can show that an actual impassible
physical separation exists between the land uses, such as a major street, major
highway or high wall, such that no off-site negative impacts would occur that
would result in harm or potential harm to the public health, safety or welfare,
unless otherwise prohibited under state law.
   (E)   Operator/permit holder qualifications. All commercial cannabis
activity in the city requires a city cannabis permit. All cannabis permit
holders and cannabis business operators must meet the following minimum
qualifications. The city reserves the right to require additional
qualifications through the cannabis permit application procedure.
      1.   Commercial cannabis permit holders and business operators must be 21
years of age or older.
      2.   Commercial cannabis permit holders and business operators shall be
subject to a background search by the California Department of Justice and
local law enforcement.
      3.   Permits for commercial cannabis uses shall not be permitted for
operators with felony convictions, as specified in Cal. Penal Code § 667.5(c),
and Cal. Penal Code § 1192.7(c). Permits for commercial cannabis uses shall not
be permitted for operators with criminal convictions that substantially relate
to the qualifications, functions, or duties of the business or profession,
including a felony conviction involving fraud, deceit, embezzlement, or a
criminal conviction for the sale or provision of illegal controlled substances
to a minor.
      4.   Commercial cannabis permit holders must meet the minimum
qualifications established by the state for the applicable state license type.
   (F)   Commercial cannabis permits.
      1.   No commercial cannabis activity may take place in the city without a
commercial cannabis permit.
      2.   The city is not obligated to issue any commercial cannabis permits.
      3.   Commercial cannabis permits are valid for one year. Renewal may be
automatic when required fees and taxes are paid in full, and no violations
exist for the subject permit holder.
      4.   No commercial cannabis permit holder may commence business
operations until the necessary state license(s) is/are obtained. “Business
operations” does not include tenant improvements or other necessary pre-
operational activities. “Business operations” means participating in commercial
cannabis activities which require a state license.
      5.   All commercial cannabis permit holders must obtain a city business
license. Additional permits or entitlements may be required depending on
construction or improvements necessary to a building or site.
      6.   The total number of commercial cannabis permits granted for each
state license type may be established by a City Council resolution.
      7.   The city may refuse to issue any discretionary or ministerial
permit, license, variance or other entitlement, which is sought pursuant to
this section, including zoning clearance for a building permit, where the
property upon which the use or structure is proposed is in violation of this
code, or any other local, state or federal law.
      8.   No property interest, vested right or entitlement to receive a
future permit to operate a commercial cannabis use shall ever inure to the
benefit of such permit holder, as such permits are revocable. Permits issued
pursuant to this section are not transferable to another individual or to
another physical location without written city approval.
   (G)   Application and permit procedures.
      1.   Applications and forms. The City Manager may create necessary
applications and forms, with input from the City Council, for commercial
cannabis permits.
      2.   Application process. The City Manager may create the application
process, with input from the City Council, for commercial cannabis permits. The
process may vary for different license types.
         (a)   Such process will require Planning Commission review and
approval of permits issued.
         (b)   Such process may include a request for proposal (“RFP”) process
that includes City Council approval for certain license types, where deemed
necessary.
      3.   Application forwarded. A commercial cannabis permit application will
only be forwarded to the Planning Commission for consideration if the
application is complete and applicant(s) has/have passed the applicable
background screening requirements. All applicants must agree to enter into an
operating/development agreement, pursuant to subsection (H) of this section.
      4.   Application denied. A commercial cannabis permit application may be
denied by the Planning Commission if one or more of the following findings are
made:
         (a)   The application does not meet all requirements of this section;
         (b)   Approval would very likely result in harm to public safety,
health or welfare;
         (c)   Potential negative impacts of the use cannot be mitigated with
conditions or through this section’s requirements; or
         (d)   The applicant has not paid all fees or taxes due to the city.
      5.   Appeals. Any Planning Commission decision to deny or grant a
commercial cannabis permit application may be appealed to the City Council by
an affected party by submitting a written appeal request to the City Clerk
within ten days of the decision. Additionally, any Council member may request
that any Planning Commission decision regarding a commercial cannabis permit be
called up and decided by the City Council. Requests by Council members to call
up a decision must be made within ten days of the Planning Commission decision.
Appeals will be noticed and scheduled for the next available date for a public
hearing before the City Council. City Council decisions on appeals and
decisions called up to the Council are final.
      6.   Notice requirements.
         (a)   At least one public hearing shall be held on an application for
a commercial cannabis permit, notice of which shall be given by one publication
in an official newspaper of general circulation in the county at least ten days
prior to such hearing, and by posting the notice on the property involved at
least ten days prior to such hearing.
         (b)   Notice shall be mailed or delivered at least ten calendar days
before the scheduled hearing to the following:
            (1)   The owner(s) of the subject property(ies) being considered in
the application, or the owner’s agent, and the applicant, if applicable;
            (2)   Each local agency expected to provide schools, water or other
essential facilities or services to the project, whose ability to provide the
facilities and services may be significantly affected;
            (3)   All owners of real property shown on the latest equalized
assessment roll within a radius of 300 feet of the exterior boundaries of the
subject property;
            (4)   Any person who has filed a written request for notice with
the Planning Director; and
            (5)   Additional means of distribution may be used at the
discretion of the City Clerk. Additional means of distribution may include
mailing of notices not otherwise required, or posting notices in the immediate
area of the property.
      7.   Permit fees. Commercial cannabis permit fees shall be set by
resolution of the City Council. No permit shall be issued until fees are paid
in full.
      8.   Approval. Commercial cannabis permits may contain additional
conditions of approval.
      9.   Suspension, revocation and renewal. Any commercial cannabis permit
issued under this section may be immediately suspended by the City Manager for
any of the reasons listed in subsections (G)9.(a) through (G)9.(i) of this
section. Any permit issued under this section may be revoked or not renewed by
the city, following notice and opportunity for a hearing, upon any of the
following:
         (a)   An operator ceases to meet any of the minimum qualifications
listed in this section, fails to comply with the requirements of this section
or any conditions of approval of the permit;
         (b)   An operator/permit holder’s state license for commercial
cannabis operations is revoked, terminated or not renewed;
         (c)   The commercial cannabis operation fails to become operative
within 18 months of obtaining its commercial cannabis permit;
         (d)   Once operational, the business ceases to be in regular and
continuous operation for three consecutive months;
         (e)   State law permitting the use for which the permit was issued is
amended or repealed resulting in the prohibition of such use, or the city
receives credible information that the federal government will commence
enforcement measures against such businesses and/or local governments that
permit them;
         (f)   Circumstances under which the permit was granted have
significantly changed and the public health, safety and welfare require the
suspension, revocation or modification;
         (g)   The permit was granted, in whole or in part, on the basis of a
misrepresentation or omission of a material statement in the permit
application;
         (h)   The operator/permit holder/business is not current on city taxes
or fees, or is not current on payments required through an operating agreement;
or
         (i)   The permit holder/operator’s state license for commercial
cannabis operations is suspended. The city shall not reinstate the permit until
documentation is received showing that the state license has been reinstated or
reissued. It shall be up to the city’s discretion whether the city reinstates
any permit.
      10.   Notice of revocation or nonrenewal. If the city proposes to revoke
or not renew a permit, written notice of the proposed revocation or nonrenewal
must be served on the permit holder at least 15 days prior to the date the
proposed revocation or nonrenewal becomes effective. The notice shall be served
personally or sent via certified mail and contain:
         (a)   A statement explaining the grounds for the revocation or
nonrenewal; and
         (b)   A statement that the permit holder may appeal the action
according to subsection (G)11. of this section, and that the failure to appeal
the notice of revocation or nonrenewal will constitute a waiver of all rights
to an appeal hearing, and the revocation will be final.
      11.   Appeal of proposed revocation or nonrenewal. Any applicant or
permit holder may appeal a proposed permit revocation or nonrenewal by filing a
written appeal with the City Manager’s office within ten days from the date of
the notice of revocation or nonrenewal. The written appeal must contain the
following:
         (a)   A brief clear statement, including material facts, to support
the appellant’s position and the relief sought;
         (b)   The signature of the permit holder with verification under
penalty of perjury of the truth of the statements in the written appeal; and
         (c)   Any required appeal fee, which may be approved via resolution of
the City Council.
      12.   Appeal hearing procedure.
         (a)   Upon receipt of a valid written appeal, the City Manager shall
schedule an appeal hearing no earlier than ten days and no later than 30 days
from the receipt of the appeal.
         (b)   A hearing officer, appointed by the City Manager, will conduct
the appeal hearing.
         (c)   The hearing officer may only consider evidence that is relevant
to whether the permit should be revoked or not renewed. However, the formal
rules of evidence shall not apply to the hearing.
         (d)   The person contesting the action will be given the opportunity
to testify and present witnesses and evidence concerning the action. Unless
requested in advance, by the person contesting the action, a representative of
the city is not required to attend the hearing, provided that any such
appearance may be made at the discretion of the City Manager.
         (e)   The hearing officer may continue the hearing and request
additional information from either party prior to issuing a written decision.
         (f)   After considering all of the testimony and evidence submitted at
the hearing, the hearing officer must issue a written decision within a
reasonable time after the hearing, to uphold or deny the recommended action and
must list in the reasons for that decision. The hearing officer will use
preponderance of evidence as the standard of evidence in deciding issues. The
decision of the hearing officer will be final.
         (g)   If the hearing officer determines that the action should not be
upheld, the city will promptly refund the applicable amount of the appeal
hearing fee.
         (h)   The city shall serve the recipient of the notice of appeal or
nonrenewal with a copy of the hearing officer’s written decision by certified
mail.
   (H)   Operating/development agreement required. All commercial cannabis
permit holders shall enter into an operating or development agreement with the
city, approved by the City Council, prior to beginning commercial operations.
Such agreement shall set forth the terms and conditions under which the
commercial cannabis activity will operate, that are in addition to the
requirements of this code, including, but not limited to, payment of fees,
charges, and contributions as mutually agreed, and any such other terms which
promote the public health, safety, and welfare.
   (I)   Development and operational standards and security requirements.
      1.   Development and operational standards.
         (a)   Building requirements. All structures used in commercial
cannabis uses shall be located in structures designed for that occupancy or
use, and in compliance with the Building Code, per Title 4 of this code.
Commercial cannabis uses that provide access to the public including, but not
limited to, employees, vendors, contractors, business partners, members,
customers or patients shall meet this code and state requirements for
accessibility, including accessible parking, accessible path of travel,
restrooms, and washing facilities.
         (b)   Emissions control. All commercial cannabis uses shall utilize
appropriate measures in construction and, where applicable, operations to
prevent the emissions of dust, smoke, noxious gases, or other substances that
have the potential to impact local or regional air quality.
         (c)   Hours of operation. Hours of operation for commercial cannabis
uses may be established in permit conditions.
         (d)   Odor control and ventilation. Commercial cannabis uses shall
comply with all current and future state laws and regulations related to odor
control and ventilation, in addition to any specific requirements for the
particular use established in this section. No commercial cannabis use may
operate in a manner whereby cannabis odors are detectable from adjacent and
nearby properties. All commercial cannabis uses must install a ventilation
system that adequately controls odor, humidity, and mold.
         (e)   Lighting. All lighting shall be fully shielded, downward casting
and not spill over onto structures, other properties or the night sky. All
indoor and mixed light cultivation operations shall be fully contained, so that
little to no light escapes. Light shall not escape at a level that is visible
from neighboring properties between sunset and sunrise.
         (f)   Runoff and stormwater control. Runoff containing sediment, or
other waste or by-products, shall not be allowed to drain to the storm drain
system, waterways or adjacent lands. Prior to beginning grading or
construction, the operator shall prepare and implement a stormwater management
plan and an erosion and sediment control plan, approved by the city. The plan
must include a best management practices for erosion control during and after
construction, and a permanent drainage and erosion control measures pursuant to
this code.
         (g)   Energy use. Use of renewable resources for indoor cultivation
and mixed light operations is encouraged, and the city’s commercial cannabis
permit application procedures may award credit for use of renewable resources.
         (h)   Fencing. Fencing shall be consistent with the surrounding area
and shall not diminish the visual quality of the site or surrounding area.
Razor wire, chain-link and similar fencing shall not be permitted.
         (i)   Weights and measures. All scales used for commercial
transactions shall be registered for commercial use and sealed by the
Department of Agriculture/Weights and Measures.
         (j)   Tracking. Commercial cannabis operators shall comply with any
track and trace program established by the city or state agencies. Commercial
cannabis operators must maintain records tracking all cannabis production and
products and shall make all records related to commercial cannabis activity
available to the city upon request. The City Manager may require commercial
cannabis operators to comply with a county track and trace system if deemed
appropriate.
         (k)   Restriction on alcohol sales and consumption. No alcoholic
beverages may be sold, dispensed or consumed on or about the premises of any
commercial cannabis use business.
         (l)   Hazardous materials. All cultivation operations that utilize
hazardous materials shall comply with applicable hazardous waste generator,
underground storage tanks, above-ground storage tanks and AB 185 (hazardous
materials handling) requirements, and maintain any applicable permits for these
programs from appropriate agencies and officials.
         (m)   Hours of operation. Indoor cultivation activities may be
conducted seven days a week, 24 hours per day, as needed, unless otherwise
conditioned in the use permit or otherwise prohibited by the base zone. Outdoor
processing activities, deliveries and shipping shall be limited to the hours
from 8:00 a.m. to 8:00 p.m., unless a use permit is obtained that allows
otherwise.
         (n)   Waste management.
            (1)   A waste management plan addressing the storing, handling and
disposing of all waste by-products of the cultivation and processing activities
shall be submitted for review and approval by the city. This plan shall
characterize the volumes and types of waste generated, and the operational
measures that are proposed to manage and dispose or reuse the wastes in
compliance with any regulations adopted by the City Council through resolution
or ordinance.
            (2)   All garbage and refuse on the site shall be accumulated or
stored in non-absorbent, watertight, vector resistant, durable, easily
cleanable, galvanized metal or heavy plastic containers with tight-fitting
lids. No refuse container shall be filled beyond the capacity to completely
close the lid. All garbage and refuse on this site shall not be accumulated or
stored for more than seven calendar days and shall be properly disposed of
before the end of the seventh day. All waste, including, but not limited to,
refuse, garbage, green waste and recyclables, must be disposed of in accordance
with local and state codes, laws and regulations. All waste generated from
cannabis operations must be properly stored and secured to prevent access by
the public.
         (o)   Wastewater discharge. A wastewater management plan shall be
submitted identifying the amount of wastewater, excess irrigation and domestic
wastewater anticipated, pre-treatment method (when applicable), as well as the
disposal method. All cultivation operations shall comply with all state
regulations, any regulations adopted by the City Council through resolution or
ordinance, and the discharger shall submit to the city verification of
compliance with the waste discharge requirements of the applicable Regional
Water Quality Control Board, or waiver thereof. Excess irrigation water or
effluent from cultivation activities shall be directed to a sanitary sewer,
septic, irrigation, grey water or bio-retention treatment systems. All
wastewater discharged to the city sewer system shall comply with this code. If
discharging to a septic system, a system capacity evaluation by a qualified
sanitary engineer shall be included in the management plan. All domestic waste
for employees shall be disposed of in a permanent sanitary sewer or on-site
septic system demonstrated to have adequate capacity.
         (p)   Water supply. An on-site water supply source adequate to meet
all on-site uses on a sustainable basis shall be provided. Trucked water shall
not be allowed, except as noted below and for emergencies requiring immediate
action as determined by the City Manager. The on-site water supply shall be
considered adequate with documentation of any one of the following sources:
            (1)   Municipal water. The public water supplier providing water
service to the site has adequate supplies to serve the proposed use;
            (2)   Recycled water. The use of recycled process wastewater from
an on-site use or connection to a municipal recycled water supply for the
cultivation use, provided that an adequate on-site water supply is available
for employees and other uses; or
            (3)   Other water source. Other water source approved by the city.
      2.   Security requirements.
         (a)   Security plans. A commercial cannabis business must comply with
a security plan that is approved by the City Manager, in consultation with the
Police Department, that includes, but is not limited to, building security
specifications, lighting, cameras and alarms to preserve the safety of persons
and to protect the business from theft, including employee theft. The plan
shall include storage and transportation information, which describes in detail
the procedures for safely and securely storing and transporting all cannabis,
cannabis products and any currency.
            (1)   The Police Chief may require additional information be
included in the security plan.
            (2)   All security plans will be held by the city in a confidential
file and shall be exempt from disclosure as a public record, unless otherwise
prohibited by law or otherwise ordered by a court.
         (b)   Security measures. A permitted commercial cannabis business
shall implement sufficient security measures to deter and prevent the
unauthorized entrance into areas containing cannabis or cannabis products, and
to deter and prevent the theft of cannabis or cannabis products at the
commercial cannabis business. Except as may otherwise be determined by the
Chief of Police or his or her designee(s), these security measures shall
include, but shall not be limited to, all of the following:
            (1)   Preventing individuals from remaining on the premises of the
commercial cannabis business if they are not engaging in an activity directly
related to the permitted operations of the commercial cannabis business;
            (2)   Establishing limited access areas accessible only to
authorized commercial cannabis business personnel;
            (3)   Except for live growing plants which are being cultivated at
a cultivation facility, all cannabis and cannabis products shall be stored in a
secured and locked room, safe or vault. All cannabis and cannabis products,
including live plants which are being cultivated, shall be kept in a manner as
to prevent diversion, theft and loss;
            (4)   Installing 24-hour security surveillance cameras of at least
HD-quality to monitor all entrances and exits to and from the premises, all
interior spaces within the commercial cannabis business which are open and
accessible to the public, all interior spaces where cannabis, cash or currency,
is being stored for any period of time on a regular basis, and all interior
spaces where diversion of cannabis could reasonably occur. The commercial
cannabis business shall be responsible for ensuring that the security
surveillance camera’s footage is remotely accessible by the Chief of Police or
his or her designee(s), and that it is compatible with the city’s software and
hardware. In addition, remote and real-time, live access to the video footage
from the cameras shall be provided to the Chief of Police or his or her
designee(s) upon request. Video recordings shall be maintained for a minimum of
45 days. Video recordings shall be of sufficient quality for effective
prosecution of any crime found to have occurred on the site of the commercial
cannabis business. All surveillance equipment, records and recordings must be
stored in a secured area that is only accessible to management staff. Operators
must keep a current list of all authorized employees who have access to the
surveillance system and/or alarm system;
            (5)   Areas where cannabis is grown, tested, cured, manufactured or
stored shall have camera placement in the room facing the primary entry door at
a height which will provide a clear unobstructed view of activity without sight
blockage from lighting hoods, fixtures or other equipment;
            (6)   Cameras shall also be placed at each location where weighing,
packaging, transport preparation, processing or labeling activities occur;
            (7)   At least one camera must be dedicated to record the access
points to the secured surveillance recording area;
            (8)   Sensors and/or “key card” (proximity entry readers) access
shall be installed to detect entry and exit from all secure areas such that the
identity of those entering and exiting the facility is known. Any visitors to
the establishment must be screened and have their identity thoroughly
documented. Deadbolts must be placed on all doors entering and exiting the
facility, along with doors used after regular business hours;
            (9)   Panic buttons shall be installed in all commercial cannabis
businesses;
            (10)   Having a professionally installed, maintained and monitored
alarm system;
            (11)   Any bars installed on the windows or the doors of the
commercial cannabis business shall be installed only on the interior of the
building;
            (12)   Each commercial cannabis business shall have the capability
to remain secure during a power outage and shall ensure that all access doors
are not solely controlled by an electronic access panel to ensure that locks
are not released during a power outage;
            (13)   Each commercial cannabis business shall identify a
designated security representative/liaison to the city, who shall be reasonably
available to meet with the Chief of Police or his or her designee(s) regarding
any security-related measures and/or operational issues;
            (14)   The commercial cannabis business shall cooperate with the
city whenever the Chief of Police or his or her designee(s) makes a request,
upon reasonable notice to the commercial cannabis business, to inspect or audit
the effectiveness of any security plan or of any other requirement of this
title;
            (15)   A commercial cannabis business shall notify the Chief of
Police or his or her designee(s) within 24 hours after discovering any of the
following:
               A.   Significant discrepancies identified during inventory. The
level of significance shall be determined by the regulations promulgated by the
Chief of Police or his or her designee(s);
               B.   Diversion, theft, loss or any criminal activity involving
the commercial cannabis business or any agent or employee of the commercial
cannabis business;
               C.   The loss or unauthorized alteration of records related to
cannabis, registering qualifying patients, primary caregivers or employees or
agents of the commercial cannabis business; and
               D.   Any other breach of security.
            (16)   Weapons and firearms are prohibited on the property, unless
legally carried by a business owner or approved and properly licensed armed
security personnel.
   (J)   Employees.
      1.   All employees of commercial cannabis businesses must be at least 21
years of age or older.
      2.   All employees of commercial cannabis businesses shall be subject to
a background search by the California Department of Justice and local law
enforcement. Permits for commercial cannabis uses shall not be permitted for
operators with felony convictions, as specified in Cal. Penal Code § 667.5(c)
and Cal. Penal Code § 1192.7(c). Permits for commercial cannabis uses shall not
be permitted for operators with criminal convictions that substantially relate
to the qualifications, functions or duties of the business or profession,
including a felony conviction involving fraud, deceit or embezzlement or a
criminal conviction for the sale or provision of illegal controlled substances
to a minor.
      3.   Each owner or operator of a commercial cannabis business shall
maintain on-site a current register of all the employees currently employed by
the commercial cannabis business, and shall produce such register to the Chief
of Police or his or her designee(s), or any other city official authorized to
enforce this code for purposes of determining compliance with this chapter.
      4.   The Police Chief is authorized to implement an employee permit
system, whereby any employee or volunteer of a commercial cannabis business,
must obtain a work permit from the city. At a minimum, such program shall
require the issuance of a permit that must be visibly displayed at all times by
the employee or volunteer when he or she is working, and contains a recent
photograph of the individual and the name of the commercial cannabis business
where he or she works or volunteers. The Police Chief may establish a fee for
the cost of issuing such permit.
   (K)   Inspections. Commercial cannabis uses and operations shall be subject
to inspections by appropriate local and state agencies, including, but not
limited to, the Departments of Health Services, Agriculture/Weights and
Measures, the city’s Police Department, and city management. Cannabis
operations shall be inspected at random times for conformance with this code
and permit requirements. Unless otherwise allowed under the law, the inspection
shall be conducted during regular business hours, with at least 24 hours’
notice. If interference in the performance of the duty of the agency having
jurisdiction occurs, the agency may temporarily suspend the permit and order
the commercial cannabis operation to immediately cease operations.
   (L)   Monitoring. Administrative monitoring shall be required for each
commercial cannabis use and operation to be granted a permit. An annual
monitoring fee may be adopted by resolution of the City Council and collected
by the city.
   (M)   Health and safety. Commercial cannabis uses shall not create a public
nuisance or adversely affect the health or safety of the nearby residents or
businesses by creating dust, light, glare, heat, noise, noxious gasses, odor,
smoke, traffic, vibration, unsafe conditions or other impacts, or be hazardous
due to the use or storage of materials, processes, products, run off or wastes.
   (N)   Taxes. Commercial cannabis uses shall comply with all city taxes,
including any that may be enacted by the voters or any additional regulations
that may be promulgated in addition to all current applicable state and local
taxes.
   (O)   Liability and indemnification. To the fullest extent permitted by law,
any actions taken by a public officer or employee under the provisions of this
section shall not become a personal liability of any public officer or employee
of the city. To the maximum extent permitted by law, the permittees under this
section shall defend (with counsel acceptable to the city), indemnify and hold
harmless the city, the City Council and its respective officials, officers,
employees, representatives, agents and volunteers (hereafter collectively
called “city”) from any liability, damages, actions, claims, demands,
litigation, loss (direct or indirect), causes of action, proceedings or
judgments (including legal costs, attorneys’ fees, expert witness or consultant
fees, City Attorney or staff time, expenses or costs) (collectively called
“action”) against the city to attack, set aside, void or annul, any cannabis-
related approvals and actions, and strictly comply with the conditions under
which such permit is granted, if any. The city may elect, in its sole
discretion, to participate in the defense of said action, and the permittee
shall reimburse the city for its reasonable legal costs and attorneys’ fees.
Permittees shall be required to agree to the above obligations in writing.
   (P)   Violations and enforcement.
      1.   Public nuisance. Any activity performed contrary to the provisions
of this section is hereby declared to be a public nuisance.
      2.   Violation. Any violation of a term, condition or the approved plans
and specifications of any permit issued pursuant to this section shall
constitute a violation.
      3.   Separate offense. Each and every day during any portion of which any
violation is committed, continued, or allowed to continue shall be a separate
offense.
      4.   Remedies.
         (a)   In addition to the revocation and suspension provisions in this
section and any or all available remedies under the law, the following remedies
shall be available to the city or other enforcement agency regarding violations
of this section:
            (1)   Administrative enforcement pursuant to Title 1, Chapter 18 of
this code, and any other applicable section;
            (2)   Civil enforcement pursuant to this code; and
            (3)   Criminal enforcement if allowed under state law.
         (b)   City Council may, by resolution, adopt specific fines, fees and
penalty amounts for violations and enforcement costs related to this section.
In any enforcement action brought pursuant to this section, whether by
administrative or judicial proceedings, each person who causes, permits,
suffers or maintains the unlawful cannabis use, shall be liable for all costs
incurred by the city, including, but not limited to, administrative costs and
any and all costs incurred to undertake, or to cause or compel any responsible
person to undertake, and any abatement action in compliance with the
requirements of this section. In any action by the agency having jurisdiction
to abate unlawful cannabis uses under this section, whether by administrative
or judicial proceedings, the prevailing party shall be entitled to a recovery
of the reasonable attorneys’ fees incurred. Recovery of attorney fees under
this subsection (P)4.(b) shall be limited to those actions or proceedings in
which the city elects, at the initiation of that action or proceeding, to seek
recovery of its own attorney fees. In no action, administrative proceeding, or
special proceeding, shall an award of attorney fees to a prevailing party
exceed the amount of reasonable attorneys’ fees incurred by the city in the
action or proceeding.
(Ord. 632, passed 12-19-2017)
§ 5-5-15 PERSONAL CANNABIS CULTIVATION.
   (A)   Outdoor personal cannabis cultivation prohibited. All outdoor personal
cannabis cultivation is expressly prohibited in all zoning districts. OUTDOOR
for purposes of this section means any location within the city that is not
within a fully enclosed and secure structure. It is hereby declared to be
unlawful and a public nuisance for any person owning, leasing, occupying or
having charge or possession of any parcel within any zoning district in the
city to cause or allow such parcel to be used for the outdoor cultivation of
cannabis, regardless of whether such cultivation is for medical, recreational,
personal or commercial uses.
   (B)   Indoor personal cannabis cultivation allowed in compliance with this
section only. It is hereby declared to be unlawful and a public nuisance for
any person owning, leasing, occupying or having charge or possession of any
parcel in the city to cause or allow such parcel to be used for the personal
cultivation of cannabis plants within a fully enclosed, and secure structure on
the parcel, except as provided in subsections (B)1. and (B)2. of this section.
      1.   Individuals permitted to cultivate cannabis indoors.
         (a)   Age restrictions. Only a person who is at least 18 years of age
and either a qualified patient or a primary caregiver, or a person who is at
least 21 years of age, may engage in personal indoor cultivation of cannabis.
         (b)   Residency requirement. The person cultivating the cannabis shall
reside full-time on the premises where the indoor cultivation of cannabis
occurs.
         (c)   Permission of owner. Tenants or anyone cultivating shall obtain
the written permission and signature of the property owner(s) prior to
cultivating cannabis. A notarized signature from the owner(s) of the property
consenting to the cultivation of cannabis at the premises, on a form acceptable
to the city, shall be made available to the city upon request by any city
official.
      2.   Indoor cultivation standards. Cannabis cultivated indoors, within
the city, shall be in conformance with the following standards:
         (a)   Indoor personal cannabis cultivation is permitted only within a
private residence or within a legal accessory structure to a private residence
that is fully enclosed and secure, and meets the requirements of this section.
PRIVATE RESIDENCE means any house, apartment unit, mobilehome or other similar
dwelling;
         (b)   Personal cannabis cultivation is permitted only within fully
enclosed and secured structures and the cultivation area must be inaccessible
to minors. A fully enclosed and secure structure used for the cultivation of
cannabis that is separate from the main residential structure on a premises
must maintain a minimum ten-foot setback from any property line. Any parcel
where cannabis is cultivated must be enclosed by a solid fence at least six
feet in height;
         (c)   Cannabis cultivation may not occur in both a detached structure
and inside a residence on the same parcel. Only one indoor cultivation area is
allowed per parcel;
         (d)   Cannabis cultivation areas shall not be accessible to persons
under 18 years of age. Cultivation areas shall be secured by lock and key or
another security device which prevents unauthorized entry;
         (e)   Indoor cultivation of cannabis shall not exceed six cannabis
plants per private residence, regardless of how many qualified adults,
qualified patients or primary caregivers are residing at the private residence;
         (f)   Cannabis cultivation shall not occur on any carpeted area;
         (g)   Cannabis cultivation lighting shall not exceed 1,200 watts and
shall comply with the California Building, Electrical and Fire Codes as adopted
by the city;
         (h)   The use of gas products (CO2, butane and the like) or generators
for cannabis cultivation or processing is prohibited;
         (i)   Cannabis cultivation for sale or any commercial purpose is
prohibited;
         (j)   From a public right-of-way, there shall be no exterior evidence
of cannabis cultivation;
         (k)   The residence shall be occupied and is required to maintain a
functioning kitchen and bathroom(s);
         (l)   Any cannabis cultivation area located within a residence shall
not create a humidity or mold problem in violation of the city’s Building and
State Health and Safety Codes;
         (m)   Any structure used for the cultivation of cannabis must have
proper ventilation to prevent mold damage and to prevent cannabis plant odors
or particles from becoming a public nuisance to surrounding properties or the
public. A public nuisance may be deemed to exist if the cultivation produces
odors which are disturbing to people of normal sensitivity residing or present
on adjacent or nearby property or areas open to the public;
         (n)   The cannabis cultivation area shall not adversely affect the
health or safety of the nearby residents by creating dust, glare, heat, noise,
smoke, traffic, vibration or other impacts, and shall not be hazardous due to
the use or storage of materials, processes, products or wastes;
         (o)   Any modification to existing structures or plumbing, electrical
or mechanical systems shall require a permit from the building official or his
or her designee(s); and
         (p)   All personal cannabis cultivation waste must be disposed of in a
manner that does not discharge pollutants into the watercourse or stormwater
system. Additionally, all personal cannabis waste that includes mature flowers
or seeds shall be disposed of by shredding and composting, or mixing the waste
with other ground materials resulting in a mixture that is at least 50% non-
cannabis waste by volume.
   (C)   Violation, penalty; generally. Any violation of this section shall be
enforced by any applicable laws or ordinances, including, but not limited to,
Title 1, Chapters 4, 17, 18 and 19 of this code.
(Ord. 632, passed 12-19-2017)
CHAPTER 6: ADMINISTRATION
Section
5-6-1 Powers and duties
5-6-2 Amendments and rezoning
5-6-3 Development agreements
5-6-4 Enforcement
5-6-5 Nonconforming uses
5-6-6 Public hearings; setting of public hearings
5-6-7 Site plan and design review
5-6-8 Specific plans; intent
5-6-9 Use permits, temporary and conditional
5-6-10 Zoning variances
5-6-11 Planned development permit process
5-6-11-1 Project plan
5-6-11-2 Development plan
5-6-12 Reasonable accommodation
5-6-12-1 Purpose
5-6-12-2 Applicability
5-6-12-3 Procedure
5-6-12-4 Approval findings
5-6-12-5 Conditions of approval
5-6-12-6 Appeals
§ 5-6-1 POWERS AND DUTIES.
   (A)   Duties of City Council. The City Council shall perform the following
specific duties:
      1.   To render decisions on amendments to this title and rezonings; and
      2.   To act on appeals of denial of variances, denial and/or revocation
of use permits or conditional use permits by the Planning Commission.
   (B)   Duties of Planning Commission. The City Planning Commission shall
perform the following specific duties:
      1.   To interpret, administer and enforce the provisions of this title in
such a way as to carry out the intent and purpose of the general plan as
interpreted on the official zoning map; and
      2.   To act on variances from the provisions of this title regarding the
development of land, construction, enlargement or alteration of any building or
structure; to recommend on site plan/design review applications, to act on use
permits, to revoke use permits as necessary; to provide interpretations of the
zoning ordinance, to act on parcel maps; to provide recommendations to the City
Council on rezonings, tentative maps, development agreements and general plan
amendments.
   (C)   Duties of the Planning Director. The Planning Director shall perform
the following specific duties:
      1.   Implement actions of the City Council and Planning Commission;
      2.   Process discretionary development applications and review and issue
temporary use permits;
      3.   Approve minor (i.e., nonsubstantive) changes to Planning Commission
and City Council approved plans and permits.
   (D)   Revocation of permits and variances.
      1.   Unless otherwise specifically provided in this zoning title, the
Planning Commission may revoke or modify any conditional use permit, occupancy
permit or variance on one or more of the following grounds:
         (a)   The approval was obtained by fraud;
         (b)   The use for which the approval was granted is not being
exercised;
         (c)   The use for which the approval was granted has ceased or has
been suspended for one year or more;
         (d)   The granted permit or variance is being, or has been, exercised
contrary to the terms and conditions of such approval or in violation of any
statute, ordinance, law or regulation;
         (e)   The use for which the approval was granted was so exercised as
to be detrimental to the public health or safety or as to constitute a
nuisance; or
         (f)   The continued exercise of the use for which the approval was
granted appears to be detrimental or contrary to the public welfare.
      2.   The Planning Commission shall hold a public hearing on any proposed
revocation or modification after giving written notice to the permittee or
property owner at least ten days prior to the hearing. If the Planning
Commission is satisfied that one or more of the grounds specified in subsection
(D)1. of this section exists, the Commission shall revoke the permit or
variance or take such other action as may be necessary to remedy said
subsection (D)1. violation and to ensure compliance with the applicable
statutes, ordinances, laws, regulations and terms and conditions.
      3.   If the permittee or property owner or any other person is
dissatisfied with the action of the Planning Commission, he or she may appeal
in writing to the City Council within ten days of the date the Planning
Commission renders a decision on the proposed revocation or modification. The
City Council shall set a date for public hearing of the appeal and shall give
notice to the appellant and the affected permittee or property owner and to the
Planning Commission of such appeal; whereupon the Planning Commission shall
submit a report to the City Council setting forth the reasons for the action
taken by the Commission. The City Council shall render its decision within 30
days of the public hearing.
(Ord. 553, passed 8-16-2005; Ord. 619, passed 6-17-2014)
§ 5-6-2 AMENDMENTS AND REZONING.
   (A)   General provisions. An amendment to this title or a rezoning may
amend, supplement or change the regulations for zoning of property now or
hereafter established by this title; provided, that the city zoning regulations
shall be consistent with the general plan in accordance with Cal. Gov’t Code §
65860. In the event these zoning regulations become inconsistent with the
general plan by reason of amendment to said plan, or to any element of such
plan, these zoning regulations shall be amended within a reasonable time to
remain consistent with the general plan.
   (B)   Application for amendment or rezoning initiation. An amendment or
rezoning may be initiated by any one of the following:
      1.   Resolution of intention of the Planning Commission. The City Council
must approve the resolution of intention by the Planning Commission prior to
initiation of the requested amendment or rezone;
      2.   Resolution of intention of the City Council;
      3.   (a)   A verified petition of one or more record owners of the
property subject to the proposed amendment, to be filed with the Planning
Commission; and
         (b)   An application form, accompanied by the appropriate fees, must
be filed with the city.
      4.   The City Manager, by directing staff to prepare a proposed amendment
or amendments.
   (C)   Hearings. The Planning Commission shall hold public hearings as
required by law on any proposed amendment or rezoning and shall give public
notice including time, place and a general description of the area in question
by the following methods:
      1.   In connection with the hearing on the proposed rezoning of property
or amendment of the text of this title, at least one publication in an official
newspaper of general circulation in the county not less than ten calendar days
prior to the date of the hearing; and
      2.   In connection with prezoning, at least one notice shall be published
in an official newspaper of general circulation in the county not less than ten
days prior to the date of the hearing.
   (D)   Planning Commission. After the hearing, the Planning Commission shall
submit its recommendation in written form to the City Council. The
recommendation shall include the reasons for the recommendation, relationship
of the proposed ordinance or amendment to the adopted general plan and shall be
transmitted to the City Council in the form and manner as may be specified by
the City Council.
   (E)   City Council action. Upon receipt of the recommendation of the
Planning Commission, the City Council shall set the matter for public hearing
and give notice of the time, place and purpose of such hearing by causing a
notice thereof to be published in at least one regular issue of the official
newspaper of general circulation in the county at least ten days before said
hearing.
   (F)   Determination. The City Council may approve, modify or disapprove the
recommendation of the Planning Commission; provided, that any modification of
the proposed amendment or rezoning by the City Council shall first be referred
to the Planning Commission for report and recommendation, but not requiring a
public hearing. Failure of the Planning Commission to act within 40 days, after
such reference or such longer period as designated by the City Council, shall
be deemed to be approval of the proposed modification.
   (G)   Withdrawal of petition or appeal. The Planning Commission or the City
Council, at its discretion, may permit the withdrawal of any petition or appeal
filed hereunder, or may abandon any proceedings for an amendment or rezoning
initiated by itself.
   (H)   Reapplication. In the event of a denial of an amendment or rezoning,
reapplication on the same or substantially the same exception to this title on
the same or substantially the same site shall not be filed within one year from
the date of denial.
   (I)   Judicial review. The time to appeal a decision of the City Council
pursuant to this section shall be governed by the provisions of Cal. Code of
Civil Procedure § 1094.6 as currently enacted.
(Ord. 553, passed 8-16-2005; Ord. 601, passed 3-19-2013)
§ 5-6-3 DEVELOPMENT AGREEMENTS.
   (A)   Intention and limitation. The development agreement ordinance was
adopted pursuant to the authority of Cal. Gov’t Code §§ 65864 through 65869.5.
Unless otherwise provided by state law, the provisions set out in this section
are the exclusive procedures and rules relating to development agreements. In
case of conflict, the provisions of state law shall prevail over any other
provisions of this chapter.
   (B)   Custodian of agreement file. The agreement file shall be held in the
official custody of the City Clerk. The file shall include an executed copy of
the agreement and all the originals of all exhibits, reports of periodic
review, amendments, modifications or cancellation to the agreement.
   (C)   Qualification of the applicant.
      1.   Only a qualified applicant or his or her authorized agent may file
any application pursuant to this chapter. A qualified applicant is a person who
has a legal or an equitable interest in the real property which is subject of
the development agreement. The city may require an applicant to submit proof or
their interest in the real property and of the authority of the agent.
      2.   A qualified applicant or his or her authorized agent may file the
application if the person has a legal or an equitable interest in the real
property which is the subject of the development agreement.
   (D)   Application; required information. Application for a development
agreement shall be made to the Planning Department on a form prescribed by the
city planner or planning designee. The application shall include the required
data as follows:
      1.   A map drawn to scale showing the property of which the development
agreement is requested and the property lines for the properties within 300
feet of the exterior boundary lines of the subject property;
      2.   A clear indication of the names of all streets and of the assessor’s
parcel numbers of each parcel shown on the map that is the subject of the
development agreement;
      3.   The names and mailing addresses as listed on the latest assessment
roll of the owners of the property shown on the map;
      4.   In addition to the required information identified on the
application form, the applicant shall submit a written description of the
project, the proposed uses, the density and intensity of use, the maximum
height and size of proposed structures, and any proposed dedication of land if
applicable. The developer shall also submit a statement justifying the findings
the Council must make in subsection (J) of this section;
      5.   The proposed term of the development agreement may range from one
year to ten years with an extension of five years based on specific intervals
of development;
      6.   Establishment of vested rights, including project approvals and
subsequent approvals to be vested, if any; and
      7.   The legal description or other description acceptable to the
Planning Director of the subject property, which must be provided prior to the
approval of the City Council.
   (E)   Application fee. The city has established by resolution a schedule of
fees for the purpose of defraying the expense involved in the processing of the
application. The schedule of fees is available in the Planning Department.
   (F)   Application withdrawal. An applicant may withdraw an application filed
pursuant to this chapter at any time prior to City Council action on the
application. Any fee required for processing the application shall not be
returned or refunded to the applicant.
   (G)   Submittal with other applications. The city may require that a
development agreement application be filed concurrently with other development
related applications to ensure that adequate information is available to allow
for the thorough review of the project’s benefits and impacts.
   (H)   Public hearing; transmittal to Commission. The Planning Director shall
transmit the application and the draft agreement to the Planning Commission for
a public hearing when all of the necessary reports and recommendations are
complete. The Planning Commission shall hold a public hearing on the
development application as prescribed in the California Government Code.
   (I)   Public hearing by City Council.
      1.   After the Planning Commission has held a public hearing, it shall
render its decision in the form of a written report, and a recommendation shall
include proposed findings on the matters stated in this chapter.
      2.   Prior to the public hearing, the applicant shall submit a letter to
the city indicating agreement with the provisions of the proposed development
agreement. If the applicant does not concur with all provisions, the letter
shall specify the areas of disagreement and indicate the reasons for such
disagreement.
      3.   Upon receipt of the recommendation and report of the Planning
Commission, the City Council shall hold a required public hearing.
      4.   After the Council has held a public hearing, it may approve, modify
and approve, or disapprove the development agreement. It may, but need not,
refer to matters not previously considered by the Planning Commission for a
report and recommendation. The Planning Commission may, but need not, hold a
public hearing on matters referred to it by the City Council.
   (J)   Action by City Council.
      1.   In order to approve a development agreement, the City Council shall
adopt findings of fact, including, but not limited to, the following:
         (a)   That the development agreement is consistent with the goals,
objectives and policies of the general plan, and any applicable specific plan
or policy plan;
         (b)   That the development agreement is compatible with the uses
authorized in, and the regulations prescribed for, the land use district in
which the real property is or will be located;
         (c)   That the development agreement would not be detrimental to the
public health, safety or welfare of the community;
         (d)   That the development agreement would promote the public
convenience, general welfare, and good land use practices, and is in the best
interest of the community;
         (e)   That the development agreement would not adversely affect the
orderly development of property or the preservation of property values; and
         (f)   That the development agreement would promote and encourage the
development of the proposed project by providing a greater degree of requisite
certainty;
      2.   A development agreement shall be adopted by ordinance.
   (K)   Execution of development agreement. The applicant shall execute the
development agreement within 15 calendar days after adoption of the ordinance.
Failure to execute the agreement shall result in the agreement becoming null
and void.
   (L)   Amendment of development agreement. An amendment to a development
agreement shall be subject to the same public notice and hearing process as
adoption of the agreement. When adopting an amendment, the City Council shall
make findings, including, but not limited to, that the amendment is consistent
with the provisions of the agreement, with the original intent of the
development agreement and that the amendment will not be detrimental to the
public health, safety or general welfare of the community. Any revision to the
development agreement which does not relate to the term of the agreement,
permitted uses of the property, provisions for the reservation or dedication of
land or monetary exactions of the developer, shall be considered an
administrative adjustment, and is not an amendment, and no public hearing shall
be required, unless otherwise determined by the Planning Director.
   (M)   Periodic review. The Planning Commission shall, not less than once
every 12 months from the effective date of the development agreement, review
the same for compliance with its terms and conditions. The Planning Commission
shall determine upon the basis of substantial evidence whether or not, for the
period under review, there has been compliance in good faith with the terms and
conditions of the agreement. After the public hearing, the Planning Commission
shall render its decision in the form of a written report to the City Council.
If the Planning Commission determines that there has not been compliance in
good faith with the terms and conditions of the agreement, the Commission may
include in its report a recommendation for the modification or termination of
the agreement.
   (N)   Hearing following periodic review.
      1.   The City Council shall place the report of the Commission on its
agenda at the second regularly scheduled City Council meeting following the
receipt of the Planning Commission report by the City Council.
      2.   If the Planning Commission reports that there has been compliance in
good faith with the terms and conditions of the agreement for the period under
review, the City Council shall accept the report for filing and shall not take
any further action unless:
         (a)   The City Council, on its own motion, votes to set the matter for
public hearing; and
         (b)   An appeal is filed with the City Council from the determination
of the Planning Commission within 15 days of the Planning Commission’s report.
      3.   If the Planning Commission reports that there has not been
compliance in good faith with the terms and conditions of the agreement for the
period under review, the City Council shall hold a public hearing to consider
the report and recommendations of the Commission. Notice shall be given as
provided in accordance with Cal. Gov’t Code §§ 65867, 65090 and 65091.
      4.   At the conclusion of the public hearing, the City Council may refer
the matter to the Planning Commission for a further report and recommendation
or it may make a final determination on whether or not there has been
compliance in good faith with the terms and conditions of the agreement.
      5.   If the City Council finds and determines, on the basis of
substantial evidence, that there has not been compliance in good faith with the
terms and conditions of the agreement for the period under review, the City
Council may terminate the agreement or impose those conditions which it
considers necessary and appropriate to protect the interests of the city. Any
court action or proceeding to attack, review, set aside, void or annul the
final determination by the City Council shall be commenced within 60 days from
the date upon which a final determination is made by the City Council.
   (O)   Cancellation or termination of development agreement.
      1.   Intent to cancel or terminate a development agreement shall be
subject to the same public notice and hearing process as adoption of the
agreement.
      2.   Any development agreement may be canceled by mutual consent of the
parties. Following a public hearing by the Planning Commission and City
Council, the Council shall adopt a resolution canceling the development
agreement.
   (P)   Termination of the development agreement by the city.
      1.   If, at any time during the term of a development agreement, the
Planning Director finds, on the basis of substantial evidence, that the
developer has not complied in good faith with the terms and conditions of the
development agreement, the Planning Commission will conduct a public hearing,
at which time the developer must demonstrate good faith compliance with the
terms of the development agreement.
         (a)   The burden of proof to show substantial evidence of compliance
by the developer shall be upon the developer.
         (b)   If such compliance has not been demonstrated to the satisfaction
of the City Council, they will terminate the development agreement or recommend
new terms and conditions intended to remedy the noncompliance.
      2.   The City Council shall review the recommendation of the Planning
Commission at which time the developer and any other interested persons shall
be entitled to submit such evidence and testimony as may be germane to the
issue of the developer’s good faith compliance with the terms of the
development agreement.
         (a)   If the City Council finds, based upon substantial evidence,
noncompliance with the terms and conditions of the development agreement, the
City Council may either cancel the development agreement upon giving 60 days’
notice to the developer or, in its discretion, may allow new terms and
conditions intended to remedy such noncompliance;
         (b)   The City Council may impose such conditions to the action it
takes as it considers necessary to protect the interests of the city; and
         (c)   The decision of the City Council shall be final.
   (Q)   Rights of the parties after cancellation or termination. In the event
that a development agreement should be canceled, or otherwise terminated,
unless otherwise agreed, all rights of the developer, property owner, or
successors in interest under the development agreement shall terminate.
      1.   Any and all benefits, including money or land, received by the city
shall be retained by the city. Notwithstanding the above provision, any
termination of the development agreement shall not prevent the developer from
completing and occupying a building or other improvements authorized pursuant
to a valid building permit previously approved by the city or under
construction at the time of termination.
      2.   The city may take any action permitted by law to prevent, stop or
correct any violation of law occurring during and after construction, and the
developer or any tenant shall not occupy any portion of the project or any
building not authorized by a previously issued building permit.
(Ord. 553, passed 8-16-2005)
§ 5-6-4 ENFORCEMENT.
   (A)   Violation, enforcement and penalty.
      1.   Any building or structure set up, erected, constructed, altered,
enlarged, converted, moved or maintained contrary to the provisions of this
title, and any use of any land, building or premises established, conducted,
operated or maintained contrary to the provisions of this title shall be, and
the same is hereby declared to be, unlawful and a public nuisance and the City
Attorney shall, upon order of the City Council, immediately commence action or
proceeding for the abatement and removal and enjoinment thereof in the manner
provided by law, and shall take over other steps and shall apply to such courts
as may have jurisdiction to grant such relief and will abate and remove such
building or structure, and restrain and enjoin any person from setting up,
erecting, building, maintaining or using any such building or structure or
using property contrary to the provisions of this title. The remedies provided
for herein shall be cumulative and exclusive.
      2.   Any person violating or causing violation of any of the provisions
of this title shall be subject to the prosecution of a misdemeanor and upon
conviction thereof shall be punishable as provided in §
1-4-1 of this code.
      3.   All permits and licenses issued shall conform to the provisions of
this title, and in no case shall a permit or license be issued for uses,
buildings or purposes in conflict with the provisions of this title. Any such
license or permit issued in conflict with the provisions of this title shall be
null and void.
      4.   It shall be the duty of the City Manager or his or her designee to
enforce the provisions of this title pertaining to the use of lands, buildings
or structures, the erection, construction, reconstruction, moving, alterations
or additions to any buildings or structures.
      5.   Any building or structure erected, constructed or moved or
maintained contrary to the provisions of this title, any use of land or
buildings operated or maintained contrary to the provisions of this title are
hereby declared to be a public nuisance and illegal.
   (B)   Complaints regarding violations. If or when a violation of this title
occurs or is alleged to have occurred, any person may file a written or oral
complaint with the Secretary of the Planning Commission. This complaint shall
state in full the causes and basis thereof and be filed with the Planning
Commission. The complaint shall immediately be recorded, investigated and acted
upon as provided by this title. The alleged violator shall be notified in
written form, of such complaint and the right to be heard on such matter.
(Ord. 553, passed 8-16-2005)
§ 5-6-5 NONCONFORMING USES.
   (A)   Intent.
      1.   Within the districts established by this section or amendments that
may be adopted there exist lots, structures and uses of land and structures
which were lawful before this section was passed or amended, but which would be
prohibited, regulated or restricted under the terms of this section.
      2.   It is the intent of this section to permit these nonconformities to
continue until they are removed, but not to encourage their survival. Such uses
are declared by this section to be incompatible with permitted uses in the
districts involved. It is further the intent of this section that
nonconformities shall not be enlarged upon, expanded or extended, nor be used
as grounds for adding other structures or uses prohibited elsewhere in the same
district.
      3.   A nonconforming use of a structure, a nonconforming use of land or a
nonconforming use of a structure and land shall not be extended or enlarged
after passage of this section by the addition of other uses of a nature which
would be prohibited generally in the district involved.
      4.   To avoid undue hardship, nothing in this section shall be deemed to
require a change in the plans, construction or designated use of any building
on which actual construction was lawfully begun prior to the effective date of
adoption or amendment of this section and upon which actual building
construction has been diligently carried on. ACTUAL CONSTRUCTION is hereby
defined to include the placing of construction materials in permanent position
and fastened in a permanent manner; except that where demolition or removal of
an existing building has been substantially begun preparatory to rebuilding,
such demolition or removal shall be deemed to be actual construction, provided
that work shall be diligently carried on until completion of the building
involved.
   (B)   Nonconforming lots of record; single-family dwellings.
      1.   In any district in which single-family dwellings are permitted,
notwithstanding limitations imposed by other provisions of this section, a
single-family dwelling and customary accessory buildings may be erected on any
single lot of record at the effective date of adoption or amendment of this
section. Such lots must be in separate ownership and not of continuous frontage
with other lots in the same ownership. This provision shall apply even though
such lot fails to meet the requirements for area or width, or both, that are
generally applicable in the district, provided that yard dimensions and other
requirements not involving the area or width, or both, of the lot shall conform
to the regulations for the district in which such lot is located. Variance of
area, width and yard requirements shall be obtained only through action of the
Planning Commission.
      2.   In any district in which single-family dwellings are permitted, lots
that are 25 feet or less exist with continuous frontage in single ownership of
record at the time of the passage or amendment of this section, and if all or
part of the lots do not meet the requirements for lot width and area as
established by this section, the lands involved shall be considered to be an
undivided parcel for the purposes of this section, and no portion of said
parcel shall be used or sold which does not meet lot width and area
requirements established by this section for single-family homes, nor shall any
division of the parcel be made which leaves remaining any lot with width or
area below the requirements stated in this section.
   (C)   Nonconforming uses of land. Where, at the effective date of adoption
or amendment of this section, lawful use of land exists that is made no longer
permissible under the terms of this section as enacted or amended, such may be
continued, so long as it remains otherwise lawful, subject to the following
provisions.
      1.   No such nonconforming use shall be enlarged or increased, nor
extended to occupy a greater area of land than was occupied at the effective
date of adoption or amendment of this section.
      2.   No such nonconforming use shall be moved in whole or in part to any
other portion of the lot or parcel occupied by such use at the effective date
of adoption or amendment of this section.
      3.   If any such nonconforming use of land ceases for any reason for a
period of more than six months, any subsequent use of such land shall conform
to the regulations specified by this section for the district in which such
land is located.
         (a)   Nonconforming agricultural uses. Due to the nature of
agricultural activities, use of agricultural land may cease for six months or
more in the normal course of farming. If the legal nonconforming use status of
a property used for agriculture is lost due to its inactivity for six months,
the property owner may apply for a conditional use permit, pursuant to §
5-6-9 of this chapter, seeking to continue the use of the property for
agriculture as a legal nonconforming use.
         (b)   Findings. Prior to granting a conditional use permit to continue
a legal nonconforming agricultural use within the city, the Planning Commission
must make the findings required in §
5-6-9(I)3. of this chapter. The Planning Commission must also find that:
            (1)   The applicant has provided substantial evidence to establish
that the subject property described in the permit application was used for
agricultural purposes, as a legal nonconforming use, within the two years
preceding the application date; and
            (2)   The granting of a conditional use permit to allow
agricultural use of the land described in the permit application will not be
materially detrimental to the public welfare or injurious to the property or
improvements in the vicinity.
      4.   Failure to comply with all applicable parking, loading and street
improvement requirements for the use shall make that use nonconforming.
   (D)   Nonconforming structures. Where a lawful structure exists at the
effective date of adoption or amendment of this section that could not be built
under the terms of this section by reason of restriction on area, lot coverage,
height, yards, parking and loading, street improvements, or other
characteristics of the structure or its location on the lot, such structure may
be continued so long as it remains otherwise lawful, subject to the following
provisions.
      1.   No such structure may be enlarged or altered in any way unless such
enlargement or alteration brings the structure into conformity with the
regulations for the district in which the structure is located.
      2.   Should such structure be destroyed by any means to an extent of more
than 50% of its replacement cost at time of destruction, the city shall allow
the residential property owner to rebuild one time. If the property is
destroyed again, the property owner must receive written authorization from the
City Council if it is going to be rebuilt.
      3.   Should such structure be moved for any reason for any distance, it
shall thereafter conform to the regulations for the district in which it is
located after it is moved.
   (E)   Nonconforming uses of structures or of structures and premises in
combination. If a lawful use of a structure, or of a structure and premises in
combination, exists at the effective date of adoption or amendment of this
section that would not be allowed in the district under the terms of this
section, the lawful use may be continued so long as it remains otherwise
lawful, subject to the following provisions.
      1.   No existing structure devoted to a use not permitted by this section
in the district in which it is located shall be enlarged, extended,
constructed, reconstructed, moved or structurally altered except in changing
the use of the structure in which it is located.
      2.   A nonconforming use may be extended throughout any part of a
building (whether or not such part was obviously arranged or designed for such
nonconforming use at the time of the amendment of this section) provided a use
permit is first secured for the entire nonconforming use. In no event shall
such nonconforming use be extended to occupy any land outside such building.
      3.   If no structural alterations are made, any nonconforming use of a
structure, or structure and premises, may be changed to any nonconforming use
provided that the Planning Commission, by making findings in the specific case,
shall find that the proposed use is equally appropriate or more appropriate to
the district than the existing nonconforming use. In permitting such change,
the Planning Commission may require appropriate conditions and safeguards in
accordance with the provisions of this section.
      4.   Any structure, or structure and land in combination, in or on which
a nonconforming use is superseded by a permitted use, shall thereafter conform
to the regulations for the district in which such structure is located, and the
nonconforming use may not thereafter be resumed.
      5.   When a nonconforming use of a structure, or structure and premises
in combination, is discontinued or abandoned for six consecutive months or for
18 months during any three-year period, the structure, or structure and
premises in combination, shall not thereafter be used except in conformance
with the regulations of the district in which it is located.
      6.   Where nonconforming use status applies to a structure and premises
in combination, removal or destruction of the structure shall eliminate the
nonconforming status of the land.
      7.   Failure to comply with all applicable parking, loading and street
improvement requirements for the use shall make that use nonconforming.
   (F)   Repairs and maintenance/cost limitations. On any building devoted in
whole or in part to any nonconforming use, work may be done in any period of 12
consecutive months on ordinary repairs, or on repair or replacement of
nonbearing walls, fixtures, wiring or plumbing to an extent the cost of such
repairs do not exceed 25% of the appraised fair market value of the building,
provided that the cubic content of the building as it existed at the time of
passage or amendment of this section shall not be increased.
   (G)   Exclusions.
      1.   Any health related repairs, such as removal of lead based paint,
asbestos or mold; repairs necessary for fire safety and other safety features;
repairs recommended by the city building inspector as necessary to correct
building code violations; and, repairs necessary to accommodate special needs
circumstances for the elderly or handicapped, such as shower fixtures, ramps,
security screen doors, additional exterior lighting and the like shall be
excluded from pertaining to the cost limitations of this section. Such
exclusions shall be at the discretion of the city.
      2.   If a nonconforming structure or portion of a structure containing a
nonconforming use becomes physically unsafe or unlawful due to lack of repairs
and maintenance, and is declared by any duly authorized official to be unsafe
or unlawful by reason of physical condition, it shall not thereafter be
restored, repaired or rebuilt except in conformity with the regulations of the
district in which it is located, unless the cost of the repairs required to be
made within the time period specified by the duly authorized official will not
exceed the cost limitation in subsection (F) of this section and unless no
structural alterations are required to be made to the building.
   (H)   Use permits. A use permit shall be required for all nonconforming
expansion projects in any commercial and/or residential district. Property
owners of nonconforming structures applying for low interest housing
rehabilitation loans, such as the community development block grant (CDBG),
shall be subject to the use permit process for discretionary review of their
expansion projects. See §
5-6-9, Use Permits, Temporary and Conditional, of this chapter.
   (I)   Appeal hearing:. If the property owner is dissatisfied with the
decision taken by any duly authorized official pursuant to the subsections (A)
through (H) of this section, he or she must file a written appeal within ten
days of the decision of the duly authorized official to the City Council. The
City Council shall set a date for a public hearing and give notice to the duly
authorized official of such appeal. The City Council shall render its decision
within 30 days of said public hearing.
   (J)   Judicial review. The time to appeal a decision of the City Council
pursuant to this section shall be governed by the provisions of Cal. Code of
Civil Procedure § 1094.6 as currently enacted.
(Ord. 590, passed 7-5-2011)
§ 5-6-6 PUBLIC HEARINGS; SETTING OF PUBLIC HEARINGS.
   Notwithstanding any provision of this title to the contrary:
   (A)   At the time of the filing of a complete and proper application with
the Planning Commission, the Secretary of the Planning Commission, or the city
planner for any permit, variance, amendment to this title, or rezoning, the
Secretary of the Planning Commission shall determine if a public hearing is
necessary and, if such a hearing is necessary, shall set the hearing in the
manner prescribed by law for regularly scheduled meetings; and
   (B)   1.   At the time of the filing of a complete and proper appeal with
the City Council or the City Clerk appealing a decision of the Planning
Commission, or at any time that a public hearing by the City Council is
required by law, the City Clerk shall set a public hearing in the manner
prescribed by law.
      2.   Where a report or recommendation by the Planning Commission or any
city employee is required by this title to be considered by the City Council
during the public hearing, the City Clerk shall not set the public hearing
until the report or recommendation is filed with the City Clerk unless the City
Council directs the City Clerk to set the hearing before receiving the report
or recommendation in order to expedite the setting of the hearing.
(Ord. 553, passed 8-16-2005)
§ 5-6-7 SITE PLAN AND DESIGN REVIEW.
   (A)   Intent. The purpose of site plan and design review is to permit the
city to evaluate site plans and designs of new and existing structures to
assure compatibility, harmony in appearance in neighborhoods, reduction of
negative impacts of nonaesthetic development and orderly development of the
community. Approval of site plan may be conditioned upon the construction of
curbs, gutters and/or sidewalks on the subject property.
   (B)   Application for site plan and design review.
      1.   Site plan and design review shall apply to all DTC, C-1, C-2, C-3,
M-1 and M-2 Districts, as well as all new development in R-2 and R-3 Districts.
Site plan and design review shall also apply to significant exterior
alterations to exterior structures, as defined in section
5-7-2 and determined by the community development director.
      2.   Applications for new developments shall be made on a form prescribed
by the city, together with copies of such site plans and sets of architectural
drawings, if applicable. Site plans shall be drawn to a scale that shall
indicate the full dimensions, topographic features and information necessary
for the Council to make an evaluation of the request. Architectural drawings
shall be of such scale and contain such information as to permit the Council to
make a full evaluation of the outside appearance, color, texture of materials
and appurtenances necessary for the development of the structure.
      3.   Scale drawings of all signs, which will be included within the
subject property, shall also be submitted concurrently with the site plan and
architectural plans of any proposed project.
   (C)   Project description. Site plans shall identify:
      1.   All potentially reflective exterior building materials, location of
the materials in relation to the position of the sun, and to the location of
motorists and other persons within sight of the project;
      2.   The type of activities to be performed, what hours they will be
performed, where on the property they will be performed, and what types of
shielding/screening will be employed;
      3.   Each exterior light source according to type, location, wattage,
height, direction of lighting patterns, type of shielding, when in use, and
whether the light is steady or pulsating. An outline of directly illuminated
areas, including points of overlap between lighting patterns, all streets
within the lighting system, and all adjacent property lines must be submitted
for a lighting plan; and
      4.   Conditions requiring additional review to determine whether
mitigation measures are necessary:
         (a)   Any light source that directly illuminates adjacent properties;
         (b)   Additional indirect illumination of adjacent properties in
excess of one and one-half foot (1½) candles;
         (c)   For pedestrian lighting systems, a point of overlap between
light patterns greater than seven (7) feet; and
         (d)   Intensity of lighting within the physical limits of an area
required to be lighted that is greater than seven (7) foot-candles.
   (D)   Design requirements.
      1.   The provision for benches, telephones and shaded areas at major
transit destinations shall be determined based upon necessity with city
approval during a site plan review procedure.
      2.   The height and scale of new commercial and industrial development
should be compatible with that of surrounding buildings where an established
pattern or character is apparent. New development shall provide a transition
from the height of adjacent structures to the maximum height of new
development.
      3.   All roof equipment shall be screened from a horizontal line of
sight. Ground or interior mounted mechanical equipment with appropriate
screening is encouraged as an alternative to roof mounting.
      4.   Entries shall be protected from the elements and shall create a
focus or sense of entry for the building. Use of wall recesses, roof overhangs,
canopies, arches, signs and similar architectural features shall be integral
elements of the building’s design.
      5.   Buildings, landscaping, parking and other development features shall
be arranged in a manner that is compatible with the size, scale and appearance
of nearby development.
      6.   Site planning shall emphasize a strong relationship to the adjoining
street(s) and encourage pedestrian circulation and access. Pedestrian access
shall be separate from vehicular access, where feasible.
      7.   Site plans shall provide safe and well defined pedestrian
connections from buildings to parking areas, from buildings to the adjoining
street(s), and among buildings on the same site. Pedestrian connections between
commercial development and surrounding residential neighborhoods should also be
provided.
      8.   Buildings, sidewalks and parking lots shall be located to minimize
conflicts between pedestrian and vehicular circulation on a site.
      9.   On site circulation shall be designed to provide safe and efficient
access for delivery vehicles, visitors and employees, and pedestrians.
      10.   Loading and trash facilities shall be located where they may be
adequately screened from view, generally at the rear of the structures, away
from the street.
      11.   Long expanses of fence shall be offset and architecturally designed
to prevent monotony. Landscaped pockets and limited openings are encouraged.
      12.   Where industrial development abuts nonindustrial uses, appropriate
buffering techniques shall be employed such as setbacks or screening
landscaping.
      13.   Site design for new industrial development shall consider the
following:
         (a)   Controlled site access;
         (b)   Service, storage and loading areas located at the rear or side
of buildings;
         (c)   Screened storage and outdoor work areas and equipment;
         (d)   Landscaping, signage and other features that emphasize the main
entrance;
         (e)   Landscaping provided for all areas not developed for parking,
storage or buildings.
      14.   Compliance with other applicable provisions of the city’s design
guide.
   (E)   Undesirable design elements to be avoided.
      1.   Large, blank, flat wall surfaces.
      2.   Exposed, untreated precision block walls.
      3.   Chainlink fence and barbed wire.
      4.   False fronts.
      5.   “Stuck on” mansard roofs.
      6.   Materials requiring high maintenance (such as stained wood, shingles
or light gauge metal siding).
      7.   Mirror window glazing.
      8.   Loading doors facing the street.
      9.   Exposed roof drains.
   (F)   Design review process. The community development director shall be the
recommending body, with the planning commission as the final approving body of
the design review process. Upon submission of drawings and applications for
review, the community development director shall render a written report
recommending approval, approval with conditions, or denial. The planning
commission shall make final approval.
   (G)   The time to appeal a decision of the planning commission pursuant to
this section shall be governed by the provisions of §
5-6-12-6 of this code.
   (H)   Occupancy permits. Before a building may be occupied, the building
official shall certify that the site or structure has been developed in
conformity with the plans and conditions approved herein.
   (I)   Minor modifications. Minor modifications are modifications to
previously approved plans or permits where the change is in substantial
conformity with the approved plan or permit. The community development director
shall be the approving body of minor modifications to previously approved plans
or permits. The community development director may approve, conditionally
approve, or deny a minor modification.
(Ord. 553, passed 8-16-2005; Ord. 661, passed 10-21-2025)
§ 5-6-8 SPECIFIC PLANS; INTENT.
   Specific plans may be utilized for development areas requiring specific
goals. Any specific plan shall be subject to the requirements of Cal. Gov’t
Code §§ 65452 to 65457, and shall be processed in the same fashion as an
amendment to the general plan. In no instance shall a specific plan be utilized
for an area less than five acres.
(Ord. 553, passed 8-16-2005)
§ 5-6-9 USE PERMITS, TEMPORARY AND CONDITIONAL.
   (A)   Purpose and intent. Use permits are used primarily to review the
location, site development or conduct of certain land uses that generally have
a distinct impact on the area in which they are located, and/or are capable of
creating special problems for bordering properties unless given special
attention. Conditional use permits may be granted by the Planning Commission,
and temporary use permits by the Planning Director under the conditions of this
section.
   (B)   Temporary use permits. Temporary use permits provide for the short
term use of property and structures that are consistent with the purpose and
objectives of this title. The Planning Director or his or her designee may
process temporary use permits as an administrative review. Following a decision
by the Director, an administrative agreement shall be prepared that outlines
the findings and conditions of the temporary use permit. The Director shall
approve, or approve with conditions, an application for a temporary use permit
after finding all of the following:
      1.   That egress and ingress and off-street parking facilities are
properly designed and adequate to serve the use;
      2.   That the site is adequate in size and location and has the proper
accessibility to accommodate the use;
      3.   That there are adequate public services, including fire protection,
water supply, wastewater disposal and police protection to serve the use;
      4.   That upon termination of the use the site shall be restored to its
original condition. All materials and equipment associated with the temporary
use shall be removed;
      5.   Those reasonable time limits shall be established for the use, not
to exceed 30 days;
      6.   That the applicants for a temporary use permit shall have all
applicable licenses and permits, including fire permits; and
      7.   That the signage for use be approved by the Planning Department.
   (C)   Application for temporary use permits. An application for a temporary
use permit shall be made to the Planning Department on a form prescribed by the
Department. The application shall be accompanied by a fee set by resolution of
the City Council.
   (D)   Temporary use permits; appeal of decision of Planning Director. A
decision involving a temporary use permit may be appealed to the Planning
Commission. An appeal shall be completed by filing a letter with the City Clerk
within ten days of the Planning Director’s determination.
   (E)   Definition of temporary uses and activities. See §
5-2-6 of this title.
   (F)   Conditional use permits. 
      1.   Use permits that are revocable, conditional or valid for a term may
be issued for any of the uses or purposes for which such permits are required
or permitted by the terms of this section. Because of their unusual
characteristics, conditional uses require special consideration so that they
may be located and developed properly with respect to the intent and purpose of
this title and to their effect on surrounding properties. Conditional use
permits require a determination of findings and conditions by the Planning
Commission.
      2.   The Planning Commission may designate such conditions in connection
with conditional and revocable use permits as it deems necessary to carry out
the purpose of this title, and may require tangible guarantees or evidence that
such renditions are being or will be complied with. These conditions may
include, but not be limited to:
         (a)   Dedication of right-of-way, setback, curbs, gutters and
sidewalks;
         (b)   Improvement of vehicle access to the subject property to city
standards;
         (c)   Regulation of height, number of stories;
         (d)   Regulation of the placement of the use or building of the
subject property;
         (e)   Regulation of the nature, hours of operation, extent of use;
         (f)   Regulation of lighted community sports facilities for extended
hours of use;
         (g)   Regulation as to transferability of the use; and
         (h)   Regulation of landscaping for the protection of adjoining and
nearby properties.
   (G)   Recycling locations. Use of parking lots for the establishment of
recycling locations as mandated by the California Beverage Container Recycling
Litter Reduction Act, being Cal. Public Resources Code, Division 12.1,
California Beverage Container Recycling and Little Reduction Act, §§ 14500 et
seq., shall not require a conditional use permit.
   (H)   Application for conditional use permits. Application for conditional
use permits shall be made to the Planning Department in writing on a form
prescribed by the city and shall be accompanied by an established fee or
deposit and copies of plans and elevations showing in detail the proposed use
or building. At least one public hearing shall be held on an application to the
Planning Commission, notice of which shall be given by one publication in an
official newspaper of general circulation in the county at least ten days prior
to such hearing and by posting notice on the property involved at least ten
days prior to such hearing.
   (I)   Criteria. In considering an application for conditional use permits,
the following criteria shall be as follows.
      1.   A conditional use permit shall not be granted for the use
unreasonably incompatible with permitted uses in the area considering damage
and nuisance from light sources, noise, smoke, odor, dust or vibration, hazard
resulting from unusual volume or character of traffic, or congestion of a large
number of persons or vehicles.
      2.   A conditional use permit must be considered in relationship to its
effect on the general plan for the area in which it is to be located. The
conditional use applied for must be in conformance with the general plan land
use map and policies.
      3.   Findings required for approval shall include:
         (a)   The site for the proposed use is adequate in size and shape to
accommodate said use and all yards, spaces, walls and fences, parking, loading,
landscaping and other features required by the applicable zoning district;
         (b)   The site for the proposed use is served by streets and highways
adequate to carry the quantity and kind of traffic generated by the proposed
use;
         (c)   Public facilities are currently adequate to serve the proposed
use or improvements are included in an approved capital improvement plan or
otherwise will be complete prior to the issuance of building permits; and
         (d)   The proposed development is consistent with the general plan. If
granted, it should be made subject to those conditions necessary to preserve
the general welfare, not the individual welfare, of any particular applicant.
   (J)   Appeal hearing. The applicant, or any interested party, may appeal a
decision of the Planning Commission to grant or deny a conditional use permit
application. An interested party is anyone who, in person or through a
representative, presented testimony at a public hearing in connection with the
decision being appealed, or who otherwise informed the city in writing of the
nature of their concerns prior to the hearing. The appeal must be filed with
the City Council within ten days of the Planning Commission’s determination.
The City Council shall set a date for the public hearing and give notice to the
Planning Commission of such appeal; whereas the Planning Commission shall
submit a report to the City Council, setting forth the reasons for action taken
by the Commission prior to the appeal hearing. The City Council shall render
its decision within 30 days of said public hearing.
   (K)   Reapplication. In the event of a denial of a conditional use permit,
reapplication on the same or substantially the same exception to this title on
the same or substantially the same site shall not be filed within one year from
the date of denial.
   (L)   Judicial review. The time to appeal a decision of the City Council
pursuant to this section shall be governed by the provisions of Cal. Code of
Civil Procedure § 1094.6 as currently enacted.
(Ord. 553, passed 8-16-2005; Ord. 592, passed 8-2-2011; Ord. 619, passed 6-17-
2014)
§ 5-6-10 ZONING VARIANCES.
   (A)   Intent. Variances from the terms of this title shall be granted only
when unreasonable and unnecessary hardships or results, inconsistent with the
general purpose of this title, result because of special circumstances
applicable to the property including size, shape, topography, location or
surroundings or the strict and literal interpretation and enforcement of the
provisions thereof. The Planning Commission shall have the authority to grant
variances from the provisions of this title as may be in harmony with its
purpose and intent. The sole purpose of any variance shall be to prevent
discrimination and undue hardship, and no variance shall be granted which would
grant a special privilege not shared by other property in the same vicinity.
   (B)   Criteria. Before a variance is granted, it shall be shown that:
      1.   There are exceptional and extraordinary circumstances or conditions
applying to the land, building and/or use referred to in the application which
do not generally apply to other land, buildings and/or uses in the same
district;
      2.   Granting of such variance will not adversely affect the general plan
of the city;
      3.   Such variance is necessary for the preservation and enjoyment of the
substantial property right possessed by other property in the same vicinity and
district denied to the property in question; and
      4.   The granting of such variance will not be materially detrimental to
the public welfare or injurious to the property or improvements in such
vicinity.
   (C)   Application for variance.
      1.   Application for the variance shall be submitted to the Planning
Department and accompanied by an established fee or deposit and copies of
plans.
      2.   At least one public hearing shall be held before the Planning
Commission for a variance, notice of which shall be given by one publication in
an official newspaper of general circulation in the county at least ten days
prior to such hearing.
      3.   If the Planning Commission, following the said public hearing, finds
that the qualifications under this section apply to the land, building or use
for which a variance is sought and that such variance is in harmony with the
general purpose of this title, it shall grant, by resolution, such variance. In
granting any variance, the Planning Commission may impose such conditions
deemed necessary to carry out the intent and purpose of this title, and require
such guarantees and evidence that such conditions will be complied with.
   (D)   Appeal hearing. The applicant, or any interested party, may appeal a
decision of the Planning Commission to grant or deny a zoning variance
application. An interested party is anyone who, in person or through a
representative, presented testimony at a public hearing in connection with the
decision being appealed, or who otherwise informed the city in writing of the
nature of their concerns prior to the hearing. The appeal must be filed with
the City Council within ten days of the Planning Commission’s determination.
The City Council shall set a date for the public hearing and give notice to the
Planning Commission of such appeal; whereas the Planning Commission shall
submit a report to the City Council, setting forth the reasons for action taken
by the Commission prior to the appeal hearing. The City Council shall render
its decision within 30 days of said public hearing.
   (E)   Reapplication. In the event of a denial of a variance, reapplication
on the same or substantially the same exception to this title on the same or
substantially the same site shall not be filed within one year from the date of
denial.
   (F)   Judicial review. The time to appeal a decision of the City Council
pursuant to this section shall be governed by the provisions of Cal. Code of
Civil Procedure § 1094.6 as currently enacted.
(Ord. 553, passed 8-16-2005; Ord. 592, passed 8-2-2011)
§ 5-6-11 PLANNED DEVELOPMENT PERMIT PROCESS.
   (A)   General provisions. The following general provisions shall apply to
all PD Overlay Districts, pursuant to an approved PD permit.
      1.   No PD Overlay District shall be established on any parcel of less
than one acre.
      2.   The PD Overlay District shall be in compliance with the general
plan.
      3.   Each PD Overlay District shall be numbered, the first adopted being
shown on the zoning map as “PD (1)” and each district subsequently adopted
being numbered consecutively.
      4.   Development of a PD Overlay District may proceed by phases. Such
phases shall be reasonable and logical in size, shape and function, and in
relationship to other development units within the overlay district. A separate
project plan and/or development plan shall be required for each phase of a
development not included in the original project plan and/or development plan
application.
      5.   All land in a proposed PD Overlay District shall be held in one
ownership, or under unified control, or have the written consent or agreement
of all owners of property proposed for inclusion in the development.
      6.   The city may initiate a PD Overlay District where, in the opinion of
the city, the establishment of such district is in the best interest of the
city.
      7.   The Director of Planning may authorize the review of the project
plan (§
5-6-11-1 of this chapter) and development plan (§
5-6-11-2 of this chapter) simultaneously.
      8.   Nothing in this section shall be construed to relieve an applicant
from compliance with subdivision regulations, building code requirements or any
other applicable regulations of the city.
      9.   Any substantive change to an approved project plan or development
plan shall be submitted to the Planning Commission and City Council for
approval prior to said change going into effect.
   (B)   Property development standards. The following property development
standards shall apply to all land and buildings in a PD Overlay District.
      1.   Lot areas. No provision for individual land uses; however, the total
lot area of the PD Overlay District shall not be less than one acre.
      2.   Lot coverage. In the area covered by the development plan (see §
5-6-11-2  of this chapter), exclusive of all dedicated public rights-of-way,
the maximum lot coverage shall be as approved by the City Council.
      3.   Lot dimensions. All lot dimensions shall be as approved by the City
Council.
      4.   Setback requirements. All setback requirements shall be as approved
by the City Council.
      5.   Distance between buildings. No provisions, except that all buildings
shall be shaped, designed and organized to allow adequate access of persons,
light and air as approved by the City Council.
      6.   Building heights. As approved by the Planning Commission or City
Council.
      7.   Landscaping.
         (a)   All private yards and open space facing or adjacent to a public
or private roadway shall be landscaped and an underground irrigation system
shall be installed prior to occupancy of any unit or building. Such landscape
plan and irrigation system is subject to approval by the Director of Public
Works.
         (b)   All common open space not utilized for off-street parking shall
be landscaped.
         (c)   All landscaping and street tree planting shall include a
permanent underground irrigation system. The Director of Public Works shall
approve plans, showing finished grades for the entire project, prior to the
issuance of any building permit.
      8.   Open space requirements.
         (a)   Common open space. The minimum common open space requirements,
to be provided in proximity to residential units when the PD includes
residential development, shall be as follows:
            (1)   Single-family units. Thirty five percent of the gross
designated low density residential area;
            (2)   Two-family units. Thirty percent of the gross designated
medium density residential area;
            (3)   Three- to nine-family units (high density). Twenty five
percent of the gross designated high density residential area;
            (4)   Ten or more units (high density). Twenty percent of the gross
designated high density residential area; and
            (5)   Commercial/industrial buildings. As approved by the City
Council.
         (b)   Private open space. For all ground level dwelling units, a
minimum of 300 square feet of private open space per unit shall be provided
with each unit.
      9.   Recreational facilities. Recreational facilities shall be as
approved by the City Council.
      10.   Off-street parking and loading requirements.
         (a)   Off-street parking and loading requirements and standards for
all uses shall be the same as the requirements specified for the same or
similar uses in §
5-4-5 of this title.
         (b)   The Planning Commission may approve amendments when an applicant
can demonstrate that a lower parking standard is appropriate.
      11.   Access.
         (a)   Vehicular access. There shall be vehicular access from a
dedicated street or alley to off-street parking facilities on property
requiring off-street parking.
         (b)   Pedestrian access. There shall be pedestrian access from a
private or dedicated street to property used for residential purposes. A
driveway shall be considered pedestrian access.
         (c)   Bicycle parking and facilities. Bicycle parking and paths should
be included as part of each planned development.
      12.   Signing. Sign restrictions for all uses shall be the same as those
specified for the same or similar uses in Title 4, Chapter 2 of this code.
      13.   Laundry and clothes drying areas, facilities. For all multi-family
residential uses, there shall be provided on the subject lot adequate (as
determined by the City Council) laundry and clothes drying areas and
facilities, which shall not be visible from adjacent, adjoining or public
property.
      14.   Solid waste storage, disposal facilities. For all uses, no open
storage of solid waste allowed.
         (a)   For all residential uses, each dwelling unit shall have a
minimum of ten cubic feet of enclosed and concealed trash containers.
         (b)   All other uses determined by the City Council to need solid
waste storage and/or disposal facilities shall provide such facilities
sufficiently concealed from public view.
      15.   Park land or in lieu fees. Park dedication or in lieu fees shall be
required of all new residential uses in the PD Overlay District, subject to
credit for any public open space provided.
      16.   Security. All multi-family residential complexes shall provide
security lighting as approved by the City Planning and Police Departments. All
multiple-family residential complexes greater than 50 units shall submit a
security plan for review and approval by the City Planning and Police
Departments.
      17.   Recreational vehicles and trailers.
         (a)   Parking or storage of recreational vehicles, motor homes, boats
or other similar recreational equipment and trailers within the front yards of
interior lots and the front and exterior side yards of corner lots, including
the driveways of said lots, shall be prohibited.
         (b)   The placement of said recreational equipment, when stored in a
permitted side or rear yard shall be screened from adjacent properties.
(Ord. 553, passed 8-16-2005)
§ 5-6-11-1 PROJECT PLAN.
   (A)   An application for a PD Overlay District shall be accompanied by a
project plan (maps and explanatory test) for the entire area and such other
material as specified herein. A project plan is intended to provide initial
details on a proposed PD, including conceptual development plans, in order to
enact a PD overlay zone. A project plan need not be prepared when the city
initiates the PD Overlay District.
   (B)   An application for a project plan for a PD Overlay District may be
initiated by the property owner of record, an authorized agent or by the city
in accordance with the procedures set forth in this code. A filing fee or
deposit as established by the City Council for a PD Overlay District project
plan shall accompany an application.
      1.   Project plan requirements. The project plan shall, when required,
set forth the following:
         (a)   Location and boundaries for the area proposed for the PD Overlay
District;
         (b)   Present and approximate proposed topography of the area
including natural features that are to be retained (i.e., stands of trees, rock
outcroppings, streams, canals and the like);
         (c)   General categories of all proposed land uses including (but not
limited to) residential, commercial and professional centers, public buildings,
school sites, recreational facilities and all common open spaces. Individual
building sizes shall be indicated;
         (d)   Proposed densities of all areas indicated for residential
development;
         (e)   Proposed property development standards as applicable under §
5-6-11(B) of this chapter;
         (f)   The location and width of all public and private streets and
easements;
         (g)   General site data, including acreage, in total development,
total acreage in each density and land use classification, public facilities,
school sites and total acreage devoted to common open space, parking areas and
the like; and
         (h)   General architectural details of proposed buildings.
   (B)   Review and processing project plans. The project plan shall be subject
to review by the Planning Department and subsequent adjudication by the
Planning Commission and City Council as follows.
      1.   The Planning Commission shall hold a public hearing on such
application and may recommend to the City Council to approve or conditionally
approve the project plan if it finds the criteria set forth herein has been
satisfied.
      2.   The Planning Commission may recommend denying the project plan if it
finds that any of the criteria has not been satisfied or that the project plan
would be detrimental to the health, safety, convenience or welfare of the
public.
      3.   The decision and findings of the Planning Commission shall be
forwarded along with the project plan to the City Council. The City Council
shall hold a public hearing and either approve, conditionally approve or deny
the project plan. The decision of the City Council shall be final.
      4.   Public hearing procedures shall be governed by §
5-6-6 of this chapter.
      5.   The applicant shall be responsible for all costs associated with the
review of the project plan by the city engineer.
      6.   Any modification to an approved project plan may be approved only
when, in the opinion of the Planning Director, such modification is deemed
minor in nature.
   (C)   Required findings of fact. The Planning Commission, after a public
hearing, may recommend the establishment of a PD Overlay District, and the City
Council, after a public hearing, may by ordinance establish a PD Overlay
District; provided, they find that the facts submitted with the project plan
application and presented at the public hearings confirm:
      1.   That each individual unit of the development if built in stages, as
well as the total development, can exist as an independent unit capable of
creating a good environment in the locality and being in any stage as desirable
and stable as the total development;
      2.   That the uses proposed will not be a detriment to the present and
proposed surrounding land uses, but will enhance the desirability of the area
and have a beneficial effect;
      3.   That any deviation from the standard ordinance requirements is
warranted by the unusual design and additional amenities incorporated in the
development plan which offer certain redeeming features to compensate for any
deviations that may be permitted; and
      4.   That the principles incorporated in the proposed project plan
identify unique characteristics that could not otherwise be achieved under the
other zoning districts.
(Ord. 553, passed 8-16-2005)
§ 5-6-11-2 DEVELOPMENT PLAN.
   (A)   Application. In order to carry out an approved project plan, or where
a project plan was not required, a development plan application shall be filed
with the Planning Department. An application for a development plan shall be
processed in the same manner as a project plan. The applicant shall be
responsible for all costs associated with the review of the development plan.
Since a project plan is not required when the project is proposed for a PD
Overlay District established by the city, a development plan shall be judged
upon its merits in accordance with the intent of the PD Overlay District.
   (B)   Scope of plan. A development plan may cover all or a portion of the
area included in the PD Overlay District. No building permit shall be issued
for any new building or structure unless a development plan has been approved
as specified herein. The Director of Planning may modify an approved
development plan only when such modification is deemed minor in nature.
   (C)   Development plan requirements. The development plan shall set forth
the following and shall be presented in the form as may be required by the
Director of Planning, and shall be substantially in conformance with an
approved project plan:
      1.   The exact boundaries and legal description of the property to be
developed;
      2.   The placement of all front, side and rear yards, including type of
structures;
      3.   The type, size and location of all fences, hedges and walls;
      4.   All proposed improvements that are to be constructed on the land and
their specific locations including, but not limited to, all residential and
nonresidential structures, recreational facilities and typical plans showing
walls, fences, trash areas, streets and walk areas;
      5.   Common open space showing size, general grades and function upon
completion, where appropriate. A full site grading plan shall also be
submitted;
      6.   The location and dimension of all off-street parking facilities,
public and private;
      7.   Location and size of all public and quasi-public sites, if
applicable (i.e., schools, churches, parks and the like);
      8.   A tabulation of the percentage of total building coverage (enclosed
structures) of the development for each land use classification;
      9.   A tabulation of densities within each project area or sector;
      10.   Building elevations to be constructed (see subsection (D) of this
section);
      11.   A schematic landscaping plan indicating the type and size of plant
material to be used and the method of providing permanent maintenance to all
planted areas and open space. This shall include a street tree planting plan in
accordance with §
6-10-27 of this code;
      12.   Plans for installation of necessary utilities, including roadways,
electrical, gas and cable television lines, storm drainage, water and
wastewater. Where necessary to facilitate the development plan, off site
improvements shall be noted;
      13.   If applicable, a subdivision map showing land divisions. The
tentative and final subdivision map shall comply with the State Subdivision Map
Act (Cal. Gov’t Code § 66410 et seq.) and Title 6 of this code with the
exception that any permit issued in conjunction with a tentative subdivision
map shall expire no sooner than the approved tentative map, or any extension
thereof; and
      14.   An anticipated development schedule from groundbreaking to
occupancy.
   (D)   Design guidelines. The City Council shall have the approval authority
of the architectural style and design of the development within the PD Overlay
District. The following design guidelines are established for all PD Overlay
Districts.
      1.   The overall plan shall achieve a harmonious and integrated
relationship between the land, buildings and uses.
      2.   Private and common open space, pedestrian and vehicular circulation
facilities, parking facilities and other pertinent amenities when proposed by
the applicant or required by the city shall be an integral part of the
landscape and particular attention shall be given to the retention of natural
landscape features of the site.
      3.   The layout of structures and other facilities which effect a
conservation in street and utility improvements in relationship to other
economic and environmental concerns shall be encouraged.
      4.   Recreational areas (active and passive) when proposed by the
applicant or required by the city shall be generally dispersed throughout the
development and shall be easily accessible from all residential units within a
PD Overlay District. Recreational facilities shall be as approved by the
Planning Commission.
      5.   Architectural variety, as well as the establishment of compatible
architectural styles and environmental harmony within the development, shall be
attained.
      6.   Fencing, walls and screening shall be incorporated into the design
of the project when proposed by the applicant or required by the city.
      7.   All roof mounted heating and air conditioning and other mechanical
equipment must be screened with solid material for a minimum line of sight of
20 feet.
      8.   Design plans shall be consistent with the city’s adopted design
guide.
(Ord. 553, passed 8-16-2005)
§ 5-6-12 REASONABLE ACCOMMODATION.
§ 5-6-12-1 PURPOSE.
   The purpose of this §
5-6-12 is to provide a procedure for individuals with disabilities to request
reasonable accommodation in seeking equal access to housing under the federal
Fair Housing Act of 1968, being 42 U.S.C. §§ 3601 et seq., and the California
Fair Employment and Housing Act, being Cal. Gov’t Code §§ 12900 through 12996,
(hereafter “Acts”) in the application of zoning laws and other land use
regulations, policies and procedures.
(Ord. 627, passed 4-5-2016)
§ 5-6-12-2 APPLICABILITY.
   (A)   1.   A request for reasonable accommodation may be made by any person
with a disability or his or her representative, when the application of a
requirement of this zoning code or other city requirement, policy, or practice
acts as a barrier to fair housing opportunities.
      2.   For the purposes of this §
5-6-12, a PERSON WITH A DISABILITY is:
         (a)   Any person who has a physical or mental impairment that
substantially limits one or more major life activities;
         (b)   Anyone who is regarded as having such impairment; or
         (c)   Anyone who has a record of such impairment.
      3.   This §
5-6-12 is intended to apply to those persons who are defined as disabled under
the acts.
   (B)   A request for reasonable accommodation may include a modification or
exception to the rules, standards and practices for the siting, development and
use of housing or housing related facilities that would eliminate regulatory
barriers and provide a person with a disability equal opportunity to housing of
their choice.
   (C)   A reasonable accommodation may be granted in compliance with this §
5-6-12 without the need for the approval of a variance.
   (D)   REASONABLE ACCOMMODATION as used in this §
5-6-12  means providing a person with a disability or a developer of housing
for people with disabilities, flexibility in the application of land use and
zoning and building regulations, policies, practices and procedures, or waiving
certain requirements, when it is necessary to eliminate barriers to housing
opportunities.
   (E)   1.   Notice of the availability of reasonable accommodation shall be
prominently displayed at the public information counter in the Planning and
Building Departments, advising the public of the availability of the procedure
for eligible individuals.
      2.   Forms for requesting reasonable accommodation shall be available to
the public in the Planning and Building Departments.
(Ord. 627, passed 4-5-2016)
§ 5-6-12-3 PROCEDURE.
   (A)   A request for reasonable accommodation shall be submitted on an
application form provided by the Community Development Department or in the
form of a letter to the Director of the Community Development Department, and
shall contain the following information:
      1.   The applicant’s name, address and telephone number;
      2.   Address of the property for which the request is being made;
      3.   The current use of the property;
      4.   A brief description of the disability or impairment that requires
reasonable accommodation;
      5.   The zoning code provision, regulation or policy from which
reasonable accommodation is being requested;
      6.   Why the reasonable accommodation is necessary to eliminate barriers
to housing opportunities; and
      7.   Any information submitted as part of a reasonable accommodations
application shall be kept confidential and shall be retained in a manner so as
to respect the privacy rights of the applicant and shall not be made available
for public inspection.
   (B)   If the project for which the request for reasonable accommodation is
being made requires some other discretionary approval (including use permit,
design review and the like), then the applicant shall file the information
required by subsection (A) of this section for concurrent review with the
application for discretionary approval.
   (C)   1.   A request for reasonable accommodation shall be reviewed by the
Director of the Community Development Department or his or her designee, if no
approval is sought other than the request for reasonable accommodation.
      2.   The Director or his or her designee shall make a written
determination within 25 days of the application being deemed complete and
either grant, grant with modifications, or deny a request for reasonable
accommodation.
   (D)   A request for reasonable accommodation submitted for concurrent review
with another discretionary land use application shall be reviewed by the
Planning Commission. The written determination on whether to grant or deny the
request for reasonable accommodation shall be made by the Planning Commission
in compliance with the applicable review procedure for the discretionary
review.
(Ord. 627, passed 4-5-2016)
§ 5-6-12-4 APPROVAL FINDINGS.
   The written decision to grant or deny a request for reasonable accommodation
will be consistent with the acts and shall be based on consideration of the
following factors:
   (A)   Whether the housing in the request will be used by a person with a
disability under the acts;
   (B)   Whether the request for reasonable accommodation is necessary to make
specific housing available to a person with a disability under the acts;
   (C)   Whether the requested reasonable accommodation would impose an undue
financial, administrative or enforcement burden on the city;
   (D)   Whether the requested reasonable accommodation would require a
fundamental alteration in the nature of a city program or law, including, but
not limited to, land use and zoning;
   (E)   Potential impact on surrounding uses; and
   (F)   Physical attributes of the property and structures.
(Ord. 627, passed 4-5-2016)
§ 5-6-12-5 CONDITIONS OF APPROVAL.
   In granting a request for reasonable accommodation, the Director of the
Community Development Department or his or her designee, or the Planning
Commission as the case might be, may impose any conditions of approval deemed
reasonable and necessary to ensure that the reasonable accommodation would
comply with the findings. The conditions shall also state whether the
accommodation granted shall be removed in the event that the person for whom
the accommodation was requested no longer resides on the site.
(Ord. 627, passed 4-5-2016)
§ 5-6-12-6 APPEALS.
   (A)   Any person dissatisfied with any action of the Director of the
Community Development Department pertaining to this §
5-6-12 may appeal to the Planning Commission within ten days after written
notice of the Director’s decision is sent to the applicant. The appeal is taken
by filing a written notice of appeal with the Director of the Community
Development Department and shall specify the reasons for the appeal and the
grounds asserted for relief.
   (B)   Any person dissatisfied with any action of the Planning Commission
pertaining to this section may appeal to the City Council within ten days after
the rendition of the decision of the Planning Commission. The appeal is taken
by filing a written notice of appeal with the director of the Community
Development Department and shall specify the reasons for the appeal and the
grounds asserted for relief.
   (C)   The City Council shall, by resolution, adopt and from time to time
amend a fee for the filing of appeals. Such fee shall be for the sole purpose
of defraying costs incurred for the administration of appeals. The fee for an
appeal shall be paid at the time of and with the filing of an appeal. No appeal
shall be deemed valid unless the prescribed fee has been paid.
   (D)   If an appeal is not filed within the time or in the manner prescribed
in this section, the right to review the action against which the complaint is
made shall be deemed to have been waived.
   (E)   After filing an appeal, the appropriate hearing body shall conduct a
public hearing for the purpose of determining whether the appeal should be
granted. Written notice of the time, date and place of hearing shall be given
to the appellant, and to any other persons who have filed a written request for
notice. Such notices shall be mailed to the appellant and the applicant at
least ten days prior to the hearing.
   (F)   The Planning Commission or City Council shall review de novo the
entire proceeding or proceedings relating to the decision, and may make any
order it deems just and equitable, including the approval of the application.
Any hearing may be continued from time to time.
   (G)   At the conclusion of the hearing, the hearing body shall prepare a
written decision which either grants or denies the appeal and contains findings
of fact and conclusions. The written decision, including a copy thereof shall
be provided to the appellant and the project applicant.
(Ord. 627, passed 4-5-2016)
CHAPTER 7: DEFINITIONS
Section
5-7-1 Applicability
5-7-2 Definitions of words and phrases
§ 5-7-1 APPLICABILITY.
   Certain words and phrases shall be deemed to have the meanings assigned to
them in this section. Words used in the present tense shall include the future;
words in the singular shall include the plural; the word “shall” is mandatory,
and the word “may” is permissive.
(Ord. 533, passed 8-16-2005)
§ 5-7-2 DEFINITIONS OF WORDS AND PHRASES.
   The words, terms and phrases used in this title shall be given the meanings
commonly assigned in the English language.
   ABUTTING. Land or zoning district boundaries having a common property line.
Lands or district boundaries separated by an alley, street or right-of-way
shall be considered ABUTTING.
   ACCESSORY BUILDING. A detached subordinate structure or building located on
the same premises as the main building or buildings, the use of which is
customarily incidental to that of the main building or to the use of the land.
Where any portion of a wall of an accessory building or structure is attached
to the main building, or where an accessory structure is attached to the main
building in a substantial manner by a roof or deck, the ACCESSORY BUILDING or
structure shall be considered and treated as part of the main building.
   ACCESSORY DWELLING UNIT. An attached or detached residential dwelling unit
which provides complete independent living facilities for one or more persons.
It shall include permanent provisions for living, sleeping, eating, cooking and
sanitation on the same parcel as the single-family dwelling or multi-family
dwelling is or will be situated. An ACCESSORY DWELLING UNIT also includes the
following (A) an efficiency unit; and (B) a manufactured home.
   ACCESSORY USE. A use naturally and normally incidental to, subordinate to,
or exclusively devoted to a principal use and located on the same lot
therewith.
   AFFORDABLE HOUSING. Affordable sales housing or affordable rental housing.
AFFORDABLE HOUSING focuses on moderate, low and very low income households as
defined herein and by state statute.
   AGRICULTURE. The tilling of soil, the raising of crops and horticulture,
including all uses customarily incidental thereto, but not including
slaughterhouses, feed yards, hog farms, fertilizer works, bone yards or plants
for the reduction of animal matter or any other industrial or agricultural use
which is similarly objectionable because of noise, odor, smoke, dust or fumes.
   ALLEY. Any public or private thoroughfare less than 40 feet in width, which
affords only a secondary means of access to property, where such property is
accessible by a STREET as defined in this section.
   APARTMENT. One or more rooms in an apartment house intended or designed to
be occupied by one family for living and sleeping purposes and containing
kitchen and bath facilities.
   APPLICANT. The person, public or private, listed as the applicant on an
application for a project and includes the record owner of the real property
that is the subject of the project at the time of the application for the
project.
   BASEMENT. That portion of a building between the floor and ceiling which is
partly below and partly above grade, but so located that the vertical distance
from grade to floor is greater than the vertical distance from grade to
ceiling.
   BLOCK. All property fronting on one side of a street between intersecting
and intercepting streets, or between a street railroad right-of-way, dead end
street, waterway, natural barrier or unsubdivided acreage. An intercepting
street shall determine only the boundary of the block on the side of the street
that it intercepts.
   BUILDING. Any permanent structure built for the occupancy, support, shelter
or enclosure of persons or animals, or personal property of any kind and/or for
use in commercial, industrial or other enterprises.
   BUILDING, ACCESSORY. A subordinate building such as a carport or garage, the
use of which is clearly incidental and secondary to that of the main building,
on the same lot or parcel of land.
   BUILDING AREA. The total amount of ground area occupied by all buildings and
structures on a parcel of land.
   BUILDING HEIGHT. The vertical distance from the average level of the highest
and lowest point of that portion of the lot covered by the main building to the
topmost point of the roof of such building.
   BUILDING, MAIN. A building in which is conducted the principal use of the
lot upon which it is situated.
   BUILDING SITE. The ground area of a building or group of buildings with its
principal building fronting on a street, road or highway, together with all
yard and open spaces as required by this title.
   CANNABIS. Has the same meaning as set forth in Business and Professions Code
section 19300.5(f) as the same may be amended from time to time. For purposes
of this title, CANNABIS and marijuana shall have the same meaning. CANNABIS
means all parts of the plant Cannabis sativa Linnaeus, Cannabis indica or
Cannabis ruderalis, whether growing or not; the seeds thereof; the resin,
whether crude or purified, extracted from any part of the plant; and every
compound, manufacture, salt, derivative, mixture or preparation of the plant,
its seeds or resin. CANNABIS also means the separated resin, whether crude or
purified, obtained from cannabis. CANNABIS does not include the mature stalks
of the plant, fiber produced from the stalks, oil or cake made from the seeds
of the plant, any other compound, manufacture, salt, derivative, mixture, or
preparation of the mature stalks (except the resin extracted therefrom), fiber,
oil or cake, or the sterilized seed of the plant which is incapable of
germination. For the purpose of this definition, CANNABIS does not mean
INDUSTRIAL HEMP as defined by section 11018.5 of the health and safety code.
   CANNABIS CULTIVATION. Any activity involving the planting, growing,
harvesting, drying, curing, grading or trimming of cannabis, including
nurseries.
   CANNABIS CULTIVATION AREA. The total aggregate area(s) of cannabis
cultivation on a single premises as measured around the outermost perimeter of
each separate and discrete area of cannabis cultivation at the drip-line of the
canopy expected at maturity and includes, but is not limited to, the space
between plants within the cultivation area, the exterior dimensions of garden
beds, garden plots, hoop houses, green houses and each room or area where
cannabis plants are grown, as determined by the review authority.
   CANNABIS CULTIVATION - INDOOR. The cultivation of cannabis using exclusively
artificial lighting.
   CANNABIS CULTIVATION - MIXED-LIGHT. The cultivation of cannabis using any
combination of natural and supplemental artificial lighting. Greenhouses, hoop
houses, hothouses and similar structures or light deprivation systems are
included in this category.
   CANNABIS CULTIVATION - OUTDOOR. The cultivation of cannabis using no
artificial lighting conducted in the ground or in containers outdoors with no
covering. OUTDOOR CULTIVATION does not include greenhouses, hoop houses,
hothouses or similar structures.
   CANNABIS CULTIVATION SITE. The premises, leased area(s), property, location
or facility where cannabis is planted, grown, harvested, dried, cured, graded
or trimmed, or a location where all or any combination of those activities.
   CANNABIS DISPENSARY, DISPENSARY or RETAIL CANNABIS ACTIVITY. A facility,
whether fixed or mobile, operated in accordance with state and local laws and
regulations, where cannabis and/or cannabis products are offered for retail
sale, including an establishment that delivers cannabis and/or cannabis
products as part of a retail sale.
   CANNABIS DISTRIBUTION FACILITY. The location or a facility where a person
conducts the business of procuring cannabis from licensed cultivators or
manufacturers for sale to licensed dispensaries or delivery operations, and the
inspection, quality assurance, batch testing by a Type 8 licensee, storage,
labeling, packaging and other processes, prior to transport to licensed
dispensaries or delivery operations. This facility requires a Type 11 license
pursuant to the Medicinal and Adult-Use Cannabis Regulation and Safety Act
(“MAUCRSA”) or a state cannabis license type subsequently established.
   CANNABIS LICENSE. A state license issued pursuant to MAUCRSA.
   CANNABIS LICENSEE. A person issued a state license under MAUCRSA to engage
in commercial cannabis uses or activity.
   CANNABIS MANUFACTURER. A person that produces, prepares, propagates or
compounds manufactured cannabis or cannabis products, either directly or
indirectly or by extraction methods, or independently by means of chemical
synthesis or by a combination of extraction and chemical synthesis at a fixed
location that packages or repackages cannabis or cannabis products or labels or
re-labels its container, that holds a valid state Type 6 or 7 license, or a
state cannabis license type subsequently established, and that holds a valid
local license or permit.
   CANNABIS MANUFACTURING. A facility, whether fixed or mobile, that produces,
prepares, propagates or compounds manufactured cannabis or cannabis products,
directly or indirectly, by extraction methods, independently by means of
chemical synthesis, or by a combination of extraction and chemical synthesis,
and is owned and operated by a licensee for these activities.
   CANNABIS NURSERY. A licensee that produces only clones, immature plants,
seeds and other agricultural products used specifically for the planting,
propagation and cultivation of cannabis.
   CANNABIS PRODUCTS. Cannabis that has undergone a process whereby the plant
material has been transformed into a concentrate, including, but not limited
to, concentrated cannabis or an edible or topical product containing cannabis
or concentrated cannabis and other ingredients.
   CANNABIS TESTING SERVICE or CANNABIS TESTING LABORATORY. A laboratory,
facility or entity that offers or performs tests of cannabis or cannabis
products, including the equipment provided by such laboratory, facility or
entity.
   CAREGIVER or PRIMARY CAREGIVER. Has the same meaning as set forth in Health
and Safety Code § 11362.7 as the same may be amended from time to time.
   CARPORT. A permanent roofed structure, not enclosed on more than two (2)
sides, used or intended to be used for vehicular shelter and storage.
   CENTERLINE. The centerline of a street as referred to in this title shall
mean the right-of-way centerline as established by official survey.
   CHILD CARE CENTER. Has the same meaning as “child day care facility” in
Health and Safety Code § 1596.750, and as “day care center” in Health and
Safety Code § 1596.76, as both may be amended from time to time: any child care
facility, and includes infant centers, preschools, extended day care facilities
and school-age child care centers where nonmedical care is provided to children
under eighteen (18) years of age in need of personal services, supervision, or
assistance essential for sustaining the activities of daily living or for the
protection of the individual on less than a twenty-four (24) hour basis.
   CITY MANAGER. The City Manager or his or her designee(s).
   COMMERCIAL CANNABIS ACTIVITY or COMMERCIAL CANNABIS USES. Any commercial
cannabis activity licensed pursuant to MAUCRSA, including but not limited to,
cultivation, possession, distribution, laboratory testing, labeling, transport,
retail activity, delivery, sale or manufacturing of cannabis or cannabis
products. COMMERCIAL CANNABIS USES also means any cannabis activity licensed
pursuant to additional state laws regulating such businesses. COMMERCIAL
CANNABIS USES shall not include legal medical cannabis or cannabis activities
carried out exclusively for one’s personal use that does not involve commercial
activity or sales.
   COMMERCIAL CANNABIS PERMIT or CANNABIS PERMIT. A permit issued by the city
pursuant to this title and §
5-5-14  of this title for the operation of a commercial cannabis business
within the city.
   CONDOMINIUM. A building/structure wherein the owner holds title to his or
her dwelling unit while sharing title to the land and other common areas of the
development and sharing maintenance/operating costs with other dwelling unit
owners through a condominium corporation.
   COURTYARD. An open, unoccupied space, other than a yard on the same lot with
a building, and bounded on two (2) or more sides by such building or buildings.
   CULTIVATION SITE. Shall have the same meaning as set forth in Business and
Professions Code § 19300.5(x) as the same may be amended from time to time.
   DENSITY BONUS. Entitlement to build additional residential units above the
maximum number of units permitted pursuant to the existing general plan,
applicable specific plan and zoning designations. Density bonus units may be
constructed only in developments where units of affordable housing are located.
DENSITY BONUS means a bonus of units awarded to a development pursuant to Gov’t
Code §§ 65915 et seq.
   DISTRIBUTOR. Any commercial cannabis operation that distributes cannabis or
cannabis products under a valid state Type 11, or a state cannabis license type
subsequently established.
   DISTRICT. An area of the city defined on the official zoning map within
which certain uses of land and building regulations and requirements or various
combinations thereof apply under provisions of this title.
   DWELLING. A building or portion thereof designed and used exclusively for
residential occupancy with cooking and bath facilities. Uses include single-
family, two-family, multiple-family dwellings and apartments, but not hotels or
motels or boarding houses.
   DWELLING GROUP. A group of two (2) or more detached or semidetached
dwellings occupying a parcel of land in one ownership and having a yard, court
or place in common, but not including motels.
   EASEMENT. A space on a lot or parcel of land and so indicated on a
subdivision map or in a deed restriction, reserved for and/or used for public
utilities and/or public uses.
   EFFICIENCY UNIT. Has the same meaning as defined in section 17957.1 of
Health and Safety Code.
   FAMILY. One or more persons occupying a dwelling unit and living as a single
housekeeping unit, and distinguished from a group occupying a boarding house,
lodging house, motel or hotel.
   FENCE. A constructed, unroofed barrier of wood, metal, masonry or other
material as allowed in this zoning ordinance that is intended to enclose,
separate, define, secure, protect, and/or screen one or more areas of a site.
   GARAGE, PRIVATE CARPORT. A building or portion of a main building, enclosed
on three (3) or more sides and designed for the storage of private passenger
motor vehicles wherein no service for profit is rendered.
   GARAGE, PUBLIC. The use of any building for the storage, care or repair of
motor vehicles for compensation and profit.
   GENERAL PLAN. Statement of goals and policies and all amendments thereto,
adopted by the City Council as a long range, comprehensive guide to the city’s
growth and development.
   GRADE. The ground surface immediately adjacent to the exterior base of a
structure, typically used as the basis for measurement of the height of the
structure.
   GUESTHOUSE. A detached structure necessary to a single-family dwelling,
accommodating living/sleeping quarters, but without kitchen or cooking
facilities.
   JUNIOR ACCESSORY DWELLING UNIT. A unit that is no more than 500 square feet
in size and contained entirely within a single-family residence. A JUNIOR
ACCESSORY DWELLING UNIT may include separate facilities, or may share
sanitation facilities within the existing structure.
   IRREGULAR SHAPED LOTS: The community development director shall determine
the setback measurements and minimum lot width and depth for lots that are not
rectangular in shape (more or less than four sides), contain an arc, or do not
have lot lines that are at right angles to one another.
   JUNK. Any worn out, cast off or discarded article or material that is ready
for destruction or has been collected or stored for salvage or conversion to
some other use. Any article or material which, unaltered or unchanged and
without further reconditions, can be used for its original purpose as readily
as when new, shall not be considered JUNK.
   JUNKYARD. Primary or accessory use of a parcel of land for the storage or
keeping of junk, including scrap metals or other scrap materials.
   KITCHEN. A room or space within a building used or intended to be used for
the cooking or preparation of food, which includes any of the following:
refrigerator; stove; oven; range top; dishwasher; and kitchen sink.
   LANDSCAPING. The planting and continued maintenance of ornamental plant
material including the installation, use and continued maintenance of a
permanent irrigation system.
   LIVESTOCK ANIMALS. Animals of a category normally referred to as livestock,
including horses, goats, sheep or cattle, but not including swine.
   LIVING AREA. The interior habitable area of a dwelling unit, including
basements and attics, but does not include a garage or any accessory structure.
   LOADING SPACE, OFF STREET. An off street space or berth on the same lot with
a building or contiguous to a group of buildings for the temporary parking of a
commercial vehicle while loading or unloading merchandise or materials, and
which abuts upon a street, alley or other appropriate means of access.
   LOT. A parcel of land occupied or to be occupied by a use, building or a
unit group of buildings and accessory buildings and uses, under the provisions
hereof, including both the building site and all required yards and other open
spaces as defined in this title, and having the required street frontage.
      1.   LOT AREA. The total horizontal area included within lot lines of a
parcel of land.
      2.   LOT, CORNER. A lot located at the intersection of two (2) or more
streets or bounded on two (2) or more adjacent sides by street lines.
      3.   LOT DEPTH. The horizontal length of a straight line drawn from the
midpoint of the front lot line to the midpoint of the rear lot line.
      4.   LOT FRONT. The portion of any lot that is adjoining a public street.
Where a rectangular or roughly rectangular shaped lot is a corner lot, that
portion which adjoins a street and is the lesser, measured linearly, than any
other portion adjoining any other street, is the front of the corner lot. Where
portions adjoin two (2) or more streets and the linear measurements of each
such adjoining portions are the same, then the front of the lot shall be
determined at the option of the owner, but once such front has been so
determined, such portion shall be the front of the lot for all purposes
provided in this title.
      5.   LOT, INTERIOR. A lot other than a corner lot.
      6.   LOT, KEY. The first lot to the rear of a corner lot, the front line
of which is a continuation of the side line of the corner lot, exclusive of the
width of any alley and fronting on the street which intercepts the street on
which the corner lot fronts.
      7.   LOT, REVERSED CORNER. A corner lot, the side street line of which is
substantially a continuation of the front line of the lot to its rear.
      8.   LOT, THROUGH. A lot having frontage on two (2) parallel or
approximately parallel streets.
      9.   LOT WIDTH. The horizontal distance between side lot lines measured
at right angles to the lot depth at the required front setback line.
   LOT LINE.
      1.   LOT LINE, FRONT. A line defining the front lot. The front lot line
for lots fronting on a curved street shall be determined by measuring a cord
located twenty-five (25) feet from the edge of the street right-of-way.
      2.   LOT LINE, REAR. A line which is opposite and most distant from the
front lot line, and in the case of an irregular, triangular or gore shaped lot,
a line within a lot ten (10) feet in length, parallel to and at the maximum
distance from the front lot line.
      3.   LOT LINE, SIDE. Any lot lines other than the front or rear lot
lines.
   MANUFACTURE. To compound, blend, extract, infuse or otherwise make or
prepare a cannabis product.
   MANUFACTURED CANNABIS. Raw cannabis that has undergone a process whereby the
raw agricultural product has been transformed into a concentrate, an edible
product, or a topical product.
   MANUFACTURER. A licensee that conducts the production, preparation,
propagation, or compounding of cannabis or cannabis products either directly or
indirectly or by extraction methods, or independently by means of chemical
synthesis, or by a combination of extraction and chemical synthesis at a fixed
location that packages or repackages cannabis or cannabis products or labels or
relabels its container.
   MEDICAL CANNABIS or MEDICINAL CANNABIS. Cannabis that is intended to be used
for medical cannabis purposes in accordance with the Compassionate Use Act 1
(“CUA”), the medical Marijuana Program Act 2 (“MMPA”) and the Medicinal and
MAUCRSA Act.
   MICROBUSINESS. A commercial cannabis facility operating under a state Type
12 license, or a state cannabis license type subsequently established, and
meeting the definition of microbusiness Business and Professions Code § 26070
(a)(3)(A), as may be amended from time to time, which cultivates less than ten
thousand (10,000) square feet of cannabis and acts as a licensed distributor,
Level 1 manufacturer and retailer.
   NURSERY. Shall have the same meaning as set forth in Business and
Professions Code § 26001(aj), and is a commercial cannabis use that produces
only clones, immature plants, seeds and other agricultural products used
specifically for the propagation and cultivation of cannabis.
   OPEN SPACE. Land which is available for outdoor recreational activities,
passively or actively, for public or private use.
   OPERATOR. The natural person or designated officer responsible for the
operation of any commercial cannabis use.
   OUTDOOR DINING AREA. An area for dining which is not located within an
enclosed structure and where patrons may consume food and/or beverages provided
by an abutting restaurant/café. Such restaurants/cafés may either provide table
service in the outdoor dining area or sell takeout items to be consumed in the
OUTDOOR DINING AREA. All alcohol served outdoors (beer, wine, hard alcohol) and
amplified live entertainment requires a conditional use permit.
   OVERLAY ZONE. A supplementary zoning designation applied to property in
addition to a primary zoning district that highlights special regulations
applying to those properties within the overlay zoning district.
   PARKING AREA, PUBLIC. An open area, other than a street or alley which is
paved, graveled or otherwise surfaced, and used for the parking or storage of
vehicles and available for public use whether free, for compensation or as an
accommodation for patrons, customers or clientele of a business, professional
office or other commercial enterprise.
   PARKING SPACE. A space within a lot or public parking area or a building or
parking garage exclusive of driveways, ramps, columns, office and work area,
for the temporary parking or storage of one vehicle.
   PERSON. An individual, firm, partnership, joint venture, association,
corporation, limited liability company, estate, trust, business trust,
receiver, syndicate, tribe or any other group or combination acting as a unit
and includes the plural as well as the singular number.
   PERSONAL CANNABIS CULTIVATION. Cannabis cultivation which is allowed for a
single qualified patient or caregiver for medicinal purposes or that
cultivation which is allowed for an adult 21 years of age or older.
   PLANNED DEVELOPMENT. An area of land controlled by a landowner, which is,
has been or is proposed to be developed as a single entity for any residential
or neighborhood commercial endeavor, the plan for which need not conform in lot
size, bulk or type of structure, number of structures per lot, height or yard
regulations established for the affected district or districts by any other
articles of this title. Such development will be permitted only after a planned
unit permit is secured.
   PREMISES. A legal parcel, or a leasehold interest in land, or a leased or
owned space in a building where the commercial cannabis use or activity is or
will be conducted.
   PUBLIC TRANSIT. A location, including, but not limited to, a bus stop or
train station, where the public may access buses, trains, subways, and other
forms of transportation that charge set fares, run on fixed routes and are
available to the public.
   QUALIFYING PATIENT or QUALIFIED PATIENT. Has the same meaning as set forth
in Cal. Health and Safety Code § 11362.7 as the same may be amended from time
to time.
   REVIEW AUTHORITY. The individual or official city body (the City Manager,
Director, Council, commission or board) and others as identified in this code
as having the responsibility and authority to review and approve or deny land
use permit applications.
   SALE, SELL and TO SELL. Have the same meaning as set forth in Business and
Professions Code § 26001(as), as the same may be amended from time to time; any
transaction whereby, for any consideration, title to cannabis is transferred
from one person to another, and includes the delivery of cannabis or cannabis
products pursuant to an order placed for the purchase of the same and
soliciting or receiving an order for the same, but does not include the return
of cannabis or cannabis products by a licensee to the licensee from whom such
cannabis or cannabis product was purchased.
   SCHOOL. Any public or private school providing instruction to students in
kindergarten or any grades 1 through 12.
   SHIPPING CONTAINER. Any enclosed container constructed of metal, wood or
other material which container was designed or patterned after structures used
in containerized shipping operations. No SHIPPING CONTAINER or similar
structure shall be used as an accessory structure in any residential or
commercial zoning district unless granted a temporary use permit pursuant to §
5-6-9  of this title. SHIPPING CONTAINERS shall be painted an approved neutral
color, allowing it to blend in with its surroundings.
   SIGHT DISTANCE AREA. A triangular area, on a corner lot or reverse corner
lot bounded by the lot line of such corner lot and a line joining points along
such lot lines measured from the intersection of two property lines or their
projection to a distance equal to the sum of the building setbacks on each of
the two (2) intersecting streets.
   SIGNIFICANT EXTERIOR ALTERATIONS TO EXTERIOR STRUCTURES. The community
development director shall consider the following criterion when determining
when an exterior alteration to an existing structure is significant: a fifteen
(15) percent change in the height of the building, a different roof line or
design, a minimum forty (40) percent surface change in the building’s facade or
elevation (including windows and doors), a minimum forty (40) percent change in
building materials, a minimum fifteen (15) percent increase in overall square
footage.
   STORY. That portion of a building included between the upper surface of any
floor and the upper surface of the floor next above, except that the topmost
story shall be that portion of a building included between the upper surface of
the topmost floor and the ceiling or roof above. If the finished floor level
directly above a basement or cellar is more than six feet above grade, such
basement or cellar shall be considered a STORY.
   STREET. A public thoroughfare that affords principal means of access to
abutting property, including avenue, place, way, boulevard, drive, lane,
highway, road and any thoroughfare except an “ALLEY” as defined herein.
   STRUCTURAL ALTERATION. Any change in the supporting members of a building,
including bearing walls, columns, beams or girders, floor joist, ceiling joist
or roof rafters, foundations, piles or retaining walls or similar components or
changes in roof or exterior lines.
   STRUCTURE. A building completely enclosed and detached from a residence that
complies with the California Building Code, as adopted by the city, and has a
complete roof enclosure supported by connecting walls extending from the ground
to the roof, a foundation, slab or equivalent base to which the floor is
secured by bolts or similar attachments, is secure against unauthorized entry,
and is accessible only through one or more lockable doors.
   SUPPORTIVE HOUSING. Housing with no limit on length of stay, that is
occupied by the target population and that is linked to on site or off site
services that assist the supportive housing resident in retaining the housing,
improving his or her health status, and maximizing his or her ability to live
and, when possible, work in the community. SUPPORTIVE HOUSING UNITS are
residential uses allowed in any zone allowing residential uses, subject only to
those requirements and restrictions that apply to other residential uses of the
same type in the same zone.
   SWIMMING POOL. A structure designed to contain water in excess of eighteen
(18) inches in depth, located above or below grade or ground surface, commonly
constructed of concrete, metal, wood, fiberglass, and/or plastic, and designed
and used for recreation or therapy.
   TARGET POPULATION. Persons with low income who have one or more
disabilities, including mental illness, HIV or AIDS, substance abuse, or other
chronic health condition, or individuals eligible for services provided
pursuant to the Lanterman Developmental Disabilities Services Act and may
include, among other populations, adults, emancipated minors, families with
children, elderly persons, young adults aging out of the foster care system,
individuals exiting from institutional settings, veterans and homeless people.
   TESTING LABORATORY. Shall have the same meaning as set forth in Business and
Professions Code § 26001(at), and means a laboratory, facility or entity in the
state that offers or performs tests of cannabis or cannabis products and that
is both of the following: credited by an accrediting body that is independent
from all other persons involved in commercial cannabis activity in the state
and licensed by the State Bureau of Cannabis Regulation.
   TRANSITIONAL HOUSING. Rental housing operated under program requirements
that call for the termination of assistance and recirculation of the assisted
unit to another eligible program recipient at some predetermined future point
in time, which shall be no less than six months from the beginning of the
assistance. TRANSITIONAL HOUSING UNITS are residential uses allowed in any zone
allowing residential uses, subject only to those requirements and restrictions
that apply to other residential uses of the same type in the same zone.
   USE. The purpose for which land or a building is arranged, designed or
intended for which either land or a building is or may be occupied or
maintained.
   VOLATILE SOLVENT. Means volatile organic compounds, including but not
limited to: a) explosive gases, such as butane, propane, xylene, styrene,
gasoline, kerosene, O2 or H2; and b) dangerous poisons, toxins, or carcinogens,
such as methanol, methylene chloride, acetone, benzene, toluene, and tri-
chloro-ethylene as determined by the Fire Marshal.
   YARD. An open space other than a court, on the same lot with a building,
unoccupied and unobstructed from the ground upward except as otherwise provided
therein.
      1.   YARD, FRONT. A yard extending across the full width of the lot, the
depth of which is the distance between the front property line and the setback
line.
      2.   YARD, REAR. A yard extending across the full width of the lot
between the most rear main building and the rear property line. The depth of
the required REAR YARD shall be measured horizontally from the nearest part of
a main building toward the nearest point of the rear property line.
      3.   YARD, SIDE. A yard, between a main building and the side property
line, extending from the front yard to the rear yard. The width of the required
SIDE YARD shall be measured horizontally from the nearest point of the side
property line toward the nearest part of the main building.
   YOUTH CENTER. Has the same meaning as in section 11353.1 of the Health and
Safety Code, as may be amended from time to time: any public or private
facility that is primarily used to host recreational or social activities for
minors, including, but not limited to, private youth membership organizations
or clubs, social service teenage club facilities, video arcades or similar
amusement park facilities.
   ZONE. A “district” as defined in this title. Portions of territory in the
city within which certain uniform regulations and requirements or various
combinations apply pursuant to this title.
   ZONING MAP. An official map subscribed by the city and on file with the city
that serves to delineate the boundaries of each “district” as defined herein.
(Ord. 533, passed 8-16-2005; Ord. 556, passed 12-19-2006; Ord. 619, passed 6-
17-2014; Ord. 626, passed 1-19-2016; Ord. 627, passed 4-5-2016; Ord. 632,
passed 12-19-2017; Ord. 659, passed 6-21-2022; Ord. 661, passed 10-21-2025)
TITLE 6: SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS
CHAPTER 1: GENERAL PROVISIONS
Section
6-1-1 Title; purpose
6-1-2 Authority to regulate
6-1-3 Governing provisions
6-1-4 Applicability
6-1-5 Merger of contiguous parcels
6-1-6 Separate maps; when required
6-1-7 Control of design and improvement
6-1-8 Map approval; generally
6-1-9 Advisory agency
6-1-10 Delegation of powers and duties
§ 6-1-1 TITLE; PURPOSE.
   (A)   This title shall be known as may be cited as the “City of Livingston
Subdivision Ordinance”.
   (B)   This title is deemed necessary in order to protect the public health,
safety and general welfare, including the orderly growth and development of the
city; the beneficial use of land in the public interest; the conservation,
stability and protection of property values, and to assure provision for
necessary utilities, public roads and other conveniences in subdivided areas.
(Ord. 295, passed 2-4-1986)
§ 6-1-2 AUTHORITY TO REGULATE.
   Pursuant to the authority conferred by Cal. Gov’t Code Title 7, Division 2,
§§ 66410 through 66499.40 cited as the Subdivision Map Act and in addition to
any other regulations provided by law, the regulations contained in this title
are established herewith and shall apply to all subdivisions or parts of
subdivisions wholly or partly within the city, and to the preparation, filing
and approval of maps.
(Ord. 295, passed 2-4-1986)
§ 6-1-3 GOVERNING PROVISIONS.
   The design, improvement and survey data for subdivisions, the form and
content of tentative, final and parcel maps, and the procedure to be followed
in securing official approval shall be governed by the provisions of the
Subdivision Map Act and by the additional provisions of this title.
(Ord. 295, passed 2-4-1986)
§ 6-1-4 APPLICABILITY.
   (A)   The provisions of this title shall not apply to any lot or lots
forming a part of a subdivision created and recorded prior to the effective
date hereof, unless those lots are hereafter proposed for further subdivision.
It is not intended by this title to repeal, abrogate or in any way impair or
interfere with existing provisions of other laws or ordinances, (except those
specifically repealed by the ordinance codified in this title) or with private
restrictions placed upon the property by deed, covenant or other private
agreements, or with restrictive covenants running with the land. Only those
improvement standards applicable at the time a tentative subdivision or parcel
map is approved, shall be imposed.
   (B)   The provisions of this title shall not be applicable to:
      1.   The financing or leasing of apartments, offices, stores or similar
space within apartment buildings, industrial buildings, commercial buildings,
mobilehome parks or trailer parks;
      2.   Mineral oil or gas leases;
      3.   Land dedicated for cemetery purposes under the Health And Safety
Code of the state;
      4.   A lot line adjustment between two or more existing adjacent parcels,
where the land taken from one parcel is added to an adjacent parcel, and where
a greater number of parcels than originally existed is not thereby created,
provided the lot line adjustment is approved by the Planning Commission
following the filing by the divider of an application therefor furnished by the
city and the payment of an application processing fee in a sum as may be
established by Council resolution;
      5.   Boundary line or exchange agreements to which the State Lands
Commission or a local agency holding a trust grant of tide and submerged lands
is a party; and
      6.   Short term leases (terminable by either party or not more than 30
days’ notice in writing) of a portion of the operating right-of-way of a
railroad corporation defined as such by Cal. Public Utilities Code § 230 unless
a showing is made in individual cases, under substantial evidence, that public
policy necessitates the application of such regulations to such short term
leases in such individual cases.
(Ord. 295, passed 2-4-1986)
§ 6-1-5 MERGER OF CONTIGUOUS PARCELS.
   (A)   Two or more contiguous parcels or units of land which have been
created under the provisions of the Subdivision Map Act or city ordinance
enacted pursuant thereto or where not subject to such provisions at the time of
their creation shall not merge by virtue of the fact that such contiguous
parcels or units are held by the same owner, and no further proceeding under
the Subdivision Map Act or this chapter shall be required for the purpose of
sale, lease or financing of such contiguous parcels or units, or any of them;
except that if any one of such contiguous parcels or units held by the same
owner does not conform to standards for minimum parcel size to permit use or
development under the provisions of the zoning ordinance or other city
ordinance and at least one of such contiguous parcels or units is not developed
with a building for which a permit has been issued by the city building
inspector or which was built prior to the time such permits were required by
the city, then such parcels shall be merged only to the extent necessary to
form one or more units which conform to lot area, width and depth requirements
set by the city zoning ordinance, for the purposes of the Subdivision Map Act
and this title.
   (B)   Any parcels or units of land merged prior to July 7, 1977, shall be
deemed unmerged and separate parcels except where merger is necessary to form
one or more units which conform to the area, width and depth requirements set
by the city zoning ordinance.
   (C)   Whenever it has been determined that real property has merged pursuant
to the Subdivision Map Act or this title, the Secretary of the Planning
Commission shall cause to be filed for record with the County Recorder a notice
of such merger specifying the names of the record owners and particularly
describing the real property, provided that, at least 30 days prior to the
recording of the notice, the owner of the parcels or units to be affected by
the merger shall be advised in writing of the intention to record the notice
and specifying a time, date and place at which the owner may present evidence
to the Planning Commission why such notice should not be recorded.
(Ord. 295, passed 2-4-1986)
§ 6-1-6 SEPARATE MAPS; WHEN REQUIRED.
   A separate map shall be prepared for each subdivision where land is
separated from other land in a parcel or holding by division other than a
street, highway, approved private road, alley, railroad right- of-way, flood
control right-of-way, canal or public utility right-of-way.
(Ord. 295, passed 2-4-1986)
§ 6-1-7 CONTROL OF DESIGN AND IMPROVEMENT.
   Control of design and improvement of subdivisions is vested in the City
Council.
(Ord. 295, passed 2-4-1986)
§ 6-1-8 MAP APPROVAL; GENERALLY.
   Jurisdiction to approve tentative and final subdivision maps and tentative
parcel maps within the city is vested in the City Council. Authority to approve
parcel maps conforming to approved tentative parcel maps is delegated to the
Planning Director.
(Ord. 295, passed 2-4-1986)
§ 6-1-9 ADVISORY AGENCY.
   The Planning Commission is designated as the advisory agency to the City
Council on all matters related to the subdivision of land.
(Ord. 295, passed 2-4-1986)
§ 6-1-10 DELEGATION OF POWERS AND DUTIES.
   Whenever, by the provisions of this title, a power of authority is given to,
or where a duty is imposed upon any public officer, it may be exercised or
performed by any deputy or departmental officer authorized by him or her
pursuant to law unless it is expressly provided that it shall be exercised in
person.
(Ord. 295, passed 2-4-1986)
CHAPTER 2: DEFINITIONS
Section
6-2-1 General provision
6-2-2 Definitions of words and phrases
§ 6-2-1 GENERAL PROVISION.
   The definitions and meanings of words and phrases, which are defined in the
Subdivision Map Act, are used in this title as defined in this chapter, unless
from the content hereof it clearly appears that a different meaning is
intended. The word “may” indicates an action which is permissive. The word
“shall” indicates an action which is mandatory. All words in the singular shall
include the plural, and the plural, the singular. Each gender shall include the
other and each tense shall include the other tenses.
(Ord. 295, passed 2-4-1986)
§ 6-2-2 DEFINITIONS OF WORDS AND PHRASES.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   ABUT. To be contiguous to and in actual contact along a common line.
   ACCESS ROAD. A road which connects a subdivision to a public road.
   ALLEY. Any dedicated way intended for vehicular service to the rear or to
the side of property served by a public road.
   APPROVED. Approved by the City Council or by the department having
jurisdiction on such matters, unless otherwise specified.
   APPROVED PRIVATE ROAD. A strip of land approved by the City Council for road
purposes, which has not been dedicated or accepted as a public road and which
connects a parcel of land with a public road.
   ARTERIAL, COLLECTOR, LOCAL COLLECTOR AND LOCAL. A road designated as such in
the circulation element of the general plan of the city and adopted by the City
Council.
   BUILDING INSPECTOR. The building inspector for the city, duly appointed by
the City Manager with concurrence of the City Council.
   CITY ENGINEER. The City Engineer for the city, duly appointed by the City
Council.
   CLERK. The City Clerk for the city, duly elected by the residents of the
city.
   COMMISSION. The City Planning Commission.
   COMMUNITY APARTMENT. An individual interest in common in the land coupled
with the right of exclusive occupancy of an apartment unit which is part of a
community apartment project.
   CONDOMINIUM. An estate in real property consisting of an individual interest
in common in a portion of a parcel of real property together with a separate
interest in space in a residential, industrial or commercial building on such
real property such as an apartment, office or store.
   COUNCIL. The City Council.
   COUNTY RECORDER. The County Recorder of the County of Merced.
   CUL-DE-SAC. A road which terminates in a permanent turnaround and which by
design is not intended to continue beyond its terminal point.
   DEAD END ROAD. A road which is terminated at the boundary line of the
subdivision but which will be required to be extended at a later date to
provide access to abutting land.
   DEDICATED ROAD. A right-of-way dedicated to the city for road purposes, and
legally accepted as such by the city.
   DESIGN.
      1.   Street alignments, grades and widths;
      2.   Drainage and sanitary facilities and utilities including alignments
and grades thereof;
      3.   Location and size of all required easements and rights-of-way;
      4.   Fire roads and firebreaks;
      5.   Lot size and configuration;
      6.   Traffic access;
      7.   Grading;
      8.   Land to be dedicated for park or recreation purposes; and
      9.   Such other specific requirements in the plan and configuration of
the entire subdivision as may be necessary or convenient to ensure conformity
to or implementation of the general plan or adopted specific plans.
   DIRECTOR. The Planning Director for the City of Livingston.
   DIVIDING STRIP. A separation between opposite direction flows of traffic. It
may also serve to separate a road or highway from the parallel frontage road
which provides access to property.
   DOUBLE FRONTAGE LOT or THROUGH LOT. A lot having frontage on two roads and
having the right of access to both of those roads, but excluding corner lots.
   EASEMENT FOR PUBLIC ROAD. A right-of-way offered to the city for road
purposes by a division of land. Upon acceptance by the city, it is deemed a
city road.
   EXISTING LOT OR BUILDING SITE. A designated lot or contiguous lots on a
lawfully established subdivision map or record of survey so existing upon the
effective date hereof, or a whole parcel of land under separate ownership so
existing upon the effective date hereof, or such lot or separate parcel of land
thereafter lawfully created.
   EXPRESSWAY. A highway for through traffic with full or partial control of
access and generally with intersections at grade.
   FINAL MAP. The official map which is recorded by the County Recorder
indicating the divisions of land within the subdivision. It shall conform with
the requirements of Chapter 7 of this title.
   FRONTAGE. That portion of a parcel of property which abuts on a public or
approved private road.
   FRONTAGE ROAD (SERVICE ROAD or OUTER HIGHWAY). Those roads which parallel
expressway, highway or other major streets, providing for access to abutting
property or for circulation, and which are separated from the highway or street
by a dividing strip.
   GENERAL PLAN. The long range, comprehensive general plan for the orderly
development of the city, adopted by the Planning Commission and the City
Council, which may include any of the elements listed in the Government Code of
the state.
   IMPROVEMENT.
      1.   Refers to such street work and utilities to be installed, or agreed
to be installed, by the subdivider on the land to be used for public or private
streets, highways and easements as are necessary for the general use of the lot
owners in the subdivision and local neighborhood traffic and drainage needs as
a condition precedent to the approval and acceptance of the final map or parcel
map.
      2.   IMPROVEMENT also refers to such other specific improvements or types
of improvements, the installation which, either by the subdivider, by public
agencies, by private utilities, by any other entity approved by the City
Council, or by a combination thereof, is necessary or convenient to ensure
conformity to or implementation of the general plan, or any approved specific
plan.
   IMPROVEMENT PLANS. The plans, profiles, cross sections and specifications of
all proposed improvements including the information required by §
6-10-40  of this title.
   IMPROVEMENT STANDARDS. The same as standard specifications.
   LOCAL ROAD. Any public road that is used or is intended to be used for the
principal purpose of serving as access to abutting property.
   LOT.
      1.   A parcel of real property with a separate and distinct number or
other designation shown on a subdivision map recorded in the office of the
County Recorder; or
      2.   A parcel of real property delineated on an approved record of survey
map or parcel map as filed in the office of the County Recorder and if required
by the zoning ordinance, abutting at least one public road or approved private
road.
   MAP ACT. The Subdivision Map Act as set forth in Cal. Gov’t Code Title 7,
Division 2.
   MASTER PLAN. See definition of GENERAL PLAN.
   NONACCESS LINE. A line delineated on a subdivision map, or described in a
deed, which is for the purpose of prohibiting access.
   OUTLOT. A lot designated alphabetically on the subdivision map for specific
use or nonuse.
   PARCEL MAP. A map prepared for acceptance by the city and the County
Recorder in accordance with an approved tentative parcel map as provided for in
Chapter 8 of this title and state laws.
   PERSON. Means and includes an individual, firm, corporation estate,
receiver, syndicate or any group or combination acting as a unit and the plural
as well as the singular number.
   PLAN LINE. A precise location for a future street right-of-way as shown on a
specific plan.
   PLANNING DIRECTOR. Person appointed by City Manager to oversee and
coordinate planning and community development.
   PRIVATE ROAD. See definition of APPROVED PRIVATE ROAD.
   PUBLIC ROAD. Any state highway, county or city street, avenue, highway or
road which is within the maintained road system of the public agency having
jurisdiction thereof or to be included within the maintained road system by
agreement between said agencies and the subdivider.
   RESTRICTED ACCESS STRIP. A strip of land not less than one foot in width for
the purpose of regulating access to part width and dead end roads until such
time as such roads may be completed or extended.
   SECRETARY OF THE PLANNING COMMISSION. The Planning Director or his or her
designee.
   SETBACK LINE, FRONT YARD. The line which defines the depth of the required
front yard. Said setback line shall be parallel with the right-of-way line or
highway setback line when one has been established.
   SETBACK LINE, REAR YARD OR SIDE YARD. The line which defines the width or
depth of the required rear or side yard. Said setback line shall be parallel
with the property line, removed therefrom by the perpendicular distance
prescribed for the yard in the zoning district.
   SPECIFIC PLAN (PRECISE PLAN). A plan for a specific area designated by the
Council, including all detailed regulations, conditions, programs and proposed
registration which shall be necessary or convenient for the systematic
implementation of each element of the general plan.
   STANDARD SPECIFICATIONS. The design and improvement requirements established
by the City Council applicable at the time of approval of a tentative
subdivision map or tentative parcel map and as set forth in the city “Standard
Specifications” manual or any amendments thereto.
   STUB ROAD (DEAD END ROAD). A road which is terminated at the boundary line
of the subdivision but which will be required to be extended at a later date to
provide access to abutting land.
   SUBDIVIDER. A person, firm, corporation, partnership or association who
proposes to divide, divides, or causes to be divided, real property into a
subdivision for himself, herself or for others, except that employees and
consultants of such person or entities, acting in such capacity are not
SUBDIVIDERS.
   SUBDIVISION. For the purposes of this title, means a division by any
subdivider, of any unit or units of improved or unimproved land, or any portion
thereof, shown on the latest equalized county assessment roll as a unit or as
contiguous units for the purpose of sale, lease or financing whether immediate
or future, except for leases of agricultural land for agricultural purposes.
Property shall be considered as contiguous units even if parcels are separated
by streets, utility easements or railroad rights-of-way. SUBDIVISION includes a
condominium project as defined in Cal. Civil Code § 4105 or community apartment
project as defined in Cal. Business and Professions Code § 11004. Any
conveyance of land to a governmental agency, public entity or public utility
shall not be considered a division of land for the purposes of computing the
number of parcels. As used in this definition AGRICULTURAL PURPOSES means the
cultivation of food, or fiber or the grazing or pasturing of livestock.
   SUBDIVISION MAP ACT. The Subdivision Map Act as set forth in Cal. Gov’t Code
Title 7, Division 2.
   TEMPORARY TURNAROUND. Paved area for turning vehicles at the end of a dead
end road, which is constructed either within the dedicated right-of-way or upon
a temporary easement to be obliterated when said road is extended.
   TENTATIVE MAP. Refers to a map made for the purpose of showing the design
and improvement of a proposed subdivision and the existing conditions in and
around it and need not be based upon an accurate or detailed final survey of
the property. It is the map which is required to be presented to the Secretary
of the Planning Commission in order to officially commence the process of
dividing land according to the requirements of this code. It shall conform with
the requirements of Chapter 6 of this title.
   TENTATIVE PARCEL MAP. The tentative map for a division of land defined in §
6-8-8  of this title which is required to be presented to the Secretary of the
Planning Commission in order to officially commence the process of dividing
land according to the requirements of this code. It shall conform with the
requirements of Chapter 6 of this title.
   VESTING TENTATIVE MAP. A tentative map for a residential subdivision, as
defined in the city’s subdivision ordinance, that shall have printed
conspicuously on its face the words “Vesting Tentative Map” at the time it is
filed in accordance with Chapter 5 of this title, and is thereafter processed
in accordance with the provisions hereof.
   WATERCOURSE. A strip of land over which water flows, having a definite bed,
bank and channel wherein the water need not flow continually but usually flows
in a particular direction.
   ZONE DISTRICT. The district established by the zoning ordinance.
(Ord. 295, passed 2-4-1986)
CHAPTER 3: CONFORMANCE TO GENERAL AND SPECIFIC PLANS AND THE ZONING ORDINANCE
Section
6-3-1 General and specific plans
6-3-2 Environmental impact
6-3-3 Zoning ordinance
§ 6-3-1 GENERAL AND SPECIFIC PLANS.
   No subdivision shall be approved unless the Planning Commission and Council
find that the proposed subdivision, together with the provisions for its design
and improvements, is consistent with the general plan or any adopted specific
plan. A proposed subdivision shall be consistent with a general plan or
specific plan only if such plan is adopted and the proposed subdivision or land
use is compatible with the objectives, policies, general land uses and programs
specified in such a plan.
(Ord. 295, passed 2-4-1986)
§ 6-3-2 ENVIRONMENTAL IMPACT.
   No tentative map or tentative parcel map submitted to the city pursuant to
the provisions of this title shall either be considered as filed or reviewed
and acted upon by the Planning Commission or Council until the requirements of
the city’s California Environmental Quality Act, being Cal. Public Resources
Code §§ 21000 et seq., guidelines have been met.
(Ord. 295, passed 2-4-1986)
§ 6-3-3 ZONING ORDINANCE.
   Subdivision maps shall conform to the zoning ordinance of the city with
respect to uses of land, lot size and dimensions, and other applicable
regulations provided, however, that where this title imposes higher standards,
the requirements of this title shall prevail. When a proposed use or
development of land requires a zoning reclassification, conditional use permit
or variance, the application therefor shall be considered prior to or
concurrently with the tentative map or the tentative parcel map.
(Ord. 295, passed 2-4-1986)
CHAPTER 4: MAPS; GENERALLY
Section
6-4-1 Examination and field check
6-4-2 Rejection
6-4-3 Filing requirements fulfilled
§ 6-4-1 EXAMINATION AND FIELD CHECK.
   Pursuant to the provisions of the Subdivision Map Act, the City Engineer and
Planning Director shall make such detailed examination of tentative and final
maps and tentative parcel maps and such field check, if any, as may be
necessary to enable them to make the required certifications.
(Ord. 295, passed 2-4-1986)
§ 6-4-2 REJECTION.
   The Planning Commission may deny a tentative map or a tentative parcel map
if the proposed use is prohibited by any ordinance, statute, law or other
regulation, and shall deny a map if it makes any of the following findings:
   (A)   The proposed subdivision is not consistent with applicable general and
specific plans;
   (B)   The design or improvement of the proposed subdivision is not
consistent with applicable general and specific plans;
   (C)   The site is not physically suitable for the type of development;
   (D)   The site is not physically suitable for the proposed density of
development;
   (E)   The design of the subdivision or the proposed improvements are likely
to cause substantial environmental damage or substantially and avoidably injure
fish or wildlife or their habitat;
   (F)   The design of the subdivision or the type of improvements is likely to
cause serious public health problems; and
   (G)   The design of the subdivision or the type of improvements will
conflict with easements, acquired by the public at large, for access through or
use of, property within the proposed subdivision. In this connection, the City
Council may approve a map if it finds that alternate easements for access or
for use will be provided and that these will be substantially equivalent to
ones previously acquired by the public.
(Ord. 295, passed 2-4-1986)
§ 6-4-3 FILING REQUIREMENTS FULFILLED.
   (A)   No map shall be considered as filed with the city until all of the
fees and charges required by the city as pertains to the subdivision of land
have been paid, the requirements of the city’s Environmental Quality Act, being
Cal. Public Resources Code §§ 21000 et seq., guidelines have been completed,
and all applicable requirements of this title have been fulfilled or an
application for or exception for appropriate zoning has been filed for
concurrent consideration.
   (B)   A final map or parcel map shall not be considered as filed until all
fees, bonds and deposits then due have been made, all corrections have been
made as required by the City Engineer and Planning Director to the maps and
improvement plans, if any, and the property has been annexed to the city and to
any service areas or districts other than the city which are to provide
necessary services.
(Ord. 295, passed 2-4-1986)
CHAPTER 5: VESTING TENTATIVE MAP
Section
6-5-1 Purpose and intent
6-5-2 Consistency
6-5-3 Application
6-5-4 Filing and processing
6-5-5 Fees
6-5-6 Expiration
6-5-7 Vesting on approval of vesting tentative map
6-5-8 Development inconsistent with zoning; conditional approval
6-5-9 Applications inconsistent with current policies
§ 6-5-1 PURPOSE AND INTENT.
   (A)   It is the purpose of this title to establish procedures necessary for
the implementation of the vesting tentative map statute, and to supplement the
provisions of the Subdivision Map Act and this title. Except as otherwise set
forth in the provisions of this chapter, the provisions of this title shall
apply to the vesting tentative map.
   (B)   To accomplish this purpose, the regulations outlined in this chapter
are determined to be necessary for the preservation of the public health,
safety and general welfare, and for the promotion of orderly growth and
development.
(Ord. 295, passed 2-4-1986)
§ 6-5-2 CONSISTENCY.
   No land shall be subdivided and developed pursuant to a vesting tentative
map for any purpose which is inconsistent with the general plan and any
applicable specific plan or not permitted by the zoning ordinance or other
applicable provisions of this code.
(Ord. 295, passed 2-4-1986)
§ 6-5-3 APPLICATION.
   (A)   This title shall apply only to residential developments. Whenever a
provision of the Subdivision Map Act, as implemented and supplemented by the
city’s subdivision ordinance, requires the filing of a tentative map or
tentative parcel map for a residential development, a vesting tentative map for
a residential development, a vesting tentative map may instead be filed, in
accordance with the provisions hereof.
   (B)   If a subdivider does not seek the rights conferred by the vesting
tentative map statute, the filing of a vesting tentative map shall not be
prerequisite to any approval for any proposed subdivision, permit for
construction or work preparatory to construction.
(Ord. 295, passed 2-4-1986)
§ 6-5-4 FILING AND PROCESSING.
   A vesting tentative map shall be filed in the same form and have the same
contents, accompanying data and reports and shall be processed in the same
manner as set forth in the city codes for a tentative map except as hereinafter
provided:
   (A)   At the time a vesting tentative map is filed it shall have printed
conspicuously on its face the words “Vesting Tentative Map”; and
   (B)   At the time a vesting tentative map is filed a subdivider shall also
supply the same information as required in §
6-6-5 of this title.
(Ord. 295, passed 2-4-1986)
§ 6-5-5 FEES.
   Upon filing a vesting tentative map, the subdivider shall pay the fees
required by §
6-12-1 of this title.
(Ord. 295, passed 2-4-1986)
§ 6-5-6 EXPIRATION.
   The approval or conditional approval of a vesting tentative map shall expire
at the end of the same time period, and shall be subject to the same
extensions, established by the subdivision ordinance for the expiration of the
approval or conditional approval of a tentative map.
(Ord. 295, passed 2-4-1986)
§ 6-5-7 VESTING ON APPROVAL OF VESTING TENTATIVE MAP.
   (A)   1.   The approval or conditional approval of a vesting tentative map
shall confer a vested right to proceed with development in substantial
compliance with the ordinances, policies and standards described in Cal. Gov’t
Code § 66474.3.
      2.   However, if Cal. Gov’t Code § 66474.3 is repealed, the approval or
conditional approval of a vesting tentative map shall confer a vested right to
proceed with development in substantial compliance with the ordinances,
policies and standards in effect at the time the vesting tentative map is
approved or conditionally approved.
   (B)   Notwithstanding subsection (A) of this section, a permit, approval,
extension or entitlement may be made conditional or denied if any of the
following are determined:
      1.   A failure to do so would place the residents of the subdivision or
the immediate community, or both, in a condition dangerous to their health or
safety, or both; and
      2.   The condition or denial is required, in order to comply with state
or federal law.
   (C)   The rights referred to herein shall expire if a final map is not
approved prior to the expiration of the vesting tentative map as provided in §
6-5-6 of this chapter if the final map is approved, these rights shall last for
the following periods of time:
      1.   An initial time period of one year;
      2.   Where several final maps are recorded on various phases of a project
covered by a single vesting tentative map, this initial time period shall begin
for each phase when the final map for that phase is recorded;
      3.   The initial time period set forth in subsection (C)1. of this
section shall be automatically extended by any time used for processing a
complete application for a grading permit or for design or architectural
review, if such processing exceeds 30 days, from the date a complete
application is filed;
      4.   A subdivider may apply for a one-year extension at any time before
the initial time period set forth in subsection (C)1. of this section expires.
If the extension is denied, the subdivider may appeal that denial to the City
Council within 15 days; and
      5.   If the subdivider submits a complete application for a building
permit during the periods of time specified in subsections (C)1. through (C)4.
of this section, the rights referred to herein shall continue until the
expiration of that permit, or any extension of that permit.
(Ord. 295, passed 2-4-1986)
§ 6-5-8 DEVELOPMENT INCONSISTENT WITH ZONING; CONDITIONAL APPROVAL.
   (A)   Whenever a subdivider files a vesting tentative map for a subdivision
whose intended development is inconsistent with the zoning ordinance in
existence at that time, that inconsistency shall be noted on the map. The city
may deny such a vesting tentative map or approve it conditioned on the
subdivider, or his or her designee, obtaining the necessary change in the
zoning ordinance to eliminate the inconsistency. If the change in the zoning
ordinance is obtained, the approved or conditionally approved vesting tentative
map shall, notwithstanding §
6-5-7(A) of this chapter, confer the vested right to proceed with the
development in substantial compliance with the change in the zoning ordinance
and the map, as approved.
   (B)   The rights conferred by this section shall be for the time periods set
forth in §
6-5-7(C) of this chapter.
(Ord. 295, passed 2-4-1986)
§ 6-5-9 APPLICATIONS INCONSISTENT WITH CURRENT POLICIES.
   Notwithstanding any provision of this title, a property owner or his or her
designee may seek approvals or permits for development which depart from the
ordinances, policies and standards described in §§
6-5-7(A) and
6-5-8 of this chapter and local agencies may grant these approvals or issue
these permits to the extent that the departures are authorized under applicable
law.
(Ord. 295, passed 2-4-1986)
CHAPTER 6: TENTATIVE MAPS
Section
6-6-1 Filing
6-6-2 Reviewing
6-6-3 Revised; alternate tentative map
6-6-4 Scale
6-6-5 Contents
6-6-6 Subdivider’s statement
6-6-7 Tract number
6-6-8 Distribution of copies
6-6-9 Review Committee
6-6-10 Planning Commission hearing and recommendation
6-6-11 Extension of time limit
6-6-12 Automatic approval; Planning Commission
6-6-13 Termination or extension of proceedings
§ 6-6-1 FILING.
   (A)   Any person desiring to subdivide land in the city shall first submit
to the Secretary of the Planning Commission 18 copies of the tentative map and
the subdivider’s statement.
   (B)   Optional alternative tentative maps may be filed at the same time.
Each filing or each alternative tentative map shall constitute a separate
action. A filing fee as set forth in §
6-12-1 of this title shall be required for each tentative map filed. In the
event that a new tentative map is filed or an approved tentative map is revised
and subsequently approved by the city, the most recently approved tentative map
shall constitute the only recognized tentative map in the consideration of the
final map.
(Ord. 295, passed 2-4-1986)
§ 6-6-2 REVIEWING.
   Prior to filing of a tentative map, the subdivider shall submit the
tentative map and the subdivider’s statement, and any other information that
the subdivider deems necessary to sufficiently describe the proposed
development to the Secretary of the Planning Commission for examination as to
conformity with the provisions of this title. Where discrepancies exist, the
Secretary of the Planning Commission may return the map to the subdivider for
correction, revision or submission of petition for exception. The tentative map
shall be accepted for filing when it is in full compliance with the provisions
of this title.
(Ord. 295, passed 2-4-1986)
§ 6-6-3 REVISED; ALTERNATE TENTATIVE MAP.
   Revised and alternate tentative maps shall contain thereon the word
“Revised” or “Alternate” after the tentative tract number.
(Ord. 295, passed 2-4-1986)
§ 6-6-4 SCALE.
   (A)   Tentative maps shall be to a scale of one inch equals 50 feet, except
that subdivisions with lots of two and one-half acres or greater may use a
scale of one inch equals 100 feet.
   (B)   The City Engineer or the Planning Director may require a scale of one
inch equals 100 or 200 feet if detail so warrants.
(Ord. 295, passed 2-4-1986)
§ 6-6-5 CONTENTS.
   The tentative map shall show and contain the following information:
   (A)   A tract number and name, if any;
   (B)   Date of preparation, north point and scale;
   (C)   Name, address and telephone number of the subdivider; the record
owner, and the person or persons preparing the map;
   (D)   A sufficient legal description of the land to define the boundaries of
the proposed tract;
   (E)   A site location map where necessary to locate the tract;
   (F)   Approximate ties to section corner or other known point;
   (G)   The boundary lines of the subdivision to be shown as required on the
final map;
   (H)   The approximate layout, dimensions and number of lots;
   (I)   Approximate acreage of the subdivision;
   (J)   Ownership division lines of abutting properties as shown on the latest
assessor’s parcel map and tract number and name, if any, of adjoining
subdivisions;
   (K)   Identification of lots in the proposed subdivision as to the existing
and proposed use; if property is to be used for more than one purpose, the
area, lot or lots proposed for each type of use shall be shown identification
of proposed public uses, if any;
   (L)   The approximate location of trees and the location and outline to
scale of buildings and structures and a description of their proposed
disposition;
   (M)   The location, names and existing right-of-way widths of all adjoining
highways, roads and alleys. The centerline and gutter line elevations of the
adjoining streets shall be shown at every change in grade;
   (N)   The location, widths and approximate gradients of all highways, roads
and alleys proposed within the tract;
   (O)   Each road shown by its actual name or by a temporary name or letter
for purposes of identification until the proper name of such road is
determined;
   (P)   The approximate radii of all curves;
   (Q)   Location of marginal or dividing strips, if any;
   (R)   The widths and approximate locations of all existing or proposed
easements or right-of-way within the subdivision or along its boundaries,
whether public or private, for roads, railroads, drainage, stormwater,
irrigation canals, sewers or public utility purposes;
   (S)   Accurate contours shall be shown drawn to intervals prescribed in the
city standards adopted by the City Council. Said contours shall be extended
into adjacent property a sufficient distance to establish proper topographical
relationships;
   (T)   Approximate location of all areas subject to inundation or stormwater
overflow, and the locations, widths and direction of flow of all watercourses;
   (U)   Proposed surface water drainage flow;
   (V)   Elevation of existing sewer lines at points or proposed connection;
   (W)   The source of water supply and the lot to be used for the community
water supply, if any;
   (X)   Proposed phasing of development; and
   (Y)   At least two reference point ties to the California State Plane
Coordinate System (1983 NA datum) shall be shown on the map, if available
within one mile of the subdivision. If the distance is greater than one mile, a
record tie to a section line or quarter section line and from a section corner
or quarter section corner shall be shown on the map and the distance from a
point on the outer line of a subdivision to a point on a section line or the
angle between the tie line and the section line upon which the control point
falls.
(Ord. 295, passed 2-4-1986; Ord. 387, passed 11-20-1990)
§ 6-6-6 SUBDIVIDER’S STATEMENT.
   A subdivider’s statement shall accompany the tentative map on a form
provided by the Secretary of the Planning Commission, and shall contain the
following:
   (A)   Total acreage of the tract, total number of lots in the tract, and the
minimum lot size (in square feet when less than an acre);
   (B)   The existing and proposed use of the property;
   (C)   The existing and proposed zoning on the property;
   (D)   Existing structures on the property;
   (E)   Existing easements on the property;
   (F)   Statement regarding improvements with reasons for any modifications or
exceptions to the provisions of this title;
   (G)   Statement regarding type of street trees to be planted, with intervals
of spacing;
   (H)   Proposed drainage, flood control measures and method of stormwater
disposal;
   (I)   Provisions for proposed fire hydrants, the proposed source of water
supply and the location and nature of sewage disposal facilities;
   (J)   Statement regarding other public utilities and services;
   (K)   Statement regarding restrictive covenants;
   (L)   Statement regarding whether the subdivider intends to file multiple
final maps on the tentative map;
   (M)   Name, address, phone number and signature of the subdivider, owner,
agent and engineer;
   (N)   Certification by the owner that he or she is the owner of the
property, on the map as proposed for subdivision, has examined the map, and
consents to its submission; and
   (O)   A preliminary title report describing the status of all interests in
the parcel to be divided.
(Ord. 295, passed 2-4-1986)
§ 6-6-7 TRACT NUMBER.
   (A)   Before filing a tentative map, the subdivider or his or her authorized
agent shall obtain from the Merced County Recorder the assignment of a number
for the tract to be subdivided. These numbers shall be assigned in consecutive
order.
   (B)   When a tract number has been assigned, the subdivider shall place the
same upon each street of the tentative and final map of the subdivision, and
the number shall not thereafter be changed or altered in any manner upon the
tentative and final map of the subdivision unless and until a new number has
been assigned in the manner provided above.
(Ord. 295, passed 2-4-1986)
§ 6-6-8 DISTRIBUTION OF COPIES.
   Copies of the tentative map shall be submitted by the Secretary of the
Planning Commission to all review agencies for their review and report.
(Ord. 295, passed 2-4-1986)
§ 6-6-9 REVIEW COMMITTEE.
   The City Manager, Planning Director, Public Works Director, City Engineer
and code enforcement/fire safety officer shall be deemed to be and are
empowered to act as the Subdivision Review Committee. The Committee shall meet
and shall formulate recommendations and requirements on the design and
improvements of subdivisions. The Subdivision Review Committee shall report its
recommendation in writing to the Planning Commission and to the subdivider at
least three days prior to any hearing or action on a tentative map by the
Planning Commission.
(Ord. 295, passed 2-4-1986)
§ 6-6-10 PLANNING COMMISSION HEARING AND RECOMMENDATION.
   (A)   Within 50 days of the filing of a tentative map with the Secretary of
the Planning Commission; the Planning Commission shall hold a public hearing on
said tentative map and, following the public hearing, take action to approve,
conditionally approve or disapprove the tentative map.
   (B)   Notices of the time and place of any public hearing on a tentative
map, including a general explanation of the tentative map and the area affected
by it, shall be given by the Planning Commission or its Secretary at least ten
calendar days before the hearing in the following manner.
      1.   The notice shall be published at least once in a newspaper of
general circulation, published and circulated in the city.
      2.   The notice shall be given by mail or delivery to all persons
including businesses, corporations or other public or private entities, shown
on the latest equalized assessment roll as owning real property within 300 feet
of the property, which is the subject of the tentative map.
      3.   The notice shall be given by mail or delivery to all persons,
including businesses, corporations or other public entities, who have in
writing requested said notice from the Secretary of the Planning Commission or
whose property rights, in the judgment of the Planning Commission or its
Secretary, may be substantially affected, or deprived as a result of a decision
on a tentative map.
   (C)   The following rules shall govern the conduct of public hearings held
pursuant to this section.
      1.   Public hearings provided for in this section shall be held at the
time and place for which such hearings were set and notices thereof given.
      2.   Any such hearing may be continued by the majority of the members
present at any hearing who may fix the time and place to which such hearing may
be continued, even in the absence of a quorum, in which case the presiding
officer at such hearing shall publicly announce prior to the conclusion of the
hearing, the time and place to which the hearing is to be continued, and no
further notice shall be required. In the absence of all of the members of the
Commission, at the time and place which such hearing was set, it shall be
deemed continued to the next regular meeting of the Commission, and no further
notice shall be required.
      3.   A majority in number of the total voting membership of the
Commission shall constitute a legal quorum for the purposes of conducting a
hearing.
      4.   The recommendation of the Commission on a tentative map shall be by
resolution of the Commission, carried by the affirmative votes of not less than
a majority of its total membership. A tie vote shall be considered a technical
denial.
      5.   The Commission shall have the authority to establish any reasonable
rules of procedure for the conduct of such hearings. The Commission may require
any person who is to testify before it to be placed under oath, in which case
the member presiding at such hearing shall be empowered to administer such
oath.
      6.   The Commission shall cause a written summary of all pertinent
testimony heard at such public hearing, together with a record of the names and
addresses of all persons testifying, to be prepared and filed with the papers
relating to such matter.
(Ord. 295, passed 2-4-1986)
§ 6-6-11 EXTENSION OF TIME LIMIT.
   The time limit for acting and reporting on tentative maps as specified in §
6-6-10 of this chapter may be extended by mutual consent of the subdivider and
the Planning Commission.
(Ord. 295, passed 2-4-1986)
§ 6-6-12 AUTOMATIC APPROVAL; PLANNING COMMISSION.
   If no action is taken by the Planning Commission to approve, conditionally
approve or disapprove a tentative map within the time limits specified in §
6-6-10 of this chapter or any authorized extension thereof, the tentative map
as filed shall be deemed to be recommended for approval insofar as it complies
with the Subdivision Map Act and all city ordinances and it shall be the duty
of the Secretary of the Planning Commission to certify the recommendation of
approval.
(Ord. 295, passed 2-4-1986)
§ 6-6-13 TERMINATION OR EXTENSION OF PROCEEDINGS.
   (A)   Failure to record a final map within two years from the date of
approval or conditional approval of the tentative map or within any extension
of time thereof granted by the Planning Commission shall terminate all
proceedings. Before a final map may thereafter be recorded, a new tentative map
shall be submitted.
   (B)   Upon application by the subdivider filed with the City Clerk prior to
the expiration date of the tentative approval, an extension of not more than
one year may be granted by the Planning Commission.
(Ord. 295, passed 2-4-1986)
CHAPTER 7: FINAL MAPS
Section
6-7-1 Filing; time limit
6-7-2 Filing; procedure
6-7-3 Preliminary soil report and geologic reports
6-7-4 Review by City Engineer
6-7-5 City Council action
6-7-6 Preparation; licensed person
6-7-7 Preparation; printing size
6-7-8 Preparation; scale; numbering
6-7-9 Title
6-7-10 Property description
6-7-11 Subdivision boundary
6-7-12 Certificates and acknowledgments
6-7-13 Lots and parcels designated
6-7-14 Bearings; length of lines; curve data
6-7-15 Highways, roads and public use areas
6-7-16 Easements
6-7-17 County or city boundary lines
6-7-18 Survey monuments
6-7-19 Land subject to inundation
6-7-20 Adjacent subdivisions
6-7-21 Subdivision shown in multiple units
6-7-22 Passage of title
6-7-23 Offers of dedication; rejection
6-7-24 Offers of dedication; termination and abandonment
6-7-25 Survey procedures
§ 6-7-1 FILING; TIME LIMIT.
   (A)   Within 12 months after the date of approval, or conditional approval,
of the tentative map by the Planning Commission, or any extension thereof, the
subdivider may cause the subdivision or any part thereof to be accurately
surveyed and a final map to be prepared and filed. The final map shall conform
to the tentative map, as approved, and shall comply with all provisions of this
title.
   (B)   The final map shall be submitted with the City Clerk not less than 60
days prior to the date by which the map must be recorded in order to permit the
actions by the City Engineer, the City Council, and the County Recorder, as
required by this title and the Subdivision Map Act.
   (C)   See §
6-6-13 of this title for failure to record a final map within the specified
time limits.
(Ord. 295, passed 2-4-1986)
§ 6-7-2 FILING; PROCEDURE.
   (A)   When filed. The final map may be filed when it is completed and all
required improvement plans and certificates except the approval certificate of
the City Council has been signed and acknowledged where necessary. (Note: a
final map shall not be considered as filed until the City Engineer has reviewed
and certified the map in accordance with the procedure specified in §
6-7-4 of this chapter.)
   (B)   With whom filed. The filing shall be with the City Clerk.
   (C)   Documents filed.
      1.   The original final map and nine copies shall be filed.
      2.   Evidence of title, acceptable to the County Recorder, shall be
secured from a title company indicating that, as shown by the public records,
the parties whose signatures appear on the map and consent to the recordation
of the map are all the parties having a record title interest in the land being
subdivided and whose signatures are required by the Subdivision Map Act.
      3.   Memorandum for the City Engineer containing the following data shall
accompany the map:
         (a)   The total area of the tract submitted;
         (b)   The total area in streets and the total linear length of
streets;
         (c)   The total area in lots;
         (d)   The total number of lots;
         (e)   The area in parks, school sites or other lands offered for
dedication or reserved for future public or quasi-public uses;
         (f)   The proposed use of the lots; and
         (g)   Total areas for each of the proposed uses.
      4.   Two copies of the protective covenants, if any, that are to be
recorded shall accompany the map.
      5.   Improvement plans shall be submitted showing all of the improvements
required herein and all others proposed to be installed by the subdivider, in,
on, over or under any road, right-of-way, easement or parcel of land dedicated
by the map. Sepias and two sets of blueprints shall be submitted when final map
is filed.
      6.   All notes, sheets and drawings showing traverse closure and the
computation of all distances, angles and courses shown on the final map and
ties to existing and proposed monuments, and adjacent subdivisions shall
accompany the map, when required by the City Engineer.
      7.   All fees as hereinafter specified shall be paid.
      8.   A statement from the county tax collector shall be secured showing
that there are no liens against the subdivision or any part thereof for unpaid
taxes or special assessments collected as taxes, except taxes or special
assessments not yet payable.
      9.   A statement shall be secured from the County Auditor-Controller
giving his or her estimate of the amount of taxes and assessments which are a
lien but which are not payable.
      10.   All necessary agreements and contracts, bonds and deposits as
required by this chapter shall accompany the final map.
(Ord. 295, passed 2-4-1986)
§ 6-7-3 PRELIMINARY SOIL REPORT AND GEOLOGIC REPORTS.
   (A)   Preliminary soil report. A preliminary soil report shall be prepared
by a civil engineer who is registered by the state, based upon test borings or
excavations unless waived as hereinafter provided. Said borings or excavations
shall be taken at specific locations determined by the City Engineer or at
random locations if no specific locations are established. Not less than one
test shall be made for every 40 lots or ten acres, whichever represents the
lesser area, and in no case shall there be less than two borings for each
subdivision. The City Engineer may require additional tests when he or she
determines the soil conditions within the subdivision are so varied that
additional tests will be needed. If the City Engineer has knowledge of the soil
qualities of the subdivision, he or she may waive some or all of the borings
upon request of the subdivider’s engineer stating he or she is familiar with
the soils and recommends a waiver based upon a soils report previously
performed. The borings shall be at least ten feet in depth. The depth of
borings shall be adjusted to represent soil profiles after any proposed lot
grading and shall take into consideration the soil embankments have been
completed. The preliminary soil report shall contain the following information
as a minimum:
      1.   The expansive qualities of the soils encountered where foundations
are to be placed;
      2.   Recommended bearing values for the soils;
      3.   Whether other soil problems exist which, if not corrected, could
lead to structural defects; and
      4.   Copies of the test boring analysis.
   (B)   Soil investigations.
      1.   If the preliminary soil report indicates the presence of critically
expansive soils, or other soils or fills would be of such depth that
foundations will not rest on original ground, a soil investigation shall be
prepared for each lot in the subdivision by a civil engineer who is registered
by the state. The soil investigation report shall include the following:
         (a)   The physical properties of subsurface formation;
         (b)   The composition of subsurface soil and rock and groundwater
conditions;
         (c)   The stability of anticipated cut or fill slopes;
         (d)   The general type of site grading; and
         (e)   Recommendations on corrective actions which are likely to
prevent structural damage to each dwelling to be constructed. These
recommendations may include the requirement that the corrective work must be
under the supervision of a registered civil engineer.
      2.   The soil investigation shall be reviewed by the City Engineer who
shall approve the investigation if he or she determines that the recommended
action is likely to prevent structural damage to each dwelling to be
constructed.
   (C)   Waiver of soil report. The City Engineer or City Manager may waive the
preliminary soil report if he or she has knowledge of the soil qualities within
the subdivision upon request of the subdivider’s engineer stating he or she is
familiar with the soils and recommends a waiver based upon a soils report
previously performed.
   (D)   Approval where soils problems exist. The City Council may approve the
subdivision or portion thereof where soils problems exist if it determines that
the recommended action is likely to prevent structural damage to each structure
to be constructed and as a condition to the issuance of any building permit,
may require that the approved, recommended action be incorporated in the
construction of each structure.
   (E)   Notice of soil or geologic report. When a soil report, a geologic
report or soil and geologic report or soils report waiver have been prepared
specifically for the subdivision, such fact shall be noted on the final map,
together with the date of such report or reports, the name of the engineer
making the soil report and geologist making the geologic report and a statement
indicating that the reports are on file for public inspection with the city.
(Ord. 295, passed 2-4-1986)
§ 6-7-4 REVIEW BY CITY ENGINEER.
   (A)   Upon receipt of the final map, the Planning Director shall refer five
copies of the map, accompanied by the memorandum for the City Engineer and one
copy of the protective covenants, to the City Engineer for review and report.
   (B)   The Planning Director shall refer all easements for public utilities
to the proper public utility for review and recommendations.
   (C)   The City Engineer or Planning Director shall check and determine the
corrections of surveying data, plans and profiles, and specifications of
improvements, certificates of dedication, acceptances of dedication and
acknowledgments, and such other matters as require checking to ensure
compliance with this title.
   (D)   If the final map and all accompanying materials are in the correct
form prescribed by this title, and the matters shown thereon are sufficient,
their corrections shall be certified on the map by the Planning Director by his
or her signature within 20 days of receipt.
   (E)   The City Engineer shall thereupon transmit said map together with said
other materials to the Planning Director for presentation to the City Council.
(Ord. 295, passed 2-4-1986)
§ 6-7-5 CITY COUNCIL ACTION.
   (A)   Approval of map.
      1.   The City Council shall, within a period of ten days after the filing
of the final map for approval or at its next regular meeting after the meeting
at which it receives the map, whichever is later, shall consider said map to
determine if it is in conformity with all the requirements of this title and
the Subdivision Map Act applicable at the time of approval or conditional
approval of the tentative map and any rulings made thereunder, or if it does
not so conform, disapprove the map.
      2.   Approval by the City Council shall at the time include, but shall
not be limited to, the acceptance or rejection of any or all offers of
dedication and shall, as a condition precedent to the acceptance of any roads
or easements, require that the subdivider agree to improve the roads and
easements. If at the time the final map is approved, any streets, paths, alleys
or storm drainage easements are rejected, the offer of dedication shall remain
open, and the City Council may, by resolution at any later date and without
further action by the subdivider, rescind its action and accept and open the
streets, paths, alleys or storm drainage easements for public use, which
acceptance shall be recorded in the office of the County Recorder.
      3.   Upon approval of the map by the City Council by resolution, a
delegate of the city shall deliver the map duly certified to the County
Recorder for recordation.
   (B)   Disapproval of map.
      1.   If the City Council determines either that the map is not in
conformity with the requirement set forth in this title, or the approved
tentative map, or that the proposed improvements do not meet city improvement
standards, the City Council shall disapprove such final map, specifying its
reason or reasons therefor, and the Planning Director shall in writing, advise
the subdivider of such disapproval and said reason or reasons.
      2.   The subdivider may file a new final map with the city, altered to
conform to all the requirements of this title.
(Ord. 295, passed 2-4-1986)
§ 6-7-6 PREPARATION; LICENSED PERSON.
   The final map shall be prepared by or under the direction of a registered
civil engineer or licensed surveyor. All data, profiles and other engineering
drawings submitted with the final map shall be prepared and signed by a
registered civil engineer.
(Ord. 295, passed 2-4-1986)
§ 6-7-7 PREPARATION; PRINTING SIZE.
   (A)   1.   The final map shall be legibly drawn, printed or reproduced by a
process guaranteeing a permanent record in black on tracing cloth or polyester
base film, including affidavits, certificates and acknowledgments, except that
such affidavits, certificates and acknowledgments may be legibly stamped or
printed upon the map with opaque ink.
      2.   Signatures shall be in opaque black ink. If ink is used on polyester
based film, the ink surface shall be coated with a suitable substance to assure
permanent legibility.
   (B)   The size of each sheet of map shall be 18 inches by 26 inches a line
shall be drawn around each sheet leaving an entirely blank margin of one inch.
(Ord. 295, passed 2-4-1986)
§ 6-7-8 PREPARATION; SCALE; NUMBERING.
   (A)   The scale of the map is recommended to be one inch equals 100 feet;
except that subdivisions with lots of two and one-half acres or greater may use
a scale of one inch equals 200 feet or the City Engineer can require one inch
equals 50 feet of complexity if detail so warrants.
   (B)   When the final map consists of more than two sheets, a key map drawn
to a scale of one inch equals 1,000 feet, shall be placed on sheet number one
indicating the relationship among all sheets.
   (C)   The particular number of each sheet and the total number of sheets
comprising the map shall be stated on each of the sheets and its relation to
each adjoining sheet be clearly shown.
(Ord. 295, passed 2-4-1986)
§ 6-7-9 TITLE.
   The title of each final map shall consist of a tract number conspicuously
displayed at the lower left hand corner of the sheet followed by the words
“consisting of sheets” (showing the number thereof followed by the words “in
the City of Livingston”).
(Ord. 295, passed 2-4-1986)
§ 6-7-10 PROPERTY DESCRIPTION.
   (A)   Below the title shall appear a description of all the property being
subdivided, by reference to such map or maps of the property shown thereon as
previously recorded or filed in the County Recorder’s office or previously
filed with the County Recorder pursuant to a final judgment in any action in
partition, or previously filed in the office of the County Recorder under
authority of Cal. Business and Professions Code Chapter 3, Part 2 of Division
4, or by reference to the plat of any United States survey.
   (B)   Each reference, in such description, to any tract or subdivision shall
be spelled out and worded identically with the original records and must show a
complete reference to the book and page of records of the County Recorder. The
description shall also include reference to any abandonment with the date, book
and page of records of the County Recorder.
(Ord. 295, passed 2-4-1986)
§ 6-7-11 SUBDIVISION BOUNDARY.
   (A)   The boundary line of a subdivision shall be indicated on the final map
by approximately one-sixteenth inch wide border outside such boundary line and
shall not obliterate any line, figure or other data appearing on the map.
   (B)   All lines shown on the map which do not constitute a part of the
subdivision itself shall be clearly distinguishable from those lines which are
a part of the subdivision.
(Ord. 295, passed 2-4-1986)
§ 6-7-12 CERTIFICATES AND ACKNOWLEDGMENTS.
   (A)   Certificates and acknowledgments as are required by this title and the
Subdivision Map Act shall appear on the title sheet of the final map, unless
their omission is permitted in the manner provided by the Subdivision Map Act.
   (B)   When a soils report has been prepared, or soils report waiver granted,
this fact shall be noted on the final map as specified in the Subdivision Map
Act, Cal. Gov’t Code § 66434(f).
(Ord. 295, passed 2-4-1986)
§ 6-7-13 LOTS AND PARCELS DESIGNATED.
   A lot shall be shown in its entirety on one sheet.
   (A)   Designation. The final map shall particularly define, delineate and
designate all lots intended to be reserved for private purposes, all parcels
offered for dedication for any purpose and any private roads, with all
dimensions, boundaries, and courses clearly shown and defined in every case.
Parcels, alleys, pedestrian walkways or easements shall be designated by
number.
   (B)   Lot numbers. The lots shall be numbered consecutively beginning with
the numerical “1” and shall continue without omission or duplication throughout
the entire tract, except that, the Planning Director may require that lot
numbering for adjoining tracts having similar names begin with the number
following the number of the last lot of the previously recorded adjoining
subdivision.
   (C)   Area designation. Each lot containing an area of one acre or more
shall have designated thereon to the next acreage of such lot shown not less
accurately than to the nearest one-hundredth of an acre.
(Ord. 295, passed 2-4-1986)
§ 6-7-14 BEARINGS; LENGTH OF LINES; CURVE DATA.
   (A)   The bearings and length of each lot line, block and boundary line
shall be shown on the final map, provided that, when bearings or lengths may be
omitted from each interior parallel lot line of such series, each required
bearing and length shall be shown in full and no ditto mark or other
designation of repetition shall be used.
   (B)   The length, the radius, the total central angle of each curve, and the
central angle and length of each segment within each lot shall be shown
thereon.
   (C)   The distances and bearings on the side lines of lots which are cut by
easements shall be so arrowed or shown as to indicate clearly the actual length
of each lot line.
(Ord. 295, passed 2-4-1986)
§ 6-7-15 HIGHWAYS, ROADS AND PUBLIC USE AREAS.
   (A)   Data required.
      1.   For each highway and road the following shall be shown:
         (a)   Width of existing right-of-way;
         (b)   Width of portion to be dedicated, if any;
         (c)   Centerline right-of-way width on each side; and
         (d)   Centerline data, as follows:
            (1)   Distance between centerlines of streets and points of
tangency;
            (2)   Length of each tangent;
            (3)   Radius;
            (4)   Central angle; and
            (5)   Length of each curve.
      2.   For each alley and pedestrian walkway, the following shall be shown:
         (a)   Total right-of-way; and
         (b)   Bearings and distances as needed.
      3.   For each water lot and other parcel offered for public or private
use, the following shall be shown:
         (a)   The intended use; and
         (b)   Dimensions of parcel (with bearings and distances as needed).
   (B)   Nonaccess lines. Nonaccess lines shall be shown on the final map. The
certificate shall indicate therein where direct access rights are being
relinquished.
   (C)   Road names. Each road shown on the final map shall have a name. The
road name shall be subject to approval by the City Council.
      1.   Where a road within the subdivision coincides with an alignment for
which the City Council has previously designated a street name, the same street
name shall be shown on the final map.
      2.   Each road which is to be dedicated, which is a continuation of, or
approximately the continuation of any existing dedicated road or way, shall be
given the same name as such existing road.
      3.   The words “avenue”, “boulevard”, “place”, or other designation of
any such road or way shall be spelled out in full on the final map and have a
proper indication of north, south, east or west as a prefix thereto.
   (D)   Dedication. If a highway, road, alley, pedestrian walkway or other
parcel intended for public use is being dedicated by a final map, it shall be
properly designated on the map and set out in the owner’s certificate of
dedication on the map.
   (E)   Private roads. The same data shall be shown for private roads to
define their boundaries as is required for public roads in subsection (A) of
this section, and also sufficient mathematical data to show clearly the portion
of each lot within such road. Private roads shall be designated by name and
shall have inserted within the limits thereof the words “not a public road”,
and shall be shown on the map by heavy dashed lines.
   (F)   Private roads; dedication. If a road is approved by the City Council
as a private road, it shall be dedicated for the private use of the lot owners
which it is intended to serve. Where the approved private road shall be
intended to serve a lot or lots, each consisting of less than 20 acres, that
road shall be offered for dedication for public use but rejected at the time of
the approval of the final map.
(Ord. 295, passed 2-4-1986)
§ 6-7-16 EASEMENTS.
   (A)   Location, width and ties. The final map shall show the width, the
sidelines or centerlines, and sufficient ties to definitely locate such
easement to which the lots in the subdivision are subject. If the location of
such easement cannot be definitely determined a statement shall be placed on
the map acknowledging the existence of such easement.
   (B)   Designation, notes and figures. Each easement shown for any canal,
ditch, storm drain, sewer, utility shall be designated by a fine dashed line
and clearly labeled and certified with all notes and figures pertaining thereto
subordinate in form and appearance to those relating to the subdivision itself.
If the easement is of record, the record reference shall be shown.
   (C)   Dedication. If an easement is being dedicated by a final map, it shall
be properly set out in the owner’s certificate of dedication on the map.
(Ord. 295, passed 2-4-1986)
§ 6-7-17 COUNTY OR CITY BOUNDARY LINES.
   Each city or county boundary line crossing or adjoining the subdivision
shall be shown upon the final map and such line shall be clearly designated and
tied in. No lot shall be divided by a county, city, school or special district
boundary line.
(Ord. 295, passed 2-4-1986)
§ 6-7-18 SURVEY MONUMENTS.
   The final map shall show the location and type of all monuments placed in
accordance with §
6-7-25 of this chapter.
(Ord. 295, passed 2-4-1986)
§ 6-7-19 LAND SUBJECT TO INUNDATION.
   (A)   Floodwater. If any portion of the land within the subdivision shown on
any final map is subject to inundation or final hazard by stormwaters, such
fact and portion shall be clearly shown by a prominent note on each sheet of
such final map.
   (B)   Overflow or ponding. If any portion of such land is or will be subject
to periodic sheet overflow, or bonding of local or foreign stormwater, the
Planning Director, after consulting with the engineer, shall so inform the
State Real Estate Commission.
   (C)   Natural watercourses. The location of any watercourse, channel, stream
or creek which functions as a drainageway shall be shown on the final map. In
the event said watercourses, channel, stream or creek is to be relocated, only
the new location need be shown on the final map.
(Ord. 295, passed 2-4-1986)
§ 6-7-20 ADJACENT SUBDIVISIONS.
   The final map shall show the tract number (and name, if any) of abutting
subdivisions.
(Ord. 295, passed 2-4-1986)
§ 6-7-21 SUBDIVISION SHOWN IN MULTIPLE UNITS.
   The recordation of the final map and the construction of subdivision
improvements may be performed in two or more units, provided that each unit
must have a separate tract number and further provided that the subdivider, at
the time the tentative map was filed with the Secretary of the Planning
Commission, indicated on the subdivider’s statement that is required pursuant
to §
6-6-6 of this title, his or her intention to file multiple final maps. No
bonds, deposits, payments or other security need be furnished for the deferred
unit or units until the final map for the deferred unit or units is submitted
to the City Council within the time limits set forth in this title for the
filing of a final map.
(Ord. 295, passed 2-4-1986)
§ 6-7-22 PASSAGE OF TITLE.
   Title to dedicated property shall pass upon its acceptance by the City
Council and recordation of the final map. The responsibility for maintenance of
improvements shall not pass to the city until the improvements have been
accepted by the City Council pursuant to Cal. Streets and Highways Code § 941.
(Ord. 295, passed 2-4-1986)
§ 6-7-23 OFFERS OF DEDICATION; REJECTION.
   If at the time the final map is approved, any streets, paths, alleys,
facilities right-of-way for local transit, and similar items, which directly
benefit the residents of a subdivision or storm drainage easements are
rejected, the offer of dedication shall remain open and the Council may by
resolution at any later date, and without further action by the subdivider,
rescind its action and accept and open the streets, paths, alleys and right-of-
way for local transit facilities and similar items, which directly benefit the
residents of a subdivision, or storm drainage easement for public use, which
acceptance shall be recorded in the office of the County Recorder.
(Ord. 295, passed 2-4-1986)
§ 6-7-24 OFFERS OF DEDICATION; TERMINATION AND ABANDONMENT.
   (A)   Offers of dedication which are covered by §
6-7-23 of this chapter may be terminated and abandoned in the same manner as
prescribed for abandonment or vacation of street by Cal. Streets and Highways
Code Part 3 (commencing with § 8300) of Division 9 or by Chapter 2 (commencing
with § 940) of Division 2, whichever is applicable.
   (B)   Except as provided in the Subdivision Map Act, Cal. Gov’t Code §§
66499.16, 66499.17 and 66499.18, if a resubdivision or reversion to acreage of
the tract is subsequently filed for approval, any offer of dedication
previously rejected shall be deemed to be terminated upon the approval of the
map by the City Council.
(Ord. 295, passed 2-4-1986)
§ 6-7-25 SURVEY PROCEDURES.
   (A)   Accuracy. The procedure and practice of all survey work done on any
subdivision, in the preparation of a final map, shall conform to the accepted
standards of the engineer’s profession. The accuracy of all boundary surveys
done in connection with any subdivision shall have a precision of one in
10,000.
   (B)   Existing centerlines. In the event the City Engineer, the State
Highway Engineer or the County Director of Public Works has established the
centerline of any street or alley in or adjoining a subdivision. the final map
shall show such centerline together with reference to a filed book or map
showing such centerline and the monuments which determine its position. If
determined by ties, that fact shall be stated upon the final map.
   (C)   Existing monuments. Each final map shall fully and clearly show and
identify such monuments or other evidence determining the boundaries of the
subdivision as were found on the ground, together with sufficient corners of
adjoining subdivisions, by lot and block number, tract name and place of
record, or by section, township and range, or other proper designation as may
be necessary to locate precisely the limits of the subdivision and to permit
the survey to be retraced.
   (D)   New monuments.
      1.   The location and size of all monuments placed in making the survey
shall be shown and, if they were reset by ties, that fact shall be shown. All
monuments on the exterior boundary of the subdivision, except those within
construction zones, shall be placed prior to the approval of the final map. All
interior monuments shall be set subsequent to the completion of the subdivision
improvements and security shall be presented by the subdivider as provided for
in the Subdivision Map Act, Cal. Gov’t Code § 66496.
      2.   Notice of setting final monuments shall be given and payment to the
engineer or surveyor for setting of final monuments shall be made provided by
the Subdivision Map Act, Cal. Gov’t Code § 66497.
      3.   Monuments shall be placed and shall be of the type specified by the
city’s improvement standards.
      4.   The City Engineer may allow the use of offset monuments, properly
tied to reference monuments, when necessary due to terrain, waterways or other
monuments other than those specified in subsections (D)1. and (D)2. of this
section.
   (E)   Monuments; replacement. Before street improvements are accepted, all
existing monuments disturbed by the placement of any improvements shall be
reset.
   (F)   Bench marks. Bench marks shall be set at locations required by the
City Engineer. The datum for the area within the city shall be based upon datum
established by the United States coast and geodetic survey sea level datum,
1929, as amended.
   (G)   Standard plaque; numbering and location; information. Identification
of monuments and bench marks shall be through the use of a standard plaque.
Descriptions of all monuments and bench marks shall be furnished to the City
Engineer for inclusion in his or her records.
   (H)   California coordinate system. All surveys required by this title, or
necessary to the subdivision of land, shall conform to the California
coordinate system when required by the City Engineer. When required, each final
map shall show the California coordinate of every monument, and all California
coordinates shall be issued and shown on all traverse closure sheets, and other
notes and ties which are required by §
6-7-20 of this chapter.
   (I)   Mathematical accuracy. The blocks and lots of each final map or
approved map or record shall have a mathematical accuracy of closure to one in
10,000.
(Ord. 295, passed 2-4-1986)
CHAPTER 8: PARCEL MAPS
Section
6-8-1 General provisions and applicability
6-8-2 Required
6-8-3 Minor Subdivision Committee; established
6-8-4 Minor Subdivision Committee; membership
6-8-5 Minor Subdivision Committee; authority
6-8-6 Minor Subdivision Committee; alternative actions
6-8-7 Lot line adjustment
6-8-8 Tentative parcel maps
6-8-9 Waiver of parcel map
6-8-10 Parcel maps
6-8-11 Design and improvements
6-8-12 Fees
§ 6-8-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS AND APPLICABILITY.
   (A)   Governing provisions. The design, improvement and survey data for
divisions of land requiring parcel maps and/or tentative parcel maps, and the
procedure to be followed in securing official approval for said maps, shall be
governed by the provisions of the Subdivision Map Act and by the provisions of
this title.
   (B)   Applicability. A parcel map shall be filed and recorded for any
subdivision for which a tentative and final map is not required by the
Subdivision Map Act, except where the requirement for a parcel map is waived as
provided by §
6-8-9 of this chapter and except for subdivisions created by short term leases
(terminable by either party on not more than 30 days’ notice in writing) of a
portion of an operating right-of-way of a railroad corporation defined as such
by Cal. Public Utilities Code § 230 or for land conveyed to or from a
governmental agency, public entity or public utility, or to a subsidiary of a
public utility for conveyance to such public utility for right-of-way;
provided, however, that upon a showing made to the Planning Commission based
upon substantial evidence that public policy necessitates such a map, this
exception shall not apply.
(Ord. 295, passed 2-4-1986)
§ 6-8-2 REQUIRED.
   It is unlawful for any person to convey for purposes of sale or financing,
or to lease any parcel in a minor subdivision, unless and until an approved
parcel map or other document approved by the city, i.e., instrument of waiver
(certificate of compliance), lot line adjustment, mere or reversion, evidencing
such minor subdivision is filed with the County Recorder.
(Ord. 295, passed 2-4-1986)
§ 6-8-3 MINOR SUBDIVISION COMMITTEE; ESTABLISHED.
   Any division of land which does not require a tentative and final map is a
minor subdivision. All minor subdivisions shall require a parcel map. Maps of
proposed minor subdivisions shall be reviewed by a Minor Subdivision Committee,
which is hereby established.
(Ord. 295, passed 2-4-1986)
§ 6-8-4 MINOR SUBDIVISION COMMITTEE; MEMBERSHIP.
   The Minor Subdivision Committee shall consist of the Chairperson of the
Planning Commission, who may appoint a member of the Planning Commission as an
alternate, the Planning Director, and the City Manager, or their
representatives. The Committee shall meet on call of the Planning Director, who
shall act as Secretary of the Committee and shall keep records of its
activities, which records shall be a public record and shall be made available
to the entire membership of the Planning Commission. The Chairperson of the
Planning Commission shall be Chairperson of this Committee. All tentative
parcel and parcel maps shall be submitted in a number and form determined by
the Subdivision Committee, and shall contain such information as is prescribed
by the Committee in its established procedures.
(Ord. 295, passed 2-4-1986)
§ 6-8-5 MINOR SUBDIVISION COMMITTEE; AUTHORITY.
   The Minor Subdivision Committee shall have authority to impose such
conditions as are deemed necessary to protect the public safety, welfare and
convenience, and may waive such provisions of this chapter relating to
improvement and design as it deems reasonable under the circumstances. The
procedures of the Committee shall be approved by resolution of the Planning
Commission and shall apply uniformly to all applications for parcel maps.
(Ord. 295, passed 2-4-1986)
§ 6-8-6 MINOR SUBDIVISION COMMITTEE; ALTERNATIVE ACTIONS.
   The Minor Subdivision Committee may:
   (A)   Refer any parcel map to the Planning Commission for action if the
Committee feels that the request involves major policy decisions which should
be made by the Planning Commission and City Council;
   (B)   Require a tentative and final subdivision map in substitute for a
parcel map when the particular circumstances of proposal so warrant;
   (C)   1.   Waive the requirement for a parcel map in those instances where
the map would merely correct a minor technical or inadvertent error, or
administrative oversight, or where the parcel to be divided meets all
requirements of the Cal. Gov’t Code § 66428 and the ordinance codified in this
title and no improvements or dedications will be required.
      2.   The subdivision shall in any instance meet the required findings of
Cal. Gov’t Code § 66428 and shall conform to all subdivision regulations
otherwise applicable, and the applicant shall be required to furnish a legal
description of the property in question, sketch of the proposed subdivision,
volume and page numbers of the deed, and whatever other information and
materials that may be required by the Subdivision Committee. When such waiver
is granted, the subdivider shall record the instrument of waiver, setting forth
the legal descriptions of the parcels before and after subdivision and the
basis for the waiver.
(Ord. 295, passed 2-4-1986)
§ 6-8-7 LOT LINE ADJUSTMENT.
   (A)   1.   A lot line adjustment between two or more adjacent parcels, where
the land taken from one parcel is added to an adjacent parcel, and where a
greater number of parcels than originally existed is not created, may be
approved by resolution of the Minor Subdivision Committee without the approval
and filing of a parcel map.
      2.   Applications for lot line adjustments shall be filed with the Minor
Subdivision Committee and shall be in the form and contain the information
required by the Minor Subdivision Committee.
   (B)   1.   A lot line adjustment shall not be approved unless the diminished
parcel and any structures or parking spaces located thereon will comply with
area, width, frontage and yard requirements of the zone in which the parcel is
located.
      2.   The lot line adjustment shall not be complete until a deed is
recorded in the office of the County Recorder and monuments have been placed at
the new lot lines and a record survey recorded in the office of the County
Recorder.
(Ord. 295, passed 2-4-1986)
§ 6-8-8 TENTATIVE PARCEL MAPS.
   (A)   Filing. The provisions of Chapter 6 of this title shall govern the
filing of tentative parcel maps.
   (B)   Application form. Application for the approval of a tentative parcel
map shall be made upon the form provided by the Secretary of the Planning
Commission. The application shall contain the following information:
      1.   A legal description of the whole parcel proposed to be divided;
      2.   Existing use of the parcels to be divided;
      3.   The proposed use of the parcels to be created;
      4.   The existing and proposed zoning on the parcel to be divided;
      5.   The source of domestic water supply and the proposed method of
sewage disposal;
      6.   Name and address and telephone number of the applicant and owners;
      7.   Certification by the owner that he or she is the owner of the
property on the map as proposed for subdivision, has examined the map and
consents to its submission; and
      8.   A preliminary title report describing the status of all interests in
the parcel to be divided shall be attached thereto.
   (C)   Tentative map; form and content.
      1.   A tentative parcel map shall be legibly drawn on reproducible
material, to a scale and in a manner prescribed by the City Engineer to best
illustrate the proposed division of land.
      2.   The following information shall be shown on the map:
         (a)   The boundary lines of the entire parcel including the area to be
divided, with dimensions, based on existing survey data or property
description;
         (b)   The proposed division lines with dimensions;
         (c)   Identification of each parcel with a number;
         (d)   All existing buildings and structures located within 100 feet of
all proposed boundary lines, together with their major exterior dimensions and
the distance from said boundary lines (except when located on the opposite side
of public rights-of-way);
         (e)   The location of all existing wells, septic tanks and leaching
fields located within 100 feet of all proposed boundary lines, with the
distance from said boundary lines (except when located on the opposite side of
public rights-of-way);
         (f)   The location and names of all abutting roads;
         (g)   The location, widths and names of any roads proposed by the
subdivider;
         (h)   Source of data from which the map was drawn;
         (i)   Name, address and telephone number of the person preparing the
map;
         (j)   The width and location of all existing or proposed easements or
rights-of-way within the land being divided or on its boundaries;
         (k)   Land subject to flooding;
         (l)   Watercourses, streams and drainage channels;
         (m)   At least two reference point ties to the California State Plane
Coordinate System (1983 NA datum) shall be shown on the map, if available
within one mile of the subdivision. If the distance is greater than one mile, a
record tie to a section line or quarter section line and from a section corner
or quarter section corner shall be shown on the map and the distance from a
point on the outer line of a subdivision to a point on a section line or the
angle between the tie line and the section line upon which the control point
falls; and
         (n)   Such additional information as the city deems necessary due to
unusual topography or drainage conditions.
   (D)   Review and approval of tentative parcel maps. The procedure for
reviewing and approving tentative parcel maps shall be as set forth in §§
6-6-8  through
6-6-13  of this title.
(Ord. 295, passed 2-4-1986; Ord. 387, passed 11-20-1990)
§ 6-8-9 WAIVER OF PARCEL MAP.
   (A)   Application. A subdivider may, at the time of filing of a tentative
parcel map, file a request for waiver of the requirement for a parcel map. Such
a request shall be filed with the Secretary of the Planning Commission in the
form of an application therefor furnished by the city.
   (B)   Findings required. The City Council shall waive the requirement for
the filing of a parcel map if, after consideration for the tentative parcel
map, information submitted therewith, the report of the Planning Commission and
any such investigation as it may determine necessary for the purposes of making
its decision, it finds that all of the following conditions have been met:
      1.   That the subdivider has complied with the provisions of §
6-8-8 of this chapter;
      2.   That adequate monuments exist in the field which appear of record in
the office of the County Recorder to permit the retracement of boundaries for
each parcel to be created;
      3.   That no dedications of rights-of-way or easements are offered or
required;
      4.   That all on site and off site improvements as required for parcel
maps by §
6-8-11 of this chapter have been completed; and
      5.   That all proposed division of land complies with requirements as to
area, design, floodwater drainage control, sanitary disposal facilities, water
supply availability, environmental protection and other requirements of the
Subdivision Map Act and this chapter.
   (C)   Waiver certificate. The instrument evidencing the City Council’s
waiving the requirement for a parcel map shall be known as a “waiver
certificate” which shall be prepared by the subdivider and shall consist of the
following form, matters and attachments:
      1.   A description of the boundary of the property proposed to be
subdivided;
      2.   A property plat map prepared by or under the direction of a
registered civil engineer or licensed land surveyor and legibly drawn, printed,
reproduced by a process guaranteeing a permanent record in black;
      3.   The location of all division lines and the exterior boundary of the
land included within the subdivision shall be indicated by distinctive lines
and clearly so designated;
      4.   The map shall be signed and sealed by the registered civil engineer
or licensed land surveyor;
      5.   A certificate shall be signed and acknowledged by the parties having
record title interest, consenting to the preparation and recordation of the
waiver certificate; and
      6.   The size of each sheet shall be eight and one-half inches by 11 or
13 inches. An entirely blank margin of two inches shall be left at the top of
each sheet.
   (D)   Filing of waiver certificate.
      1.   The waiver certificate shall be submitted to the City Manager for
his or her examination prior to filing together with all necessary fees for the
recordation of the waiver certificate and evidence that all fees as hereinafter
required have been paid. The City Manager shall examine the certificate of
waiver, and if he or she finds the same to be substantially in the form
required by this chapter, and in conformity with the conditions imposed by the
City Council in connection with the approval of the tentative parcel map, he or
she shall accept the same for filing and shall submit the same to the Planning
Director.
      2.   Within 20 days after receiving the waiver certificate or within such
additional time as may be reasonably necessary, the Planning Director in
concert with the City Engineer shall determine whether the waiver certificate
is technically correct and conforms with the approved tentative parcel map. If
approved, he or she shall so certify upon the waiver certificate.
      3.   After affixing his or her signature upon the waiver certificate, the
Planning Director shall deliver the certificate to the City Clerk who shall
present the certificate to the County Recorder for filing. When the certificate
is presented to the County Recorder and is accepted by him or her, he or she
shall file and index the same in the official records of the county.
   (E)   Fees. Waiver of the parcel map shall not preclude the payment of fees
as provided by Chapter 12 of this title. Said fee shall be calculated in the
same manner as though a parcel map had been required and shall be paid prior to
the filing of the waiver of certificate with the City Clerk.
(Ord. 295, passed 2-4-1986)
§ 6-8-10 PARCEL MAPS.
   (A)   Map validity. No subdivision that is governed by the provisions of
this section shall be deemed valid until and unless it conforms to the
applicable provisions of this title, and has been so certified by the City
Clerk and referred to and filed with the County Recorder.
   (B)   Proceedings termination. Failure to file a parcel map within two years
after the date on which the tentative parcel map is approved or conditionally
approved by the Planning Commission, or any extension thereof, shall terminate
all proceedings. Before a parcel map thereafter be filed, a new tentative
parcel map shall be submitted and approved. Upon written application by the
subdivider filed prior to the expiration date of the tentative parcel map, an
extension of not more than one year may be granted by the Planning Commission;
provided, however, that no tentative parcel map may be approved for a period
exceeding a total of two years.
   (C)   Parcel map withdrawal.
      1.   In the event the applicant wishes to terminate his or her
application prior to the recordation of the parcel map, he or she shall submit
his or her request in writing to the Secretary of the Planning Commission.
Where an agreement to construct improvements has been executed, the City
Council may release the applicant from his or her agreement to improve and
release to him or her any surety bond or cash deposit which he or she may have
posted upon completion of necessary abandonment proceedings.
      2.   In the event the parcel map has been recorded with the County
Recorder, a revised parcel map may be prepared in the manner prescribed in this
chapter for an original parcel map, and the revised parcel map shall supersede
any previous parcel map.
   (D)   Parcel map; form and content. The subdivider shall file five copies of
the parcel map with the City Clerk not less than 60 days prior to the date on
which the map must be recorded. The format and content of the final map shall
be as prescribed in the following provisions and the Subdivision Map Act:
      1.   The parcel map shall be prepared by or under direction of a
registered civil engineer or licensed surveyor;
      2.   It shall be a map legibly drawn, printed or reproduced by a process
guaranteeing a permanent record in black on tracing cloth or polyester base
film including certificates, except that such certificates may be legibly
stamped or printed upon the map with opaque ink. If ink is used on polyester
base film, the ink surface shall be coated with a suitable substance to assure
permanent legibility;
      3.   The scale of the map is recommended to be one inch equals 50 feet;
except that subdivisions with lots of two and one-half acres or greater may use
a scale of one inch equals 100 feet, or the Planning Director or City Engineer
may require one inch equals less than 50 feet if complexity of detail so
warrants;
      4.   When the parcel map consists of more than two sheets, a key map
drawn to scale of one inch equals 1,000 feet shall be placed on sheet number
one indicating the relationship among all sheets. The particular number of each
sheet and the total number of sheets comprising the map shall be stated on each
of the sheets and its relation to each adjoining sheet shall be clearly shown;
      5.   The title of each parcel number placed on the sheet followed by the
words “consisting of ... sheets” (showing the number thereof) followed by the
words “in the City of Livingston”. There shall appear a description of all the
property being subdivided, by reference to such map or maps of the property
shown thereon as previously recorded or filed in the County Recorder’s office
or previously recorded or filed with the County Recorder pursuant to a final
judgment in any action in partition, or previously filed in the office of the
County Recorder under the authority the Cal. Business and Professions Code
Chapter 3, Part 2 of Division 4, or by reference to the plat of any United
States survey. Each reference, in such description, to any tract or subdivision
shall be spelled out and worded identically with the original records thereof
and must show a complete reference to the book and page of records of the
County Recorder. The description shall also include reference to any
abandonment with the date, book and page of records of the County Recorder;
      6.   The exterior boundary of the land included within the subdivision
shall be indicated by distinctive line and clearly so designated. The map shall
show the location of each parcel and its relation to surrounding surveys. The
location of any remainder of the original parcel shall be shown, but need not
be shown as a matter of survey but only by reference to the existing record
boundaries of such remainder if such remainder has a gross area of five acres
or more;
      7.   (a)   A lot shall be shown in its entirety on one sheet.
         (b)   The parcel map shall particularly define, delineate and
designate all parcels intended to be reserved for private purposes, all parcels
offered for dedication for any purpose and any private roads, with all
dimensions, boundaries, and courses clearly shown and defined in every case.
Parcels offered for dedication other than for roads, alleys, pedestrian
walkways, water lots or easements shall be numbered consecutively and shall
continue without omission or duplication throughout the entire subdivision.
Each parcel containing an area of one acre or more, excluding public easements
of record, shall have designated thereon the net acreage of such lot shown not
less accurately than to the nearest one-hundredth of an acre.
      8.   Certificate and acknowledgments as are required by the Subdivision
Map Act shall appear on the title sheet of the parcel map, unless their
omission is permitted in the manner provided by the Subdivision Map Act;
      9.   A certificate, either as a separate document or a certificate on the
parcel map, signed and acknowledged by all parties having any record title
interest in the real property subdivided, as specified in the Subdivision Map
Act, Cal. Gov’t Code § 66465;
      10.   A certificate for the City Clerk shall be required where
dedications are offered and shall certify the action of the City Council to
accept or reject the proposed dedications; and
      11.   Evidence of title, acceptance to the County Recorder, shall be
secured from a title company indicating that, as shown by public records, the
parties whose signatures appear on the map and consent to the recordation of
the map are all the parties having a record title interest in the land being
subdivided whose signatures are required by the Subdivision Map Act.
   (E)   Examination of parcel map; Planning Director. The Planning Director
shall examine the parcel map, and if he or she finds the same to be
substantially in the form required by this title, and in conformity with the
conditions imposed by the Planning Commission in connection with the approval
of the tentative parcel map, he or she shall accept the same for filing and
shall then transmit the same to the City Engineer.
   (F)   Examination of parcel map; City Engineer. The City Engineer shall
examine the parcel map and it shall be certified by him or her if he or she
shall find that such map is substantially the same as the approved tentative
parcel map and that the map is technically correct and in proper form as
required by this title and the Subdivision Map Act. Review of the parcel map
shall be completed by the City Engineer within 20 days after receiving the map
or within such additional time as may be reasonably necessary.
   (G)   Verification of improvements. If the subdivider states that the
required improvements, if there be any, or any part of them have been
completed, they shall be inspected by the City Engineer, or any other city
officer designated for such purposes by the Council, and if the same have been
completed in conformity with the requirements of the City Council and
applicable provisions of this title, he or she shall certify such fact on the
parcel map or attach a certificate thereto so showing. If any of the
improvements have not been properly completed, he or she shall attach his or
her report thereof to the map.
   (H)   Completion of improvements or agreement therefor.
      1.   Requirements for the construction of off site and on site
improvements shall be noticed by certificate on the parcel map, or by separate
instrument and shall be recorded on, concurrently with, or prior to the parcel
map being filed for record.
      2.   (a)   Fulfillment of such construction requirements shall not be
required until such time as a permit or other grant of approval for development
of the parcel is issued by the city or until such time as the construction of
such improvements is required pursuant to an agreement between the subdivider
and the city, except that in the absence of such an agreement, the city may
require fulfillment of such construction requirements within a reasonable time
following approval of the parcel map and prior to the issuance of a permit or
other grant of approval for the development of a parcel upon a finding by the
City Council that fulfillment of the construction requirements is necessary for
reasons of:
            (1)   The public health and safety; or
            (2)   The required construction is a necessary prerequisite to the
orderly development of the surrounding area.
         (b)   Said findings and requirements shall be made at the time of
approval of the tentative parcel map, and the requirement shall be made on a
condition of approval.
      3.   Agreements as to the time for the construction of required
improvements as provided above may be entered into by mutual agreement of city
and the subdivider. Such agreements shall be approved by the City Council at
the time of approval of the tentative parcel map.
      4.   Conditions of approval requiring improvements by a time specific and
agreements as to the time for the construction of required improvements shall
be accompanied by security to guarantee performance as provided in Chapter 6 of
this title.
   (I)   Final certification. When the City Clerk shall find that the parcel
map is substantially in the form required by this chapter, in conformity with
the conditions imposed by the Council in connection with the approval of the
tentative parcel map, that, where required, the agreement and security
respecting improvements have been approved and filed and that all certificates
of approval herein required have been made, he or she shall endorse on such map
the final certification thereof.
   (J)   Acceptance of dedications. If dedications are offered or required, the
City Clerk shall transmit the parcel map or deeds of dedication to the Council,
which may accept or reject any or all offers of dedication by resolution. If
the offer of dedication is shown on the parcel map, any acceptance and the date
thereof shall be certified on such map by the City Clerk. Dedications shall be
completed prior to filing of the parcel map with the County Recorder. If, at
the time the final map is approved, any streets, paths, alleys or storm
drainage easements are rejected, the offer of dedication shall remain open and
the City Council may by resolution at any later date, and without further
action by the subdivider, rescind its action and accept and open the streets,
paths, alleys or storm drainage easements for public use, which acceptance
shall be recorded in the office of the County Recorder.
   (K)   Recordation of parcel maps. Upon final certification and acceptance or
rejection of dedications, the City Clerk shall deliver the map to the County
Recorder for recordation.
(Ord. 295, passed 2-4-1986)
§ 6-8-11 DESIGN AND IMPROVEMENTS.
   All divisions of land shall be designed and improvements thereon constructed
and dedications therefrom required as in the case of subdivisions as provided
in Chapter 10 of this title.
(Ord. 295, passed 2-4-1986)
§ 6-8-12 FEES.
   Fees required for filing, or as a condition of the recordation of a final
parcel map, are governed by the provisions of Chapter 12 of this title.
(Ord. 295, passed 2-4-1986)
CHAPTER 9: DEDICATIONS, FEES, REIMBURSEMENT AND RESERVATIONS, CERTAIN PUBLIC
FACILITIES
Section
6-9-1 Pedestrian walkways and bikeways
6-9-2 Dedication of land or payment of fees in lieu thereof
6-9-3 School site dedication
6-9-4 Reservations for public facilities
6-9-5 Drainage fees
6-9-6 Bridge crossings and major thoroughfares
6-9-7 Supplemental improvements; reimbursement agreements
§ 6-9-1 PEDESTRIAN WALKWAYS AND BIKEWAYS.
   Pedestrian walkways or bikeways may be required where needed for:
   (A)   Access to schools, playgrounds or parks, shopping centers or other
public areas;
   (B)   Traffic safety;
   (C)   Access through unusually long blocks; and
   (D)   Access to public areas shown on the approved general plan. Dedications
for bicycle paths may only be required for subdivisions which have 100 lots or
more on the final map.
(Ord. 295, passed 2-4-1986)
§ 6-9-2 DEDICATION OF LAND OR PAYMENT OF FEES IN LIEU THEREOF.
   (A)   Adoption. This section is adopted pursuant to Cal. Gov’t Code § 66477
which provides for the dedication of land or the payment of fees in lieu
thereof for park and recreational facilities as a condition of approval of a
tentative map or parcel map.
   (B)   Fee/dedication. Whenever land that is proposed to be divided for
residential use lies within the boundaries of the city, a fee and/or the
dedication of land shall be required as a condition of approval of the division
of land.
   (C)   Purpose. It is found and determined by the City Council that the
public interest, convenience, health, welfare and safety requires that three
acres of land for each 1,000 persons residing within a subdivision shall be
devoted to neighborhood and community park and recreational facilities.
However, if the amount of actual acreage of neighborhood and community park
area existing within the city, as shown on the city’s records, plans,
recreational element, maps or reports as of the date of the most recent
available federal census, per 1,000 members of the total population of the
city, as shown in the most recent available federal census, exceeds that limit,
then the City Council determines that the public interest, convenience, health,
welfare and safety requires that a higher standard, not to exceed five acres of
land per 1,000 persons residing within the city, shall be devoted to
neighborhood and community park purposes.
   (D)   Definitions. For the purpose of this section, the following
definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a
different meaning.
      DWELLING UNIT. A building or mobilehome designed for residential
occupancy. For the purposes of this section, the number of dwelling units
created by a land division shall be as follows: one dwelling unit per lot
created in a single-family residential zone; one dwelling per unit approved in
a multi-family residential zone; and where the number of units to be built in a
multi-family residential zone is unknown, the maximum number of dwelling units
allowed under that zone. For a condominium project, the number of dwelling
units created shall be the number of condominium units approved.
      PARK. A parcel or parcels of land, exclusive of natural open space, which
is open and available for use by the general public and which serves the
recreational needs of the public.
      PARKS AND RECREATION PLAN.
         (a)   A general plan and/or other plan for park and recreational
facilities adopted by the city which describes current and planned facilities
and services.
         (b)   Exemptions: this section shall not apply to the following land
divisions:
            (1)   Commercial or industrial;
            (2)   Condominium projects or stock cooperatives which consist of
the subdivision of airspace in an existing apartment building which is more
than five years old and no new dwelling units are added;
            (3)   Subdivisions containing less than five parcels and not used
for residential purposes; provided, however, that a condition of approval shall
be placed on those maps that if a building permit is requested for the
construction of a residential structure or structures on one or more of the
parcels within four years, the fee may be required to be paid by the owner of
each parcel as a condition to issuance of such permit; and
            (4)   Subdivisions subject to development agreements approved by
the City Council, that contain specific requirements for park land dedication
and/or park construction. Such subdivisions shall comply with the requirements
as set forth in the respective development agreements.
   (E)   Adoption and amendment of a parks and recreation plan.
      1.   Prior to requiring a subdivider to dedicate land or pay a fee, or a
combination of both, the city must adopt a parks and recreation plan which
shall be used to plan and direct park and recreation services within the city.
      2.   The city may amend an approved parks and recreation plan at any time
to reflect the needs of the city or when there are pertinent changes in the
city’s boundaries. A parks and recreation plan shall contain a statement of
goals, policies, programs, standards and proposed location and development or
rehabilitation of recreation facilities and services such as natural
reservations, parks, parkways, playgrounds, recreational community gardens and
other recreational areas.
   (F)   Land dedication and fee requirements.
      1.   Whenever a tentative map or a parcel map which is subject to the
provisions of this section is submitted to the city, it shall be accompanied by
a written statement from the applicant stating whether he or she intends to
dedicate land, pay fees in lieu thereof, or a combination of both for park and
recreational purposes. If the developer desires to dedicate land for this
purpose, he or she shall first consult with the city as to the appropriate area
to be dedicated, and such area shall be shown on the tentative map or parcel
map as submitted.
      2.   The conditions of approval of a tentative map or a parcel map
subject to the provisions of this section shall require the dedication of land,
the payment of fees in lieu thereof, or a combination of both for park and
recreational purposes to serve the future inhabitants of the subdivision. If
the land is to be dedicated, the proposed dedication shall be shown on the
approved tentative map or parcel map. If fees are to be paid, the condition of
approval shall require that the fees be paid to the city.
      3.   The amount and location of land to be dedicated and/or the fees to
be paid shall bear a reasonable relationship to the use of the park and
recreational facilities by the future inhabitants of the subdivision.
      4.   All land dedicated, fees paid, or a combination of both, must be
used only for the purpose of developing new or rehabilitating existing
neighborhood or community park and recreational facilities to serve the
subdivision.
      5.   The amount and location of property to be dedicated and the amount
of any fees to be paid shall be as approved by the city in accordance with the
provisions of this section.
      6.   Whenever subsequent development occurs on property for which fees
have been paid or land dedicated, no additional fees or dedications shall be
required except as to any additional lots or dwelling units which were not
subject to a prior fee or dedication requirement.
      7.   All dedications of land shall be in accordance with the Subdivision
Map Act. Land shall be conveyed in fee simple to the city free and clear of all
encumbrances except those which will not interfere with the use of the property
for its intended purposes and which the city agrees to accept. All deeds shall
be delivered to the city before the approval of the final map or parcel map. If
the final map or parcel map is disapproved, or if it is withdrawn by the
subdivider, the deeds shall be returned to the subdivider. If the final map or
parcel map is approved, the deeds shall be recorded by the city at the time the
final map or parcel map is recorded. No deed for dedication of land shall be
accepted unless it is accompanied by a policy of title insurance, secured by
the subdivider, in an amount equal to the value of the land dedicated.
      8.   Whenever land has been conveyed or fees paid to the city and a final
map is never recorded or, if recorded, is reverted to acreage, the city shall,
at its option, either reconvey all land dedicated to it, repay all fees paid
without interest, allow the developer a credit for any land dedicated or fees
paid to be applied only to a new subdivision on the same property, or make
other arrangements with the subdivider.
      9.   Land which has been dedicated and accepted may be sold by the city
if the subdivider has not begun substantial construction on the subdivision and
the City Council determines that another site would be more suitable for local
park or recreational facilities. The proceeds from the sale of the land must be
used for the purchase of the more suitable site.
      10.   Whenever fees are to be paid, the fees shall be paid at such time
as is agreed upon by the subdivider and the city through the conditions of
approval. Payment may be required prior to recordation of the final map or
parcel map if the fees are to reimburse the city for expenditures previously
made, or if the city determines that the fees will be collected for park and
recreation facilities for which an account has been established and funds
appropriated and for which the city has adopted a proposed construction
schedule or plan. Payment may be deferred to the date of the issuance of
building permits.
      11.   Whenever fees are paid pursuant to this section, the city shall
deposit them into a separate park fund.
      12.   All fees paid must be used only for the purpose of developing new
or rehabilitating existing neighborhood or community park and recreational
facilities to serve the subdivision. The development of new park and
recreational facilities includes, but is not limited to, the acquisition of
land for neighborhood or community parks for recreational purposes.
      13.   Fees paid pursuant to this section shall be expended for use only
within the boundaries of the city and as specified herein and the city shall
maintain appropriate records to reflect such expenditures.
      14.   A subdivider of any tentative map or parcel map which was approved
prior to the effective date of this section may apply to be reassessed pursuant
to the provisions of this section, provided the fees have not yet been paid
and, in such event, all other provisions of this section shall apply. Upon such
application, the city shall determine the amount of fees required, and the
matter need not be set for hearing before the City Council or the Planning
Commission unless a dedication of land or a credit as provided in subsection
(F)5. of this section is requested by the subdivider or recommended by the
Planning Department.
   (G)   Land dedication and fee determinations.
      1.   Whether the conditions of approval for a land division shall require
the dedication of land, the payment of fees, or both, shall be based on the
following:
         (a)   The natural features of the area; topography; geology; available
access; the location, size and shape of the subdivision; the land available for
dedication; the feasibility of dedication; the location of existing and
proposed park sites and trailways; suitability for patrol, supervision and
maintenance; and the compatibility of dedication with the city’s general plan
and parks master plan adopted by the city;
         (b)   For subdivisions containing 50 parcels or less, only the payment
of fees may be required, provided, however, that when a condominium project,
stock cooperative or community apartment project, as those terms are defined in
Article 2 of Cal. Civil Code Division 4, Part 5, Chapter 1, exceeds 50 dwelling
units, the dedication of land may be required even though the number of parcels
may be less than 50. Nothing in this section shall prevent the city from
accepting the voluntary dedication of land by a subdivider for a subdivision
containing less than 50 parcels if the dedication meets the other requirements
of this section; and
         (c)   Whenever the actual amount of land to be dedicated is less than
the amount of land required to be dedicated, the subdivider shall pay fees for
the value of any additional land that otherwise would have been required to be
dedicated.
      2.   (a)   Unless a different number is set forth in the parks and
recreation plan, the average number of persons per unit (density) for
calculating the amount of land to be dedicated or the amount of fee to be paid,
or a combination of both, shall be 4.37 according to the U.S. Census Bureau,
Census 2000.
         (b)   The amount of land to be dedicated or fees paid shall be based
on the residential density of the subdivision and shall be determined by
multiplying the number of dwelling units of the subdivision by the average
number of persons per unit (as determined pursuant to this subsection (G)2.) by
a coefficient equaling the number of acres of park land required per person
(currently set at 0.005).
      3.   Whenever land will be dedicated, the following provisions shall
apply:
         (a)   Whenever land is dedicated, the subdivider shall, without
credit, provide the following for the benefit of the land dedicated:
            (1)   Full street improvements and utility connections including,
but not limited to, curbs, gutters, relocation of existing public utility
facilities, street paving, traffic control devices, street trees and sidewalks
to the dedicated land;
            (2)   Fencing along the property lines of the subdivision which are
contiguous to the park;
            (3)   Improve the drainage through the park site;
            (4)   Provide minimal physical improvements, not including
recreational facilities, building, or equipment, which the city determines are
necessary for acceptance of the land for park and recreational purposes;
            (5)   Provide access from the park and recreational facilities to
an existing or proposed public street, unless the city determines that such
access is unnecessary for maintenance of the park area or use of the park by
the residents of the area;
            (6)   Water, sewer, grading and drainage improvements in addition
to those grading, drainage, irrigation and planting improvements required under
other city ordinances. All land to be dedicated and improvements to be made
should be approved by the city prior to the approval or disapproval of a
subdivision;
            (7)   All grading plans for land to be dedicated shall be reviewed
and approved by the city for conformance with the city’s general plan and any
other parks and recreation plans and the needs of the city; and
            (8)   No grading, drainage, irrigation, planting, street or utility
improvements required under this section shall be eligible for a credit against
the land to be dedicated or fees paid under the provisions of this section.
      4.   Whenever a fee is to be paid in lieu of the dedication of land, the
following provisions shall apply.
         (a)   The amount of the fee shall be determined by multiplying the
number of acres of land required to be dedicated pursuant to subsection (G)2.
of this section by the per acre fair market value of the land within the
subdivision which would otherwise be dedicated.
         (b)   The per acre fair market value of the land within the
subdivision which would otherwise be required to be dedicated shall be based on
the zoning of the property contemplated under the development approval and on
the value of the land within the subdivision as if it were improved only with
those improvements specified in subsection (F)3. of this section. The value of
any structures other than those improvements specified in subsection (F)3. of
this section shall not be considered when determining fair market value.
Alternatively, the fair market value may be determined by adding 20% of the
fair market value of the land (without those improvements specified in
subsection (F)3. of this section), to account for the cost of improvements. The
fair market value shall be determined and agreed to by the City Council and the
subdivider. However, if an agreement on the fair market value cannot be
reached, the subdivider may, at his or her own expense, obtain an appraisal of
the property if the City Council does not accept the subdivider’s appraisal,
the fair market value shall be determined by the City Council after
consultation with the office of the County Assessor for Merced County.
      5.   The subdivider may receive a credit against the payment of fees or
the dedication of land as follows.
         (a)   Common interest developments, as defined in Cal. Civil Code §
1351, shall be eligible to receive a credit, as determined by the City Council,
against the amount of land required to be dedicated or the amount of the fee
imposed pursuant to this section, for the value of private open space within
the development which is usable for active recreational uses.
         (b)   A credit may be given against the requirement for the payment of
fees or the dedication of land required by this section for the reasonable
value of park and recreation improvements, including any equipment, provided by
the subdivider to the dedicated land. The amount of the credit shall be
determined prior to the approval or conditional approval of the tentative map
or parcel map. The granting of a credit shall be made by the City Council and
shall be based on an approved set of improvement plans. However, the city
reserves the right to require in lieu fees if it finds the improvements
unacceptable.
         (c)   (1)   A credit may be given where private areas for park and
recreational purposes are provided in a subdivision and such areas are for
active recreational uses, to be privately owned and maintained in common by the
future owner(s) of the development. Such areas may be credited against up to
50% of the requirement of land dedication or fees at the discretion of the City
Council; provided, that the City Council determines that it is in the public
interest to grant such credits and that all of the following standards either
have been or will be met prior to approval of the final map or development
permit:
               A.   That yards, court areas, setbacks and other open space
areas, as may be required to be maintained by this code, the building code and
other regulations, shall not be included in the computation of such private
areas;
               B.   Evidence is provided that the private ownership and
maintenance of the area will be adequately provided for by recorded written
agreement, covenants or restrictions;
               C.   That the use of the private area is restricted for park and
recreational purposes by an open space easement or other instrument; and
               D.   That the proposed private area is reasonably adaptable for
use of park or recreational purposes, taking into consideration such factors as
size, shape, topography, geology, access and location.
            (2)   A.   ACTIVE RECREATIONAL USES means, for the purposes of this
section, recreation facilities occurring on usable level land (5% maximum
slope) in a planned development which are designed to provide individual or
group activities of an active nature including, but not limited to, open lawn,
sports fields, court games, swimming pools, children’s play areas, picnic
areas, golf courses and recreational community gardening;
               B.   Active recreational uses do not include natural open space,
nature study areas, and open space for buffer areas, steep slopes, or scenic
overlooks. Credits for areas within watercourses, drainage areas or water
bodies may be granted only if:
                  i.   Such areas are suitable for active recreational use;
                  ii.   Such areas will actually be used for active recreation;
and
                  iii.   The proposed type of active recreational use to be
located within such areas is allowed or otherwise permitted by the city’s parks
master plan or other plan adopted by the city for parks and recreational
facilities.
      6.   (a)   Generally. Notwithstanding the 50% limitation as set forth
above, a private open space credit in excess of 50% of the requirement of land
dedication or fees payment may be granted by the City Council provided that the
proposed recreational use is cited in the city’s general plan or other plan
adopted by the city for parks and recreational facilities.
         (b)   Annual reports.
            (1)   The city shall maintain a separate account for all land
dedications and fee payments received pursuant to this section and shall
prepare an annual report for each account. The annual reports shall be prepared
no later than 90 days after the fiscal year of the city ends.
            (2)   The reports shall include each of the following:
               A.   The land dedications and fee payments received, the balance
of the account and the facilities purchased, leased or constructed during the
fiscal year;
               B.   Documentation in support of and justification for the land
dedications, fee payments, fee expenditures and any change in the fee account
balance;
               C.   Information describing any changes in boundaries, service
area, plan goals, policies, standards, as well as, any changes in park and
recreation facility inventory; and
               D.   A schedule of how, when and where the city intends to use
the land dedicated or fees paid, or both, to develop park or recreational
facilities to serve the residents of the subdivisions and the anticipated
starting dates for the development of the park and recreation facilities. The
starting dates shall be reasonable with respect to the need for such parks and
facilities, weather constraints, the need to minimize the disruption of the
neighborhood, the amount of land and fees received, and the anticipated
availability of funds for the operation and maintenance of the parks and
facilities which are constructed.
(Ord. 525, passed 4-1-2005)
§ 6-9-3 SCHOOL SITE DEDICATION.
   (A)   A subdivider who develops or completes the development of one or more
school districts maintaining an elementary school may be required to dedicate
to the school district or districts within which such subdivisions are to be
located, such land as the City Council deems to be necessary for the purpose of
constructing thereon such elementary school or schools as are necessary to
assure the residents of the subdivision adequate public school service, except
that the City Council shall not require the dedication of an amount of land
which would make the development of the remaining land held by the subdivider
economically unfeasible or which would exceed the amount of land ordinarily
allowed under the procedures of the state allocation board.
   (B)   This section shall not be applicable to a subdivider who has owned the
land being subdivided for more than ten years prior to filing of the tentative
subdivision map.
   (C)   The requirement of dedication shall be imposed at the time of approval
of the tentative subdivision map by the City Council if, within 30 days after
the requirement of dedication is imposed by the City Council, the school
district does not offer to enter into a binding commitment with the subdivider
to accept the dedication, this requirement shall be automatically terminated.
   (D)   The required dedication shall be made any time before, concurrently
with, or up to 60 days after the filing of the final map for any portion of the
subdivision.
   (E)   The school district to which the property is dedicated shall record a
certificate with the County Recorder, containing therein all information
required by Cal. Gov’t Code § 66478.
   (F)   The school district shall pay the subdivider any costs, if it accepts
the dedication, as are provided in Cal. Gov’t Code § 66478.
   (G)   In the event the school district does not require the dedication of
land for a future elementary school site or the subdivider cannot dedicate land
because of unavailability of land in the subdivision for financial feasibility,
the subdivider and school shall mutually agree upon an alternative.
(Ord. 295, passed 2-4-1986)
§ 6-9-4 RESERVATIONS FOR PUBLIC FACILITIES.
   (A)   The city may require that areas of real property within a subdivision
be reserved for parks, recreational facilities, fire stations, police stations,
libraries or other public uses, subject to the following conditions:
      1.   The requirement is based upon an adopted specific plan or an adopted
general plan containing a community facilities element, a recreation element
and the required reservations are in accordance with definite principles and
standards contained therein;
      2.   The reserved area is of such size and shape as to permit the balance
of the property within which the reservation is located to develop in an
orderly and efficient manner; and
      3.   The amount of land reserved will not make development of the
remaining land held by the subdivider economically unfeasible.
   (B)   The reserved area shall conform to the adopted specific or general
plan and shall be in such multiples of streets and parcels as to permit an
efficient division of the reserved area in the event that it is not acquired
within the prescribed period; in such event, the subdivider shall make those
changes as are necessary to permit the reserved area to be developed for the
intended purpose consistent with good subdividing practices.
   (C)   The public agency for whose benefit an area has been reserved shall at
the time of approval of the final map or parcel map enter into a binding
agreement to acquire such reserved area within 21 years after the completion
and acceptance of all improvements, unless such period of time is extended by
mutual agreement. The purchase price shall be the market value thereof at the
time of the filing of the tentative map plus the taxes against such reserved
area from the date of the reservation and any other costs incurred by the
subdivider in the maintenance of such reserved area, including interest costs
incurred on any loan covering such reserved area.
   (D)   If the public agency for whose benefit an area has been reserved does
not enter into such a binding agreement, the reservation of such area shall
automatically terminate.
(Ord. 295, passed 2-4-1986)
§ 6-9-5 DRAINAGE FEES.
   Prior to filing of any final map or parcel map, the subdivider shall pay or
cause to be paid any fees for defraying the actual or estimated costs of
constructing planned drainage facilities for the removal of surface and storm
waters from local or neighborhood drainage areas established pursuant to the
Cal. Gov’t Code § 66483. The fees to be paid by the subdivider will be based on
the city master drainage plan and other supplemental documents.
(Ord. 295, passed 2-4-1986)
§ 6-9-6 BRIDGE CROSSINGS AND MAJOR THOROUGHFARES.
   The City Council may require the payment of a fee as a condition of approval
of a final map or as a condition of issuing a building permit for purposes of
defraying the actual or estimated cost of constructing bridges over waterways,
railways or constructing major thoroughfares subject to the following
requirements:
   (A)   Fees may be required for facilities as provided in the Subdivision Map
Act, Cal. Gov’t Code § 66484(a) when they are identified by the circulation
elements, transportation or flood control provisions of the city’s general
plan;
   (B)   A public hearing shall be held and notice shall be given as provided
in Subdivision Map Act, Cal. Gov’t Code § 66484(a)(2);
   (C)   The boundaries of the area of benefit, the cost, and a fair method of
allocation of costs to the area of benefit and fee apportionment shall be
determined at a public hearing as provided in Subdivision Map Act, Cal. Gov’t
Code § 66484(a)(3);
   (D)   Fees shall not be required unless the requirements of Subdivision Map
Act, Cal. Gov’t Code § 66484(a)(4) and (5) have been met;
   (E)   Protests may be filed and proceedings shall be abandoned as provided
in Subdivision Map Act, Cal. Gov’t Code § 66484(a)(6); and
   (F)   All procedures for imposing and handling fees shall be as provided by
Subdivision Map Act, Cal. Gov’t Code § 66484.
(Ord. 295, passed 2-4-1986)
§ 6-9-7 SUPPLEMENTAL IMPROVEMENTS; REIMBURSEMENT AGREEMENTS.
   (A)   Supplemental improvements; requirement. The subdivider may be required
to install improvements for the benefit of the subdivision which may contain
supplemental size, capacity or number for the benefit of property not within
the subdivision as a condition precedent to the approval of a subdivision or
parcel map and thereafter to dedicate such improvements to the public. However,
the subdivider shall be reimbursed for that portion of the cost of such
improvements equal to the difference between the amount it would have cost the
subdivider to install such improvements, pursuant to the provisions of
Subdivision Map Act, Cal. Gov’t Code §§ 66485 et seq.
   (B)   Supplemental improvements; reimbursement agreement; funding
procedures.
      1.   No charge, area of benefit, or local benefit district shall be
established unless and until a public hearing in accordance with the provisions
of §
6-9-6 of this chapter is held thereon by the City Council, and the City Council
finds that the fee or charge and the area of benefit or local benefit district
is reasonably related to the cost of such supplemental improvements and the
actual ultimate beneficiaries thereof.
      2.   The notice required by §
6-9-6 of this chapter, shall be given to the subdivider and to those who own
property within the proposed area of benefit as shown on the latest equalized
assessment roll, and the potential users of the supplemental improvements
insofar as they can be ascertained at the time. Such notices shall be mailed by
the City Clerk at least ten days prior to the date established for hearing.
   (C)   Supplemental improvements; drainage, sewage, bridges and major
thoroughfares. If the city has adopted a local drainage or sanitary sewer plan
or map as required for the imposition of fees therefor, or has established an
area of benefit for bridges or major thoroughfares as provided in this chapter,
the city may impose a reasonable charge on property within the area benefitted
and may provide for the collection of said charge as set forth in this chapter.
The city may enter into reimbursement agreements with a subdivider who
constructs said facilities, bridges, or thoroughfares, and the charges
collected by the city therefor may be utilized to reimburse the subdivider as
set forth herein.
(Ord. 295, passed 2-4-1986)
CHAPTER 10: DESIGN AND IMPROVEMENT STANDARDS
Section
6-10-1 Conformance
6-10-2 Road design; layout
6-10-3 Road design; intersections
6-10-4 Road design; restricted access strips
6-10-5 Road design; part width
6-10-6 Road design; stub roads
6-10-7 Road design; cul-de-sac
6-10-8 Road design; frontage roads
6-10-9 Road design; access roads
6-10-10 Future roads; dedication
6-10-11 Future roads; state highway
6-10-12 Road design; grade separation
6-10-13 Road design; alleys
6-10-14 Easements; locations
6-10-15 Easements; width
6-10-16 Lot design; area and frontage
6-10-17 Grading plan
6-10-18 Lot design; side line
6-10-19 Lot design; boundary lines
6-10-20 Lot design; double frontage lots
6-10-21 Block design; length
6-10-22 Watercourses
6-10-23 Land subject to inundation
6-10-24 Dedications
6-10-25 Improvements; required
6-10-26 Improvements; streets
6-10-27 Improvements; street trees
6-10-28 Improvements; sidewalks
6-10-29 Improvements; walls
6-10-30 Improvements; sewage
6-10-31 Improvements; water
6-10-32 Improvements; fire hydrants
6-10-33 Improvements; drainage
6-10-34 Improvements; abandoned wells and pipelines
6-10-35 Improvements; traffic and road signs
6-10-36 Improvements; out of tract
6-10-37 Improvements; streetlights
6-10-38 Improvements; utilities
6-10-39 Improvements; bikeways
6-10-40 Improvement procedures; agreements
6-10-41 Improvement procedures; plan submittal
6-10-42 Improvement procedures; installations
6-10-43 Improvement procedures; inspections and acceptance
6-10-44 Private improvements; maintenance of private roads
6-10-45 Provision for future passive or natural heating or cooling
opportunities
6-10-46 Installation of subdivision improvements prior to the issuance of
building permits
§ 6-10-1 CONFORMANCE.
   Design and improvements shall conform to this title and the improvement
standards. Design shall also provide for adequate traffic circulation and
should promote the extension of aesthetic values.
(Ord. 295, passed 2-4-1986)
§ 6-10-2 ROAD DESIGN; LAYOUT.
   Road layout shall conform as follows.
   (A)   Street rights-of-way widths shall be in accordance with the city’s
standard specifications.
   (B)   Streets which are extensions of existing streets shall continue the
centerline of the existing street, as far as practicable, either in the same
direction or by adjustment curves.
   (C)   All opposing streets entering upon any given street shall have their
centerlines directly opposite each other or separated by at least 125 feet.
(Ord. 295, passed 2-4-1986)
§ 6-10-3 ROAD DESIGN; INTERSECTIONS.
   The centerlines of streets shall intersect one another as nearly at right
angles as practicable, shall not be excessively curved, and shall conform to
the requirements for sign distance as provided in the standard specifications.
(Ord. 295, passed 2-4-1986)
§ 6-10-4 ROAD DESIGN; RESTRICTED ACCESS STRIPS.
   Access from abutting land, not part of a subdivision, shall not be permitted
to a dedicated part width or dead end road over a restricted access strip.
   (A)   Restricted access strips shall be provided along and at the end of
part width and dead end roads to separate them from abutting land not part of
the subdivision.
   (B)   Said restricted access strip shall be not less than one foot in width
and shall be offered for dedication to the city for road purposes.
   (C)   Said restricted access strip shall be shown on the map and identified
as a “restricted access strip” (insert, in alphabetical order, the appropriate
letter designation).
(Ord. 295, passed 2-4-1986)
§ 6-10-5 ROAD DESIGN; PART WIDTH.
   The design of the subdivision shall be so that full width local roads will
be provided unless said requirement is waived in accordance with the provisions
of Chapter 11 of this title. In no case shall a local street which provides for
less than one parking lane and two travel lanes be provided.
(Ord. 295, passed 2-4-1986)
§ 6-10-6 ROAD DESIGN; STUB ROADS.
   (A)   Stub roads shall be provided where necessary to give access to or
permit a satisfactory future development of adjoining land. The road shall
extend to the boundary line of the property, or within one foot thereof where a
restricted access strip is dedicated.
   (B)   Stub roads which are abutted by more than one lot on either side shall
be terminated by a temporary turnaround. The turnaround shall conform to the
standard specifications. A stub road may be approved by the City Council
without a temporary turnaround when the road is less than 150 feet in length,
or its length equals the dimensions of the corner lot along the road, whichever
is greater.
(Ord. 295, passed 2-4-1986)
§ 6-10-7 ROAD DESIGN; CUL-DE-SAC.
   Cul-de-sac roads shall be terminated by a permanent turnaround as provided
in the improvement standards. Cul-de-sac roads shall not exceed 300 feet in
length, measured from the centerline of the intersecting road to the end of the
turnaround, in which case the maximum length may be 500 feet.
(Ord. 295, passed 2-4-1986)
§ 6-10-8 ROAD DESIGN; FRONTAGE ROADS.
   (A)   Where lots in a subdivision front on any highway shown on the
circulation element of the general plan, the City Council may require the
dedication and improvement of a frontage road for access to those lots.
   (B)   Frontage road intersections which open onto any highway shown on the
general plan shall be through the bulb type intersection as provided in the
standard specifications.
(Ord. 295, passed 2-4-1986)
§ 6-10-9 ROAD DESIGN; ACCESS ROADS.
   When a subdivision does not abut upon a public road, an access road may be
required by the City Council to connect the subdivision with a public road.
When required, the access road shall meet all requirements of this title.
(Ord. 295, passed 2-4-1986)
§ 6-10-10 FUTURE ROADS; DEDICATION.
   Whenever the Commission or City Council has determined that a particular
local road is not at this time warranted, but is anticipated to be necessary in
the future to serve local neighborhood traffic needs, the City Council may
require that the location, width and extent of such road be shown on the final
map and offered for dedication for road purposes.
(Ord. 295, passed 2-4-1986)
§ 6-10-11 FUTURE ROADS; STATE HIGHWAY.
   If a parcel of land to be subdivided includes a portion of the right-of-way
for a state highway, the right-of-way of which has been certified by the
California Transportation Commission, the subdivider shall either dedicate or
withhold from the subdivision all the area included in said right-of-way.
(Ord. 295, passed 2-4-1986)
§ 6-10-12 ROAD DESIGN; GRADE SEPARATION.
   Whenever it is proposed to subdivide property abutting an approach to an
existing or specific plan lined grade separation, the subdivision shall be so
arranged that any lot abutting such approach shall have suitable access
elsewhere, and that the street layout adequately provides for and conforms to
such approach.
(Ord. 295, passed 2-4-1986)
§ 6-10-13 ROAD DESIGN; ALLEYS.
   (A)   Where required. An alley, with adequate ingress and egress provided
for truck traffic, may be required at the rear or side of lots where the
property is to be used for multiple residential, commercial or industrial use.
   (B)   Intersections. Intersecting alleys shall not be permitted.
   (C)   Width. Alleys, when required, shall be a minimum of 20 feet in width.
(Ord. 295, passed 2-4-1986)
§ 6-10-14 EASEMENTS; LOCATIONS.
   (A)   Sewer, gas and water. Sewer, gas and water mains shall not be on rear
or side lot easements unless street location is found to be impracticable or
uneconomical and unless specifically approved by the City Council.
   (B)   Storm drains and flood control. Easements for storm drains and flood
control shall be provided within the subdivision when deemed necessary by the
City Council.
   (C)   Public utilities. Easements for underground electrical and telephone
facilities shall be provided as requested by the affected utility.
(Ord. 295, passed 2-4-1986)
§ 6-10-15 EASEMENTS; WIDTH.
   All easements within a subdivision shall not be less than 20 feet in width,
being not less than ten feet on each side of abutting properties. However,
easements of a lesser width may be approved by the City Council when it has
been determined that the purpose of any easement may be accomplished by the use
of a lesser width.
(Ord. 295, passed 2-4-1986)
§ 6-10-16 LOT DESIGN; AREA AND FRONTAGE.
   (A)   The area and dimensions of lots shall be in conformity with the zoning
regulations for the zoning district in which the proposed subdivision is
located. A larger minimum lot area may be required when necessitated by
topographical and geological consideration.
   (B)   All lots shall have frontage on at least one public or approved
private road as required by the appropriate zoning district. The width of such
frontage shall not be less than that prescribed by the zoning regulations for
the zoning district in which the proposed subdivision is located.
(Ord. 295, passed 2-4-1986)
§ 6-10-17 GRADING PLAN.
   A grading plan shall be prepared prior to acceptance and approval of the
final subdivision map. The grading plan shall depict the depth and extent of
all excavations and embankments which constitute changes in original grade from
that shown on the approved tentative subdivision map. All grades shall conform
to the datum used in the city’s bench mark system.
(Ord. 295, passed 2-4-1986)
§ 6-10-18 LOT DESIGN; SIDE LINE.
   The side line of all lots, so far as possible, shall be at right angles to
the road which the lot faces, or radial or approximately radial if the road is
curved.
(Ord. 295, passed 2-4-1986)
§ 6-10-19 LOT DESIGN; BOUNDARY LINES.
   No lot shall be divided by the boundary line of a county, school or special
district.
(Ord. 295, passed 2-4-1986)
§ 6-10-20 LOT DESIGN; DOUBLE FRONTAGE LOTS.
   Double frontage lots, other than corner lots, which abut two roads and have
a depth less than 240 feet will not be approved except where necessitated by
topographical or other physical conditions or where ingress or egress to and
from one of the roads is prohibited by law or where direct access rights have
been or will be waived.
(Ord. 295, passed 2-4-1986)
§ 6-10-21 BLOCK DESIGN; LENGTH.
   Blocks shall not exceed 1,320 feet in length between road centerlines,
except where topographical or other conditions require longer blocks.
(Ord. 295, passed 2-4-1986)
§ 6-10-22 WATERCOURSES.
   Where a subdivision or any part thereof is transversed by any watercourse,
channel, stream, creek, or canal, the subdivider shall, subject to riparian
rights, indicate the physical limits thereof.
(Ord. 295, passed 2-4-1986)
§ 6-10-23 LAND SUBJECT TO INUNDATION.
   (A)   Land subject to flooding and land deemed by the City Engineer to be
uninhabitable shall not be platted for residential occupancy, nor for such
other uses as may endanger health, life or property, or aggravate the flood
hazard; and shall be shown on the map as subject to inundation or otherwise
uninhabitable.
   (B)   Such land may be filled or otherwise improved in a manner and to a
degree approved by the City Engineer so it is no longer subject to the
restrictions of this section. The required improvements shall be completed or
agreed to be completed by secured agreement pursuant to §
6-10-40 of this chapter prior to the approval of the final map.
   (C)   Lands included within areas designated by the Federal Flood Insurance
Administration as flood prone areas or shown on maps supplied by the U.S.
Department of Agriculture, Soil Conservation Service or the U.S. Corps of
Engineers as being within flood prone areas, shall not be divided until a plan
provided by the subdivider is approved by the City Engineer showing how all
development within the subdivision will be floodproofed in a manner which will
not adversely affect surrounding properties.
(Ord. 295, passed 2-4-1986)
§ 6-10-24 DEDICATIONS.
   All land shown and designated on the final map for any public use shall be
offered for dedication.
(Ord. 295, passed 2-4-1986)
§ 6-10-25 IMPROVEMENTS; REQUIRED.
   As a condition precedent to acceptance and approval of the final map or
parcel map, the subdivider shall make or agree to make, the minimum
improvements as set out in §
6-10-26 of this chapter and in accordance with the standard specifications.
Additional improvements may be required if deemed by the City Council to be
necessary for the general use of the lot owners in the subdivision and local
neighborhood traffic and drainage needs. Such improvements shall conform to the
standard specifications.
(Ord. 295, passed 2-4-1986)
§ 6-10-26 IMPROVEMENTS; STREETS.
   (A)   Public roads or private roads. All roads dedicated for public use
approved private roads shall be improved in accordance with the standard
specifications.
   (B)   Previously dedicated rights-of-way. The City Council may require the
subdivider to improve previously dedicated roads, public ways or easements to
the degree required by subsection (A) of this section. When so required by the
City Council, improvements shall conform to the standard specifications.
(Ord. 295, passed 2-4-1986)
§ 6-10-27 IMPROVEMENTS; STREET TREES.
   (A)   The city street tree Ord. 293 provides for the planting, protection,
regulation and control of trees in street tree areas.
   (B)   1.   It shall be the responsibility of the developer of new building
construction to plant and stake trees in areas dedicated as rights-of-way. They
shall be planted as approved in the tentative map and be of an approved type
and size.
      2.   A minimum containerized tree size of 15 gallons per tree shall be
required. Proper care and maintenance is the subdivider’s responsibility until
this responsibility is assumed by the purchaser of a parcel. It shall be the
responsibility of the developer or resident to replace trees and/or stakes due
to damage or if plant ceases to live.
   (C)   1.   Street trees shall be of a variety on the master tree list of
acceptable trees of the city. The acceptable trees are as follows:
         (a)   Chinese pistachio (male) sweet gum;
         (b)   Norway maple;
         (c)   Tulip tree;
         (d)   Tupelo (sour gum);
         (e)   Camphor; and
         (f)   Ginkgo - maidenhair.
      2.   Single-family zones: one street tree per parcel up to and including
a lot width of 80 feet. Any fractional lot width in excess of 80 feet will
require one additional street tree for a total of two. However, on corner
parcels one street tree will be required per street lot frontage and any
additional trees based upon the above lot width requirements.
      3.   Multiple-family zones: the city shall require for duplex, triplex,
fourplex, dwelling groups, apartments and the like, a minimum of two street
trees per parcel up to and including a lot width of 80 feet. Any fractional lot
width in excess of 80 feet will require one additional street tree for a total
of three and/or an overall formula of one street tree every 30 feet on center.
(Note: additionally, on corner parcels the above criteria applies, but to both
street frontages of the parcel.)
      4.   Commercial and industrial zones: the city shall require for
commercial and industrial zones a minimum of one tree for every 60 feet.
(Ord. 295, passed 2-4-1986)
§ 6-10-28 IMPROVEMENTS; SIDEWALKS.
   Sidewalks shall be installed in accordance with the standard specifications.
(Ord. 295, passed 2-4-1986)
§ 6-10-29 IMPROVEMENTS; WALLS.
   When the rear or side of any lot abuts an expressway, arterial or collector
street shown on the general plan, and access to such highway has been
relinquished, a wall may be required to be erected along the abutting lot line
in accordance with the standard specifications.
(Ord. 295, passed 2-4-1986)
§ 6-10-30 IMPROVEMENTS; SEWAGE.
   Sanitary sewer lines and appurtenances shall be installed and connections
made to the existing system in accordance with requirements established by the
City Engineer.
(Ord. 295, passed 2-4-1986)
§ 6-10-31 IMPROVEMENTS; WATER.
   (A)   All lots within an approved subdivision shall be served by connection
to the city water system. The method of connection with the water system, and
design of the water system within the subdivision shall be subject to the
approval of the City Engineer.
   (B)   Whenever a well and tank site is to be located within a subdivision in
conjunction with the city water system, the well site and its access right-of-
way shall be shown on the tentative and final maps and be designated for such
use. When the well site or other system facilities are to be located outside
the subdivision boundaries, easements shall be conveyed to the city prior to
the recordation of the final map.
(Ord. 295, passed 2-4-1986)
§ 6-10-32 IMPROVEMENTS; FIRE HYDRANTS.
   Fire hydrants shall be installed in accordance with the standard
specifications.
(Ord. 295, passed 2-4-1986)
§ 6-10-33 IMPROVEMENTS; DRAINAGE.
   The subdivider shall install drainage facilities to adequately remove
surface and storm waters from the subdivision. When so required, installation
shall conform to the standard specifications.
(Ord. 295, passed 2-4-1986)
§ 6-10-34 IMPROVEMENTS; ABANDONED WELLS AND PIPELINES.
   Any abandoned well, existing well or any irrigation pipelines which are
abandoned, or to be abandoned shall be removed, destroyed or completely filled
by the subdivider, within the tract, in a manner approved by the City Engineer
as part of the subdivision improvements.
(Ord. 295, passed 2-4-1986)
§ 6-10-35 IMPROVEMENTS; TRAFFIC AND ROAD SIGNS.
   Necessary street name signs, warning signs, regulatory signs, markers,
barricades, and other safety and public convenience facilities shall be
installed in accordance with the improvement standards and specifications
established therefor by the city. The subdivider may deposit with the city
sufficient sums for the furnishing and installation of certain of the above
facilities.
(Ord. 295, passed 2-4-1986)
§ 6-10-36 IMPROVEMENTS; OUT OF TRACT.
   All improvements lying outside of the tract, and necessary for the general
use of the lot owners in the subdivision and neighborhood traffic needs, shall
conform to the improvement standards.
(Ord. 295, passed 2-4-1986)
§ 6-10-37 IMPROVEMENTS; STREETLIGHTS.
   Streetlights shall be installed in accordance with the standard
specifications.
(Ord. 295, passed 2-4-1986)
§ 6-10-38 IMPROVEMENTS; UTILITIES.
   All utilities shall be placed underground, in accordance with the
requirements of the utility concerned, in either city street easements or
appropriate utility easements. When utilities are installed in city street
easements, they shall be laid subject to the standard specifications.
(Ord. 295, passed 2-4-1986)
§ 6-10-39 IMPROVEMENTS; BIKEWAYS.
   All bikeways dedicated for public use or approved private use shall be
improved in accordance with the standard specifications.
(Ord. 295, passed 2-4-1986)
§ 6-10-40 IMPROVEMENT PROCEDURES; AGREEMENTS.
   (A)   Agreement requirements. Where the required improvements are not
completed before a final map is approved or where the installation of
improvements has been mutually agreed upon or required to be installed by a
time specific as a condition precedent to the approval of a parcel map, the
subdivider shall enter into an agreement with the City Council prior to the
approval of the final map or parcel map to either complete the work or initiate
and consummate proceedings under an appropriate special assessment act for the
financing and improvement thereof. Such agreement shall provide for the
following:
      1.   Time limit for completion of required improvements;
      2.   Procedures for making changes or alterations that become necessary
during the performance of the work;
      3.   A requirement for maintenance for a period of one year after the
completion and acceptance thereof against any defective work or labor done or
defective materials furnished for those portions of the work which contain
earth excavations or embankments in excess of eight feet; and
      4.   A requirement for maintenance for a period of one year after the
completion and acceptance thereof against any defective work or labor done, or
defective materials furnished in the performance of the agreement with the
Council or the performance of the act.
   (B)   Renewal. At the request of the subdivider, the City Council may renew
this agreement at the expiration of this time. Such agreements shall provide
for the release of the required improvement security when the conditions of the
agreement are completed.
   (C)   Security. To assure the city that this work will be completed,
improvement security shall be provided subject to §
6-12-5 of this title.
   (D)   Assessment district method. Where a special assessment district is
formed for the purpose of financing and constructing the designated
improvements, the original improvement security may be reduced in an amount not
to exceed 90% of the contract amount thereof at such time as the contract for
the work is executed.
(Ord. 295, passed 2-4-1986)
§ 6-10-41 IMPROVEMENT PROCEDURES; PLAN SUBMITTAL.
   Where improvements are proposed or are required by the provisions of this
title, improvement plans shall be submitted to the City Engineer for his or her
review and approval. The improvement plans shall show full details of the
improvements as required by the improvement standards. The improvement plans
shall be prepared and signed by a registered civil engineer. During
construction of the improvements, this civil engineer shall be available for
consultation on the general supervision of the various phases of the
construction operation. He or she shall also be responsible for providing
construction engineering and surveying to enable the work covered by the
improvement plans to be completed.
(Ord. 295, passed 2-4-1986)
§ 6-10-42 IMPROVEMENT PROCEDURES; INSTALLATIONS.
   All underground utilities required by the final map approval to be installed
below the surface improvement in public roads or alleys or easements shall be
constructed prior to the installation of any surface improvements.
(Ord. 295, passed 2-4-1986)
§ 6-10-43 IMPROVEMENT PROCEDURES; INSPECTIONS AND ACCEPTANCE.
   All required improvements shall be constructed under the inspection of the
City Engineer and shall be subject to approval and acceptance by resolution of
the City Council. The cost of all inspections shall be paid by the subdivider
as provided in §
6-12-2 of this title.
(Ord. 295, passed 2-4-1986)
§ 6-10-44 PRIVATE IMPROVEMENTS; MAINTENANCE OF PRIVATE ROADS.
   Prior to the recordation of the final map of a subdivision containing any
improved private roads, the subdivider shall have provided for their
maintenance the formation of a permanent road district formed in the manner set
forth by Cal. Streets and Highways Code § 1020. The City Council may waive this
requirement when it finds such permanent road district would not be in the
public interest, in which event the City Council may impose such other
provisions for maintenance which it deems appropriate.
(Ord. 295, passed 2-4-1986)
§ 6-10-45 PROVISION FOR FUTURE PASSIVE OR NATURAL HEATING OR COOLING
OPPORTUNITIES.
   (A)   The design of a subdivision for which a tentative map is required
pursuant to this title shall provide, to the extent feasible, for future
passive or natural heating or cooling opportunities in the subdivision.
   (B)   Examples of passive or natural heating opportunities in subdivision
design, include design of lot and configuration to permit orientation of a
structure in an east-west alignment for southern exposure.
   (C)   Examples of passive or natural cooling opportunities in subdivision
design include design of lot size and configuration to permit orientation of a
structure to take advantage of shade or prevailing breezes.
   (D)   In providing for future passive or natural heating or cooling
opportunities in the design of a subdivision, consideration shall be given to
local climate, to contour, to configuration of the parcel to be divided, and to
other design and improvement requirements, and such provision shall not result
in reducing allowable densities or the percentage of a lot which may be
occupied by a building or structure under applicable planning and zoning in
force at the time the tentative map is filed.
   (E)   The requirements of this section do not apply to condominium projects
which consist of the subdivision of airspace in an existing building when no
new structures are added.
   (F)   For the purposes of this section, FEASIBLE means capable of being
accomplished in a successful manner within a reasonable period of time, taking
into account economic, social and technological factors.
(Ord. 295, passed 2-4-1986)
§ 6-10-46 INSTALLATION OF SUBDIVISION IMPROVEMENTS PRIOR TO THE ISSUANCE OF
BUILDING PERMITS.
   (A)   Upon approval of the final subdivision map and the subdivision
improvement agreement by the City Council, and upon recordation of the final
subdivision map with the County Recorder’s office, the subdivider may begin
construction of new homes within new subdivisions provided that all subdivision
improvements including storm drainage, water, sewer, natural gas, electrical
power lines, cable television, other dry utilities, curb, gutter, sidewalk,
asphalt pavement associated with the applicable phase of the subdivision
improvements, and all other city required infrastructure shall be substantially
completed. For the purposes of deeming the subdivision improvements as
substantially complete, the City Engineer shall make a determination that:
      1.   All underground utilities have been installed per city approved
engineering plans;
      2.   All curb, gutter, sidewalk, streetlights, street signage and
striping have been installed per city approved engineering plans;
      3.   All streets needed to serve the phase of the subdivision, for which
the final subdivision map has been recorded, have been paved. The City Engineer
may require that the final lift of the asphalt concrete pavement not be
installed until substantial completion of home construction. In extenuating
circumstances such as weather, an alternative temporary type of surface
sufficient to provide access for emergency vehicles may be permitted by written
agreement with the city;
      4.   Water mains and fire hydrants are installed and fully operational in
the area of the subdivision where permits are requested;
      5.   There is adequate and safe access to all areas within the project
for city personnel and emergency vehicles; and
      6.   All other permit requirements for issuance of building permits have
been met and building permits issued.
   (B)   The provisions in subsection (A) of this section shall not apply for
the construction of up to eight model homes in the subdivision phase.
   (C)   It shall be the responsibility of the subdivider to allow no human
occupancy in any dwelling unit (including model homes) until all necessary
subdivision improvements have been installed, utilities are functioning and
written approval for occupancy has been given by the city.
   (D)   It shall be unlawful for any subdivider to sell any portion of an
approved subdivision until the prospective buyer has been advised by the
subdivider that building permits shall not be issued or occupancy permitted
until the required subdivision improvements are completed and accepted by the
city.
(Ord. 295, passed 2-4-1986)
CHAPTER 11: EXCEPTIONS
Section
6-11-1 Application
6-11-2 Factual data required
6-11-3 Planning Commission review
6-11-4 City Council decision
§ 6-11-1 APPLICATION.
   The application for any exception shall be by petition filed with the
Secretary of the Planning Commission at the time the tentative map or tentative
parcel map is presented to the Planning Commission.
(Ord. 295, passed 2-4-1986)
§ 6-11-2 FACTUAL DATA REQUIRED.
   In order for the property referred to in the petition to come within the
provisions of this section it is necessary for the Commission and the City
Council to find that all of the following conditions exist:
   (A)   That there are exceptional circumstances or conditions that affect
said property or the reasonable use thereof;
   (B)   That the exception is necessary to preserve a substantial property
right and permit the enjoyment thereof;
   (C)   That the granting of the exception will not be detrimental to the
public safety, health and welfare; and
   (D)   That the granting of the exception will not be injurious to or prevent
the logical development of other property in the immediate area.
(Ord. 295, passed 2-4-1986)
§ 6-11-3 PLANNING COMMISSION REVIEW.
   The Commission, in recommending the granting of an exception for a tentative
map or a tentative parcel map, may recommend such conditions as may be
necessary to secure substantial compliance with the objectives of this title,
protecting the public health, safety and welfare.
(Ord. 295, passed 2-4-1986)
§ 6-11-4 CITY COUNCIL DECISION.
   The City Council shall consider and render its decision upon recommendation
from the Planning Commission. The Council, in granting an exception, may
establish such conditions as may be necessary to secure substantial compliance
with the objectives of this title protecting the public health, safety and
welfare.
(Ord. 295, passed 2-4-1986)
CHAPTER 12: FEES, BONDS AND DEPOSITS
Section
6-12-1 Filing fees
6-12-2 Checking and inspection fees
6-12-3 Recordation
6-12-4 Security
6-12-5 Forms of improvement security
6-12-6 Improvement completion failure; procedure
6-12-7 Exoneration of security
6-12-8 Improvement security; release
§ 6-12-1 FILING FEES.
   Filing fees as established by resolution of the City Council shall be paid
at the time of filing of subdivision maps and parcel map waiver certificates.
No refund of filing fee shall be made for any map or portion thereof deleted,
withdrawn or abandoned.
(Ord. 295, passed 2-4-1986)
§ 6-12-2 CHECKING AND INSPECTION FEES.
   (A)   The subdivider shall pay a fee as established by the City Council
resolution for checking the improvement plans and inspecting all proposed
improvements controlled by the city prior to the submission of the final map to
the City Council.
   (B)   The fees established by this section shall be based on reasonable
improvement cost estimates made by the Planning Director in concert with the
City Engineer. No adjustment in or refund of such fees shall be made once the
fees have been paid; except when a final map is withdrawn, or a reversion to
acreage map is recorded, the unexpended portion of the required fee may be
refunded upon written request made by the subdivider to the City Council.
   (C)   The City Council may retain qualified consulting engineers for the
performance of any part of the inspection services.
   (D)   In the event the City Council permits the required improvements to be
financed by a proceedings under an appropriate special assessment act as
provided for in Subdivision Map Act, Cal. Gov’t Code § 66462(a)(2), the fees
required by this section may be included as an incidental expense of such
proceedings. The subdivider shall be refunded the amount of fees required by
this section to the extent that monies for the inspection of improvement
construction are available in the monies provided by the special assessment act
proceedings.
(Ord. 295, passed 2-4-1986)
§ 6-12-3 RECORDATION.
   Fees, as provided by Cal. Gov’t Code §§ 27361 and 27372, shall be paid to
the City Clerk to defray the costs of recording of any final map, parcel map or
certificate of waiver.
(Ord. 295, passed 2-4-1986)
§ 6-12-4 SECURITY.
   Agreements and requirements referred to in §
6-10-40 of this title shall be accompanied by security to guarantee performance
as follows:
   (A)   Improvement security in the amount of 100% of the total estimated cost
of all required work as indicated in the agreement or requirements for the
purpose of securing the performance of said work;
   (B)   Improvement security in the amount of 100% of the estimated cost of
all required work to secure payment to the contractor, his or her
subcontractors, and to persons renting equipment or furnishing labor or
materials for such improvements;
   (C)   Improvement security to secure the maintenance for a period of one
year after the completion and acceptance thereof against any defective
materials furnished, in the performance of the agreement with the Council or
the performance of the act. Said security shall not exceed an amount equal to
20% of the estimated cost of furnishing and installing said facilities. This
security shall be in addition to any warranty required of the manufacturer;
   (D)   Improvement security to secure the maintenance of a private road for a
period of one year after the acceptance thereof against any defective work or
labor done or defective material furnished in the construction of the private
work which security shall be in an amount equal to the construction thereof;
   (E)   Security in the amount equal to the estimated cost of placing all
monuments and lot corners not set at the time the final map is filed as
specified in §
6-7-25(D) and (E) of this title;
   (F)   Security in the estimated amount of taxes, and special assessments
collected as taxes which are a lien but which are not yet payable as referred
to in Subdivision Map Act, Cal. Gov’t Code § 66493; and
   (G)   As part of the obligation guaranteed by the security and in addition
to the face amount of the security, there shall be included costs and
reasonable expenses and fees, including reasonable attorney fees, incurred by
the local agency in successfully enforcing the obligation secured.
(Ord. 295, passed 2-4-1986)
§ 6-12-5 FORMS OF IMPROVEMENT SECURITY.
   Whenever this title authorizes or requires the furnishing of security in
connection with the performance of any act or agreement, such security shall be
one of the following at the option of and subject to the approval of the City
Council:
   (A)   Bond or bonds by one or more duly authorized corporate sureties;
   (B)   A deposit, either with the city or a responsible escrow agent or trust
company, at the option of the City Council, of money or negotiable bonds of the
kind approved for securing deposits of public monies;
   (C)   An instrument of credit from one or more financial institutions
subject to regulation by the state or federal government and pledging that the
funds necessary to carry out the act or agreement are on deposit and guaranteed
for payment; and
   (D)   A lien upon the property to be divided, created by contract between
the owner and the city, if the City Council finds that it would not be in the
public interest to require the installation of the required improvement sooner
than two years after the recordation of the map.
(Ord. 295, passed 2-4-1986)
§ 6-12-6 IMPROVEMENT COMPLETION FAILURE; PROCEDURE.
   If the subdivider fails to complete the improvements in the time specified
or an extension thereof, the City Council may take appropriate legal action
against the subdivider and his or her security, with or without first causing
such improvements to be completed. In the event the security is insufficient to
pay the full cost of the improvements, the subdivider shall be liable for any
balance.
(Ord. 295, passed 2-4-1986)
§ 6-12-7 EXONERATION OF SECURITY.
   It shall be the duty of the Director of Public Works or City Engineer to
inspect all improvements installed and monuments set as to their compliance
with this title and city standards. No security given for faithful performance
of such work shall be exonerated from the agreement referred to herein until
and unless the Director of Public Works or City Engineer certifies compliance
thereto.
(Ord. 295, passed 2-4-1986)
§ 6-12-8 IMPROVEMENT SECURITY; RELEASE.
   (A)   Security given for faithful performance of any act or agreement shall
be released upon the final completion of the act of the work encompassed by the
agreement and the acceptance of the act or work by resolution of the City
Council.
   (B)   1.   Security securing payment to the contractor, his or her
subcontractors, and to persons furnishing labor, materials or equipment shall
six months after the performance of the act or the completion of the work and
its acceptance by resolution of the City Council, be reduced to an amount not
less than the total of all claims on which an action has been filed and notice
thereof given in writing to the City Council, and if no such actions have been
filed, the security shall be released in full.
      2.   Such releases shall not apply to any required guarantee and warranty
period, nor to cost and reasonable expenses and fees, including reasonable
attorney fees.
   (C)   In all cases where the performance of the obligation for which the
security is required is subject to the approval of another agency, the City
Council shall not release the security until the obligation is performed to the
satisfaction of such other agency. Such agency shall have two months after
completion of the performance of the obligation to register its satisfaction or
dissatisfaction. If at the end of that period it has not registered its
satisfaction or dissatisfaction, it shall be conclusively deemed that the
performance of the obligation was done to its satisfaction.
(Ord. 295, passed 2-4-1986)
CHAPTER 13: REVERSION TO ACREAGE
Section
6-13-1 Map Act provisions apply
6-13-2 Tentative maps; requirements apply
6-13-3 Tentative maps; review; report
6-13-4 Planning Commission consideration
6-13-5 City Council procedure
6-13-6 Title
6-13-7 Dedications terminated
6-13-8 Tax bond
6-13-9 Report and certification
6-13-10 City Council; decision
§ 6-13-1 MAP ACT PROVISIONS APPLY.
   Subdivided real property must be reverted to acreage pursuant to Subdivision
Map Act, Cal. Gov’t Code Title 7, Division 2, Chapter 6. The provisions of
Subdivision Map Act, Cal. Gov’t Code §§ 66499.11 through 66499.20.3 shall
apply.
(Ord. 295, passed 2-4-1986)
§ 6-13-2 TENTATIVE MAPS; REQUIREMENTS APPLY.
   When making a reversion to acreage map, the applicable requirements of
Subdivision Map Act, Cal. Gov’t Code Title 7, Division 2, Chapter 6 as to
filing, map form, tract number, and committee review shall be complied with
unless waived by the City Manager.
(Ord. 295, passed 2-4-1986)
§ 6-13-3 TENTATIVE MAPS; REVIEW; REPORT.
   Copies of the tentative map, of a reversion to acreage map, shall be
distributed to the City Engineer, City Manager and Planning Director. The City
Engineer, City Manager and Planning Director shall review and report upon the
map in the manner provided in §
6-13-4 of this chapter.
(Ord. 295, passed 2-4-1986)
§ 6-13-4 PLANNING COMMISSION CONSIDERATION.
   The Commission shall consider the tentative map at a regular or special
meeting after giving notice to its intent to consider the map, in a newspaper
of general circulation, within the area affected, at least ten days preceding
the meeting at which the tentative map is to be heard. In making a
recommendation to the City Council concerning a reversion to acreage map, the
Commission shall determine that the reversion will have no adverse effect on
abutting property or the proper development thereof, and that there exists
nonuse of streets and easements within the area included in the reversion to
acreage.
(Ord. 295, passed 2-4-1986)
§ 6-13-5 CITY COUNCIL PROCEDURE.
   (A)   The City Council shall act upon the Commission’s recommendation at a
regular or adjourned regular meeting not less than 15 nor more than 40 days
after the filing of the Commission’s recommendation with the City Council. The
City Council shall give public notice of its intent to consider the tentative
map in a newspaper of general circulation within the area affected at least ten
days immediately preceding the meeting at which the map is to be heard. In
approving or conditionally approving a reversion to acreage map the City
Council shall find that dedications or offers of dedication to be vacated or
abandoned by the reversion to acreage are unnecessary for present or
prospective public purposes; and either:
      1.   All owners of an interest in real property within the subdivision
have consented to the reversion;
      2.   Two years from the date the final or parcel map was filed for
record, or within the time allowed by agreement for completion of the
improvements whichever is the later; or
      3.   No lots shown on the final or parcel map have been sold within five
years from the date such map was filed for record.
   (B)   The City Council shall report its action in writing to the subdivider
and the Planning Commission not later than ten days following such action.
(Ord. 295, passed 2-4-1986)
§ 6-13-6 TITLE.
   Upon the title sheet of each map filed for the purpose of reverting
subdivided land to acreage, the subtitle shall consist of the words “a revision
to acreage...” (insert the legal description of the land being reverted).
(Ord. 295, passed 2-4-1986)
§ 6-13-7 DEDICATIONS TERMINATED.
   Any previous offer of dedications not retained on the reversion to acreage
map shall be deemed to be terminated upon approval of the final map or by the
City Council and the recordation of the final map.
(Ord. 295, passed 2-4-1986)
§ 6-13-8 TAX BOND.
   A tax bond shall not be required in any cases covered by this chapter.
(Ord. 295, passed 2-4-1986)
§ 6-13-9 REPORT AND CERTIFICATION.
   (A)   The City Engineer shall review each map and assure himself or herself
that it complies with the requirements of the approved tentative map, with
previously recorded property description data and with the provisions of law
and this title. The City Engineer shall consult with the City Manager in making
these determinations.
   (B)   If the final map is in the correct form prescribed by the Subdivision
Map Act and this title and the masters shown thereon are sufficient, their
corrections shall be certified on the map by the City Engineer.
   (C)   The City Engineer shall within 20 days after the receipt of the map,
transmit the map together with said other materials to the City Manager for
presentation to the City Council.
(Ord. 295, passed 2-4-1986)
§ 6-13-10 CITY COUNCIL; DECISION.
   (A)   Approval of map.
      1.   At its next regular or adjourned meeting after the filing of a final
map with the City Manager, the City Council shall consider the map to determine
if it is in conformity with all the requirements of the Subdivision Map Act and
this title applicable at the time of approval of the tentative map, or any
ruling made thereunder.
      2.   Upon approval of the map by the City Council, the City Clerk shall
deliver the map to the County Recorder for recordation.
   (B)   Disapproval of map.
      1.   If the City Council determines that the map is not in conformity
with either the requirements of this title or the tentative approval of the
reversion to acreage, the City Council shall disapprove such final map,
specifying its reason or reasons therefor, and the City Clerk shall, in
writing, advise the subdivider of such disapproval and the reason or reasons
therefor.
      2.   After the City Council has disapproved any map, the proponent may
file a new final map with the City Clerk, altered to conform to all the
requirements imposed upon him or her by this title.
(Ord. 295, passed 2-4-1986)
CHAPTER 14: SUBDIVISION PROHIBITION AND PENALTIES
Section
6-14-1 Prohibited transactions
6-14-2 Voidability of sale
6-14-3 Remedies not barred
6-14-4 Permit refusal
6-14-5 Notice of violation
6-14-6 Violations; penalties
§ 6-14-1 PROHIBITED TRANSACTIONS.
   (A)   No person shall offer to sell or lease, to contract to sell or lease,
to sell or lease, or to finance any parcel or parcels of real property or to
commence construction of any building for sale, lease or financing thereon,
except model homes, or to allow occupancy thereof, for which a final map is
required by this title, until such map thereof, in full compliance with the
provisions of said sections, has been filed for record by the Recorder of
Merced County.
   (B)   No person shall sell, lease or finance any parcel or parcels of real
property or commence construction of any building for sale, lease or financing
thereon, except model homes or allow occupancy thereof, for which a parcel map
is required by this title until such map thereof, in full compliance with the
provisions of said sections, has been filed for record by the Recorder of
Merced County.
   (C)   Conveyances of any part of a subdivision of real property for which a
final or parcel map is required by this title shall not be made by parcel or
block number, initial or other designation, unless and until such map has been
filed for record by the Recorder of Merced County.
   (D)   This section does not apply to any parcel or parcels of a subdivision
offered for sale or lease, contracted for sale or lease, or sold or leased in
compliance with or exempt from any law regulating the design and improvement of
subdivisions in effect at the time the subdivision was established.
(Ord. 295, passed 2-4-1986)
§ 6-14-2 VOIDABILITY OF SALE.
   (A)   Any deed of conveyance, sale or contract to sell real property which
has been divided, or which has resulted from a division, in violation of this
title is voidable at the sole option of the grantee, buyer or person
contracting to purchase, his or her heirs, personal representative, or trustee
in insolvency or bankruptcy within one year after the date of discovery of the
violation of the provisions of said sections, but the deed of conveyance, sale
or contract to sell is binding upon any successor in interest of the grantee,
buyer or person contracting to purchase, other than those above enumerated, and
upon the grantor, vendor or person contracting to sell, or his or her assignee,
heir or devisee.
   (B)   Any grantee, or his or her successor in interest of real property
which has been divided, or which has resulted from a division, in violation of
the provisions of the title, may, within one year of the date of discovery of
such violation, bring an action in the superior court to recover any damages he
or she has suffered by reason of such division of property. The action may be
brought against any successors in interest who have actual or constructive
knowledge of such division of property.
   (C)   The provisions of this section shall not apply to the conveyance of
real property identified in a certificate of compliance, filed pursuant to
Subdivision Map Act, Cal. Gov’t Code § 66499.35 or identified in a recorded
final map or parcel map, from and after the date of recording. The provisions
of this section shall not limit or affect in any way the rights of a grantee or
his or her successor in interest under any other provision of law.
(Ord. 295, passed 2-4-1986)
§ 6-14-3 REMEDIES NOT BARRED.
   (A)   Nothing herein contained shall bar any legal, equitable, or summary
remedy to which the city or other political subdivision, or any person may
otherwise be entitled.
   (B)   The city or other political subdivision or person may file suit in the
superior court of Merced County to restrain or enjoin any attempted or proposed
subdivision or sale in violation of the Subdivision Map Act or this title.
(Ord. 295, passed 2-4-1986)
§ 6-14-4 PERMIT REFUSAL.
   Subject to the authority and requirements of Subdivision Map Act, Cal. Gov’t
Code § 66499.34, the city shall refuse to grant building and other permits in
relation to the property involved until such time as all of the requirements of
this title have been complied with.
(Ord. 295, passed 2-4-1986)
§ 6-14-5 NOTICE OF VIOLATION.
   Whenever the city has knowledge that real property has been subdivided in
violation of this title or the Subdivision Map Act, it shall cause to be filed
a notice of violation pursuant to Subdivision Map Act, Cal. Gov’t Code §
66499.36.
(Ord. 295, passed 2-4-1986)
§ 6-14-6 VIOLATIONS; PENALTIES.
   Any offer to sell, contract to sell, sale, or deed of conveyance made
contrary to the provisions of this title is a misdemeanor, and any person, upon
conviction thereof, shall be punishable by a fine of not less than $25 and not
more than $500 or imprisonment in the county jail for a period of not more than
six months, or by both such fine and imprisonment.
(Ord. 295, passed 2-4-1986)
TITLE 7: FIRE REGULATIONS AND DEPARTMENT OF PUBLIC SAFETY
CHAPTER 1: DEPARTMENT OF PUBLIC SAFETY
Section
7-1-1 Creation and function
7-1-2 Director of Public Safety/Chief of Police and Fire Chief; duties and
responsibilities
7-1-3 Department of Public Safety Divisions
7-1-4 Police Services Division
7-1-5 Fire Services Division
7-1-6 Animal Control Division
7-1-7 Penalty
§ 7-1-1 CREATION AND FUNCTION.
   A Department of Public Safety is established for the city. The Department of
Public Safety shall be responsible for the administration and provision of
public safety services which shall include police protection, fire protection
and other related public safety services.
(Ord. 617, passed 6-3-2014)
§ 7-1-2 DIRECTOR OF PUBLIC SAFETY/CHIEF OF POLICE AND FIRE CHIEF; DUTIES AND
RESPONSIBILITIES.
   There is created the position of Director of Public Safety/Chief of Police
and who shall be appointed by the City Manager and who shall serve at the
pleasure of the City Manager. The Director of Public Safety/Chief of Police
shall report to and administer the Department of Public Safety under
supervision of the City Manager. In addition to the divisions of the Department
of Public Safety hereinafter set forth, the Director of Public Safety/Chief of
Police, subject to approval of the City Manager, shall organize and maintain
such other divisions later established, and shall further be responsible for
direction and administrative control of all functions of the Department of
Public Safety.
   (A)   In those cases where the Director of Public Safety/Chief of Police has
a background in law enforcement and meets the minimum qualifications required
for appointment to the office of Chief of Police in a municipality located in
the state, the Director of Public Safety/Chief of Police shall be entitled to
all rights and privileges afforded the office of Chief of Police, and may
perform all duties as may be legally required of a Chief of Police pursuant to
the laws of the state; additionally, the Director of Public Safety/Chief of
Police is charged with administrative control of the Police Services Division
of the Department of Public Safety while the Fire Chief is charged with
administrative control of the Fire Services Division of the Department of
Public Safety.
   (B)   If at any time the city does not employ or contract for employment for
a Fire Chief, the Director of Public Safety/Chief of Police may assume the role
of Fire Chief if he or she has a background in fire prevention or suppression
and meets the minimum qualifications required for appointment to the office of
Fire Chief in a municipality located in the state. If the Director of Public
Safety/Chief of Police meets these minimum qualifications, he or she shall be
entitled to all the rights and privileges afforded the office of Fire Chief and
may perform all duties as may be legally required of a Fire Chief pursuant to
the laws of this state. Additionally, if the Director of Public Safety/Chief of
Police is charged with administrative control of the Fire Services Division of
the Department of Public Safety, the Deputy Chief of police services will
function as the operational head of the Police Services Division of the
Department of Public Safety.
   (C)   The Fire Chief is charged with administrative and operational control
of the Fire Services Division of the Department of Public Safety including the
responsibility of the Fire Marshal’s office; while the battalion chief
functions as the person in charge of operations of the Fire Services Division
of the Department of Public Safety. The Fire Marshal shall function performing
enforcement of building standards adopted by the state’s Fire Marshal.
      1.   The Fire Chief is charged with the overall administrative and
operational control of the Fire Services Division.
      2.   The Battalion Chief works under the direction of the Fire Chief and
assists in the day to day administration and operations of both paid and
volunteer staff assigned in the Fire Services Division. The Fire Chief may
designate the Battalion Chief to represent him or her in his or her absence.
      3.   The Fire Marshal has the responsibility for enforcement of the
building standards adopted by the State Fire Marshal as published in the
California building codes relating to fire and panic safety, such as plan
reviews and inspections for buildings in regards to the building permit. Assess
conformity with the California Health and Safety Code, California Fire Code,
National Fire Protection Standards, Cal. Code of Regulations Title 19 and Title
24 and other state regulations within the scope of the State Fire Marshal’s
office.
(Ord. 617, passed 6-3-2014)
§ 7-1-3 DEPARTMENT OF PUBLIC SAFETY DIVISIONS.
   Within the Department of Public Safety, the following divisions are created:
   (A)   Police Services Division;
   (B)   Fire Services Division; and
   (C)   Animal Control Division.
(Ord. 617, passed 6-3-2014)
§ 7-1-4 POLICE SERVICES DIVISION.
   The Police Services Division is created. The Director of Public Safety/Chief
of Police shall be responsible for the management, administration and provision
of the Police Services Division.
(Ord. 617, passed 6-3-2014)
§ 7-1-5 FIRE SERVICES DIVISION.
   The Fire Services Division is created. The position of Fire Chief is
created, which person shall be responsible for the management, administration
and supervision of the Fire Services Division, which shall include the
Volunteer Fire Department. The Fire Chief shall report directly to the City
Manager or his or her designee. The Battalion Chief of the Fire Services
Division may speak on behalf of the Fire Chief in their absence.
   (A)   Fire Services Division organization.
      1.   Fire Chief;
      2.   Division chief;
      3.   Battalion chief - Fire Marshal;
      4.   Fire captain;
      5.   Fire apparatus engineer; and
      6.   Volunteer members.
   (B)   Volunteer Fire Department. There is hereby established a Volunteer
Fire Department which shall be known as the Livingston Volunteer Fire
Department. The Livingston Volunteer Fire Department shall function as an
integral part of the Department of Public Safety, Fire Services Division. The
Fire Chief shall be responsible for overall administrative control of the
Livingston Volunteer Fire Department.
      1.   Members and selection process. The Livingston Volunteer Fire
Department shall consist of 31 maximum members. The battalion chief assigned,
who shall be the person charged with operations of the Fire Services Division,
shall be considered as one member of the Volunteer Fire Department. The
remaining 30 members of the Livingston Volunteer Fire Department shall be
selected in accordance with the established selection guidelines of the
Livingston Volunteer Fire Department. One of these members shall be designated
as president of the Livingston Volunteer Fire Department Association; one of
these members shall be designated as the vice president of the Livingston
Volunteer Fire Department Association; one of the members shall be designated
as the training officer of the Livingston Volunteer Fire Department
Association. Selection of the president, vice president and training officer
shall be made in accordance with established selection guidelines of the
Livingston Volunteer Fire Department.
         (a)   President of the volunteer association shall be charged with
monthly association meetings and fundraising activities.
         (b)   Vice president shall assist the president and speak on their
behalf in their absence.
         (c)   Training officer shall be charged with ensuring all required
training is current and documented.
      2.   Rules and regulations. The members of the Livingston Volunteer Fire
Department shall operate under the rules and regulations established by the
Fire Chief, with input from the Volunteer Fire Department members.
Additionally, the members of the Livingston Volunteer Fire Department shall
make rules and regulations regarding the selection of members, retirement of
members, expelling members, performance requirements of members, and attendance
requirements of members. Such rules and regulations shall be subject to
approval by the Fire Chief before they become effective.
      3.   Volunteer duties. Members of the Livingston Volunteer Fire
Department shall respond to emergency incidents within the city and perform
their duties in fire suppression and emergency response as directed by the Fire
Chief and/or his or her designee. Additionally, members of the Livingston
Volunteer Fire Department shall assist with fire suppression and emergency
response duties in locations outside the city when directed to do so by the
Fire Chief and/or his or her designee. Members of the Livingston Volunteer Fire
Department have a duty and responsibility to safeguard all public and private
property under their control or supervision while performing their volunteer
duties.
(Ord. 617, passed 6-3-2014)
§ 7-1-6 ANIMAL CONTROL DIVISION.
   (A)   The Animal Control Division is created.
   (B)   The Director of Public Safety/Chief of Police, under the direction of
the City Manager, shall be responsible for the management, administration, and
provision of the Animal Control Division.
(Ord. 617, passed 6-3-2014)
§ 7-1-7 PENALTY.
   Any person who violates any provision of this chapter or of the Merced
County air pollution control rules and regulations shall be guilty of a
misdemeanor or felony as the law may read, and upon conviction thereof, shall
be punished as provided in the appropriate code, law, rule or regulation.
(Ord. 617, passed 6-3-2014)
CHAPTER 2: FIRE PREVENTION CODE
Section
7-2-1 Administration and enforcement
7-2-2 Definitions
7-2-3 Adoption of Fire Codes
7-2-4 Conflict of Codes
7-2-5 Modifications
§ 7-2-1 ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT.
   The Fire Chief or his or her designated representatives shall have authority
to enforce this chapter and issue citations for violations.
(Ord. 617, passed 6-3-2014)
§ 7-2-2 DEFINITIONS.
   Whenever any of the following terms are used in any of the Fire Codes they
shall also refer to the following.
   CORPORATE OR CORPORATION COUNSEL. The City Attorney.
   JURISDICTION. The city limits of Livingston.
   MUNICIPALITY. The City of Livingston.
(Ord. 617, passed 6-3-2014)
§ 7-2-3 ADOPTION OF FIRE CODES.
   The California Fire Code, 2013 edition, is hereby adopted in its entirety.
The adoption of the 2013 California Fire Code includes all of the inclusions
and exclusions set forth in each chapter’s matrix, except that Appendix D to
the 2013 California Fire Code is hereby adopted in its entirety and the
following provisions from the 2012 International Fire Code shall be adopted as
additional provisions of Division II and Appendix D of the 2013 California Fire
Code, and the 2013 California Fire Code, together with these additions, shall
constitute the city’s fire code.
   Part 1 - General Provision
   Section 101 General
   101.1 Title. These regulations shall be known as the Fire Code of the City
Of Livingston hereinafter referred to as “this code”.
   101.2 Scope. This code establishes regulations affecting or relating to
structures, processes, premises and safeguards regarding:
   1.   The hazard of fire and explosion arising from the storage, handling or
use of structures, materials or devices;
   2.   Conditions hazardous to life, property or public welfare in the
occupancy of structures or premises;
   3.   Fire hazards in the structure or on the premises from occupancy or
operation;
   4.   Matters related to the construction, extension, repair, alteration or
removal of fire suppression or alarm systems; and
   5.   Conditions affecting the safety of fire fighters and emergency
responders during emergency operations.
   101.2.1 Appendices. Provisions in the appendices shall not apply unless
specifically adopted.
   101.3 Intent. The purpose of this code is to establish the minimum
requirements consistent with nationally recognized good practice for providing
a reasonable level of life safety and property protection from the hazards of
fire, explosion or dangerous conditions in new and existing buildings,
structures and premises, and to provide safety to fire fighters and emergency
responders during emergency operations.
   101.4 Severability. If a section, subsection, sentence, clause or phrase of
this code is, for any reason, held to be unconstitutional, such decision shall
not affect the validity of the remaining portions of this code.
   101.5 Validity. In the event any part or provision of this code is held to
be illegal or void, this shall not have the effect of making void or illegal
any of the other parts or provisions hereof, which are determined to be legal;
and it shall be presumed that this code would have been adopted without such
illegal or invalid parts or provisions.
   Section 102 Applicability
   102.6 Historic Buildings. The provisions of this code relating to the
construction, alteration, repair, enlargement, restoration, relocation or
moving of buildings or structures shall not be mandatory for existing buildings
or structures identified and classified by the state or local jurisdiction as
historic buildings when such buildings or structures do not constitute a
distinct hazard to life or property. Fire protection in designated historic
buildings and structures shall be provided in accordance with an approved fire
protection plan.
   102.7 Referenced Codes And Standards. The codes and standards referenced in
this code shall be those that are listed in chapter 80, and such codes and
standards shall be considered part of the requirements of this code to the
prescribed extent of each such reference and as further regulated in sections
102.7.1 and 102.7.2.
   102.7.1 Conflicts. Where conflicts occur between provisions of this code and
referenced codes and standards, the provisions of this code shall apply.
   102.7.2 Provisions In Referenced Codes And Standards. Where the extent of
the reference to a referenced code or standard includes subject matter that is
within the scope of this code, the provisions of this code, as applicable,
shall take precedence over the provisions in the referenced code or standard.
   102.8 Subjects Not Regulated By This Code. Where no applicable standards or
requirements are set forth in this code, or are contained within other laws,
codes, regulations, ordinances or bylaws adopted by the jurisdiction,
compliance with applicable standards of the National Fire Protection
Association or other nationally recognized fire safety standards, as approved,
shall be deemed as prima facie evidence of compliance with the intent of this
code. Nothing herein shall derogate from the authority of the fire code
official to determine compliance with codes or standards for those activities
or installations within the fire code official’s jurisdiction or
responsibility.
   102.10 Conflicting Provisions. Where there is a conflict between a general
requirement and a specific requirement, the specific requirement shall be
applicable. Where, in a specific case, different sections of this code specify
different materials, methods of construction or other requirements, the most
restrictive shall govern.
   102.11 Other Laws. The provisions of this code shall not be deemed to
nullify any provisions of local, state or federal law.
   102.12 Application Of References. References to chapter or section numbers,
or to provisions not specifically identified by number, shall be construed to
refer to such chapter, section or provision of this code.
   Part 2 - Administrative Provisions
   Section 103 Department Of Fire Prevention
   103.1 General. The department of fire prevention is established within the
jurisdiction under the direction of the fire code official. The function of the
department shall be the implementation, administration and enforcement of the
provisions of this code.
   103.2 Appointment. The fire code official shall be appointed by the chief
appointing authority of the jurisdiction; and the fire code official shall not
be removed from office except for cause and after full opportunity to be heard
on specific and relevant charges by and before the appointing authority.
   103.3 Deputies. In accordance with the prescribed procedures of this
jurisdiction and with the concurrence of the appointing authority, the fire
code official shall have the authority to appoint a deputy fire code official,
other related technical officers, inspectors and other employees.
   103.4 Liability. The fire code official, member of the board of appeals,
officer or employee charged with the enforcement of this code, while acting for
the jurisdiction, in good faith and without malice in the discharge of the
duties required by this code or other pertinent law or ordinance, shall not
thereby be rendered liable personally, and is hereby relieved from all personal
liability for any damage accruing to persons or property as a result of an act
or by reason of an act or omission in the discharge of official duties.
   103.4.1 Legal Defense. Any suit instituted against any officer or employee
because of an act performed by that officer or employee in the lawful discharge
of duties and under the provisions of this code shall be defended by the legal
representative of the jurisdiction until the final termination of the
proceedings. The fire code official or any subordinate shall not be liable for
costs in an action, suit or proceeding that is instituted in pursuance of the
provisions of this code; and any officer of the department of fire prevention,
acting in good faith and without malice, shall be free from liability for acts
performed under any of its provisions or by reason of any act or omission in
the performance of official duties in connection therewith.
   Section 104 General Authority And Responsibilities
   104.1 General. The fire code official is hereby authorized to enforce the
provisions of this code and shall have the authority to render interpretations
of this code, and to adopt policies, procedures, rules and regulations in order
to clarify the application of its provisions. Such interpretations, policies,
procedures, rules and regulations shall be in compliance with the intent and
purpose of this code and shall not have the effect of waiving requirements
specifically provided for in this code.
   104.3 Right of Entry. Whenever it is necessary to make an inspection to
enforce the provisions of this code, or whenever the fire code official has
reasonable cause to believe that there exists in a building or upon any
premises any conditions or violations of this code which make the building or
premises unsafe, dangerous or hazardous, the fire code official shall have the
authority to enter the building or premises at all reasonable times to inspect
or to perform the duties imposed upon the fire code official by this code. If
such building or premises is occupied, the fire code official shall present
credentials to the occupant and request entry. If such building or premises is
unoccupied, the fire code official shall first make a reasonable effort to
locate the owner or other person having charge or control of the building or
premises and request entry. If entry is refused, the fire code official has
recourse to every remedy provided by law to secure entry.
   104.3.1 Warrant. When the fire code official has first obtained a proper
inspection warrant or other remedy provided by law to secure entry, an owner or
occupant or person having charge, care or control of the building or premises
shall not fail or neglect, after proper request is made as herein provided, to
permit entry therein by the fire code official for the purpose of inspection
and examination pursuant to this code.
   104.4 Identification. The fire code official shall carry proper
identification when inspecting structures or premises in the performance of
duties under this code.
   104.6 Official Records. The fire code official shall keep official records
as required by sections 104.6.1 through 104.6.4. Such official records shall be
retained for not less than five years or for as long as the structure or
activity to which such records relate remains in existence, unless otherwise
provided by other regulations.
   104.6.1 Approvals. A record of approvals shall be maintained by the fire
code official and shall be available for public inspection during business
hours in accordance with applicable laws.
   104.6.2 Inspections. The fire code official shall keep a record of each
inspection made, including notices and orders issued, showing the findings and
disposition of each.
   104.6.3 Fire Records. The fire department shall keep a record of fires
occurring within its jurisdiction and of facts concerning the same, including
statistics as to the extent of such fires and the damage caused thereby,
together with other information as required by the fire code official.
   104.6.4 Administrative. Application for modification, alternative methods or
materials and the final decision of the fire code official shall be in writing
and shall be officially recorded in the permanent records of the fire code
official.
   104.8 Modifications. Whenever there are practical difficulties involved in
carrying out the provisions of this code, the fire code official shall have the
authority to grant modifications for individual cases, provided the fire code
official shall first find that special individual reason makes the strict
letter of this code impractical and the modification is in compliance with the
intent and purpose of this code and that such modification does not lessen
health, life and fire safety requirements. The details of action granting
modifications shall be recorded and entered in the files of the department of
fire prevention.
   104.9 Alternative Materials and Methods. The provisions of this code are not
intended to prevent the installation of any material or to prohibit any method
of construction not specifically prescribed by this code, provided that any
such alternative has been approved. The fire code official is authorized to
approve an alternative material or method of construction where the fire code
official finds that the proposed design is satisfactory and complies with the
intent of the provisions of this code, and that the material, method or work
offered is, for the purpose intended, at least the equivalent of that
prescribed in this code in quality, strength, effectiveness, fire resistance,
durability and safety.
   104.9.1 Research Reports. Supporting data, when necessary to assist in the
approval of materials or assemblies not specifically provided for in this code,
shall consist of valid research reports from approved sources.
   104.9.2 Tests. Whenever there is insufficient evidence of compliance with
the provisions of this code, or evidence that a material or method does not
conform to the requirements of this code, or in order to substantiate claims
for alternative materials or methods, the fire code official shall have the
authority to require tests as evidence of compliance to be made at no expense
to the jurisdiction. Test methods shall be as specified in this code or by
other recognized test standards. In the absence of recognized and accepted test
methods, the fire code official shall approve the testing procedures. Tests
shall be performed by an approved agency. Reports of such tests shall be
retained by the fire code official for the period required for retention of
public records.
   104.10 Assistance From Other Agencies. Police and other enforcement agencies
shall have authority to render necessary assistance in the investigation of
fires when requested to do so.
   104.11 Authority At Fires And Other Emergencies. The fire chief or officer
of the fire department in charge at the scene of a fire or other emergency
involving the protection of life or property, or any part thereof, shall have
the authority to direct such operation as necessary to extinguish or control
any fire, perform any rescue operation, investigate the existence of suspected
or reported fires, gas leaks or other hazardous conditions or situations, or
take any other action necessary in the reasonable performance of duty. In the
exercise of such power, the fire chief is authorized to prohibit any person,
vehicle, vessel or thing from approaching the scene, and is authorized to
remove, or cause to be removed or kept away from the scene, any vehicle, vessel
or thing which could impede or interfere with the operations of the fire
department and, in the judgment of the fire chief, any person not actually and
usefully employed in the extinguishing of such fire or in the preservation of
property in the vicinity thereof.
   104.11.1 Barricades. The fire chief or officer of the fire department in
charge at the scene of an emergency is authorized to place ropes, guards,
barricades or other obstructions across any street, alley, place or private
property in the vicinity of such operation so as to prevent accidents or
interference with the lawful efforts of the fire department to manage and
control the situation and to handle fire apparatus.
   104.11.2 Obstructing Operations. No person shall obstruct the operations of
the fire department in connection with extinguishment or control of any fire,
or actions relative to other emergencies, or disobey any lawful command of the
fire chief or officer of the fire department in charge of the emergency, or any
part thereof, or any lawful order of a police officer assisting the fire
department.
   104.11.3 Systems And Devices. No person shall render a system or device
inoperative during an emergency unless by direction of the fire chief or fire
department official in charge of the incident.
   Section 105 Permits
   105.2.3 Time Limitation of Application. An application for a permit for any
proposed work or operation shall be deemed to have been abandoned 180 days
after the date of filing, unless such application has been diligently
prosecuted or a permit shall have been issued; except that the fire code
official is authorized to grant one or more extensions of time for additional
periods not exceeding 90 days each. The extension shall be requested in writing
and justifiable cause demonstrated.
   105.3.1 Expiration. An operational permit shall remain in effect until
reissued, renewed or revoked, or for such a period of time as specified in the
permit. Construction permits shall automatically become invalid unless the work
authorized by such permit is commenced within 180 days after its issuance, or
if the work authorized by such permit is suspended or abandoned for a period of
180 days after the time the work is commenced. Before such work recommences, a
new permit shall be first obtained and the fee to recommence work, if any,
shall be one-half the amount required for a new permit for such work, provided
no changes have been made or will be made in the original construction
documents for such work, and provided further that such suspension or
abandonment has not exceeded one year. Permits are not transferable and any
change in occupancy, operation, tenancy or ownership shall require that a new
permit be issued.
   105.3.2 Extensions. A permittee holding an unexpired permit shall have the
right to apply for an extension of the time within which the permittee will
commence work under that permit when work is unable to be commenced within the
time required by this section for good and satisfactory reasons. The fire code
official is authorized to grant, in writing, one or more extensions of the time
period of a permit for periods of not more than 180 days each. Such extensions
shall be requested by the permit holder in writing and justifiable cause
demonstrated.
   105.6.12 Dry Cleaning. An operational permit is required to engage in the
business of dry cleaning or to change to a more hazardous cleaning solvent used
in existing dry cleaning equipment.
   105.6.16 Flammable And Combustible Liquids. An operational permit is
required:
   1.   To use or operate a pipeline for the transportation within facilities
of flammable or combustible liquids. This requirement shall not apply to the
offsite transportation in pipelines regulated by the department of
transportation (DOT) nor does it apply to piping systems.
   2.   To store, handle or use class I liquids in excess of 5 gallons (19 l)
in a building or in excess of 10 gallons (37.9 l) outside of a building, except
that a permit is not required for the following:
   2.1.   The storage or use of class I liquids in the fuel tank of a motor
vehicle, aircraft, motorboat, mobile power plant or mobile heating plant,
unless such storage, in the opinion of the fire code official, would cause an
unsafe condition.
   2.2.   The storage or use of paints, oils, varnishes or similar flammable
mixtures when such liquids are stored for maintenance, painting or similar
purposes for a period of not more than 30 days.
   3.   To store, handle or use class II or class IIIA liquids in excess of 25
gallons (95 l) in a building or in excess of 60 gallons (227 l) outside a
building, except for fuel oil used in connection with oil burning equipment.
   4.   To store, handle or use class IIIB liquids in tanks or portable tanks
for fueling motor vehicles at motor fuel-dispensing facilities or where
connected to fuel-burning equipment.
            Exception: Fuel oil and used motor oil used for space heating or
water heating.
   5.   To remove class I or II liquids from an underground storage tank used
for fueling motor vehicles by any means other than the approved, stationary on-
site pumps normally used for dispensing purposes.
   6.   To operate tank vehicles, equipment, tanks, plants, terminals, wells,
fuel-dispensing stations, refineries, distilleries and similar facilities where
flammable and combustible liquids are produced, processed, transported, stored,
dispensed or used.
   7.   To place temporarily out of service (for more than 90 days) an
underground, protected above-ground or above-ground flammable or combustible
liquid tank.
   8.   To change the type of contents stored in a flammable or combustible
liquid tank to a material that poses a greater hazard than that for which the
tank was designed and constructed.
   9.   To manufacture, process, blend or refine flammable or combustible
liquids.
   10.   To engage in the dispensing of liquid fuels into the fuel tanks of
motor vehicles at commercial, industrial, governmental or manufacturing
establishments.
   11.   To utilize a site for the dispensing of liquid fuels from tank
vehicles into the fuel tanks of motor vehicles, marine craft and other special
equipment at commercial, industrial, governmental or manufacturing
establishments.
   105.6.17 Floor Finishing. An operational permit is required for floor
finishing or surfacing operations exceeding 350 square feet (33 m2) using class
I or class II liquids.
   105.6.18 Fruit And Crop Ripening. An operational permit is required to
operate a fruit- or crop-ripening facility or conduct a fruit-ripening process
using ethylene gas.
   105.6.19 Fumigation And Insecticidal Fogging. An operational permit is
required to operate a business of fumigation or insecticidal fogging, and to
maintain a room, vault or chamber in which a toxic or flammable fumigant is
used.
   105.6.27 LP-Gas. An operational permit is required for:
   1.   Storage and use of LP-gas.
   Exception: A permit is not required for individual containers with a 500-
gallon (1893 l) water capacity or less or multiple container systems having an
aggregate quantity not exceeding 500 gallons (1893 l), serving occupancies in
group R-3.
   2.   Operation of cargo tankers that transport LP gas.
Table 105.6.20: Permit Amounts for Hazardous Materials
Type Of Material Amount
Table 105.6.20: Permit Amounts for Hazardous Materials
Type Of Material              Amount
Combustible liquids           See section 105.6.16
Corrosive materials
   Gases                   See section 105.6.8
   Liquids                 55 gallons
   Solids                  500 pounds
Explosive materials           See section 105.6.14
Flammable materials
   Gases                   See section 105.6.8
   Liquids                 See section 105.6.16
   Solids                  100 pounds
Highly toxic materials
   Gases                   See section 105.6.8
   Liquids                 Any amount
   Solids                  Any amount
Oxidizing materials
   Gases                   See section 105.6.8
   Liquids
      Class 4           Any amount
      Class 3           1 gallon
      Class 2           10 gallons
      Class 1           55 gallons
   Solids
      Class 4           Any amount
      Class 3           10 pounds
      Class 2           100 pounds
      Class 1           500 pounds
Organic peroxides
   Liquids
      Class I           Any amount
      Class II          Any amount
      Class III         1 gallon
      Class IV          2 gallons
      Class V           No permit required
   Solids
      Class I           Any amount
      Class II          Any amount
      Class III         10 pounds
      Class IV          20 pounds
      Class V           No permit required
Pyrophoric materials
   Gases                   Any amount
   Liquids                 Any amount
   Solids                  Any amount
Toxic materials
   Gases                   See section 105.6.8
   Liquids                 10 gallons
   Solids                  100 pounds
Unstable (reactive) materials
   Liquids
      Class 4           Any amount
      Class 3           Any amount
      Class 2           5 gallons
      Class 1           10 gallons
   Solids
      Class 4           Any amount
      Class 3           Any amount
      Class 2           50 pounds
      Class 1           100 pounds
Water-reactive materials
   Liquids
      Class 3           Any amount
      Class 2           5 gallons
      Class 1           55 gallons
   Solids
      Class 3           Any amount
      Class 2           50 pounds
      Class 1           500 pounds
For SI: 1 gallon = 3.785 l, 1 pound = 0.454 kg.
 
   a.   20 gallons when table 5003.1.1(1) note k applies and hazard
identification signs in accordance with section 5003.5 are provided for
quantities of 20 gallons or less.
   b.   200 pounds when table 5003.1.1(1) note k applies and hazard
identification signs in accordance with section 5003.5 are provided for
quantities of 200 pounds or less.
   105.6.28 Magnesium. An operational permit is required to melt, cast, heat
treat or grind more than 10 pounds (4.54 kg) of magnesium.
   105.6.29 Miscellaneous Combustible Storage. An operational permit is
required to store in any building or upon any premises in excess of 2,500 cubic
feet (71 m3) gross volume of combustible empty packing cases, boxes, barrels or
similar containers, rubber tires, rubber, cork or similar combustible material.
   105.6.30 Open Burning. An operational permit is required for the kindling or
maintaining of an open fire or a fire on any public street, alley, road, or
other public or private ground. Instructions and stipulations of the permit
shall be adhered to.
         Exception: Recreational fires.
   105.6.31 Open Flames and Torches. An operational permit is required to
remove paint with a torch; or to use a torch or open-flame device in a wildfire
risk area.
   105.6.32 Open Flames and Candles. An operational permit is required to use
open flames or candles in connection with assembly areas, dining areas of
restaurants or drinking establishments.
   105.6.33 Organic Coatings. An operational permit is required for any
organic-coating manufacturing operation producing more than 1 gallon (4 l) of
an organic coating in one day.
   105.6.34 Places Of Assembly. An operational permit is required to operate a
place of assembly.
   105.6.35 Private Fire Hydrants. An operational permit is required for the
removal from service, use or operation of private fire hydrants.
   Exception: A permit is not required for private industry with trained
maintenance personnel, private fire brigade or fire departments to maintain,
test and use private hydrants.
   105.6.36 Pyrotechnic Special Effects Material. An operational permit is
required for use and handling of pyrotechnic special effects material.
   105.6.37 Pyroxylin Plastics. An operational permit is required for storage
or handling of more than 25 pounds (11 kg) of cellulose nitrate (pyroxylin)
plastics, and for the assembly or manufacture of articles involving pyroxylin
plastics.
   105.6.38 Refrigeration Equipment. An operational permit is required to
operate a mechanical refrigeration unit or system regulated by chapter 6.
   105.6.39 Repair Garages and Motor Fuel-Dispensing Facilities. An operational
permit is required for operation of repair garages, and automotive, marine and
fleet motor fuel-dispensing facilities.
   105.6.40 Rooftop Heliports. An operational permit is required for the
operation of a rooftop heliport.
   105.6.41 Spraying or Dipping. An operational permit is required to conduct a
spraying or dipping operation utilizing flammable or combustible liquids, or
the application of combustible powders regulated by chapter 24.
   105.6.42 Storage Of Scrap Tires and Tire Byproducts. An operational permit
is required to establish, conduct or maintain storage of scrap tires and tire
byproducts that exceed 2,500 cubic feet (71 m3) of total volume of scrap tires,
and for indoor storage of tires and tire byproducts.
   105.6.44 Tire-Rebuilding Plants. An operational permit is required for the
operation and maintenance of a tire rebuilding plant.
   105.6.45 Waste Handling. An operational permit is required for the operation
of wrecking yards, junk yards and waste material-handling facilities.
   105.7.15 Standpipe Systems. A construction permit is required for the
installation, modification or removal from service of a standpipe system.
Maintenance performed in accordance with this code is not considered a
modification and does not require a permit.
   105.7.16 Temporary Membrane Structures and Tents. A construction permit is
required to erect an air supported temporary membrane structure or a tent
having an area in excess of 400 square feet (37 m2).
         Exceptions:
   1.   Tents used exclusively for recreational camping purposes.
   2.   Funeral tents and curtains, or extensions attached thereto, when used
for funeral services.
   3.   Tents and awnings open on all sides, which comply with all of the
following:
   3.1.   Individual tents shall have a maximum size of 700 square feet (65
m2).
   3.2.   The aggregate area of multiple tents placed side by side without a
fire break clearance of not less than 12 feet (3658 mm) shall not exceed 700
square feet (65 m2) total.
   3.3.   A minimum clearance of 12 feet (3658 mm) to structures and other
tents shall be maintained.
   Section 106 Inspections
   106.1 Inspection Authority. The fire code official is authorized to enter
and examine any building, structure, marine vessel, vehicle or premises in
accordance with section 104.3 for the purpose of enforcing this code.
   Section 107 Maintenance
   107.1 Maintenance of Safeguards. Whenever or wherever any device, equipment,
system, condition, arrangement, level of protection, or any other feature is
required for compliance with the provisions of this code, or otherwise
installed, such device, equipment, system, condition, arrangement, level of
protection, or other feature shall thereafter be continuously maintained in
accordance with this code and applicable referenced standards.
   107.2 Testing and Operation. Equipment requiring periodic testing or
operation to ensure maintenance shall be tested or operated as specified in
this code.
   107.2.1 Test and Inspection Records. Required test and inspection records
shall be available to the fire code official at all times or such records as
the fire code official designates shall be filed with the fire code official.
   107.2.2 Re-Inspection and Testing. Where any work or installation does not
pass an initial test or inspection, the necessary corrections shall be made so
as to achieve compliance with this code. The work or installation shall then be
resubmitted to the fire code official for inspection and testing.
   107.3 Supervision. Maintenance and testing shall be under the supervision of
a responsible person who shall ensure that such maintenance and testing are
conducted at specified intervals in accordance with this code.
   107.4 Rendering Equipment Inoperable. Portable or fixed fire-extinguishing
systems or devices, and fire warning systems, shall not be rendered inoperative
or inaccessible, except as necessary during emergencies, maintenance, repairs,
alterations, drills or prescribed testing.
   107.5 Overcrowding. Overcrowding or admittance of any person beyond the
approved capacity of a building or a portion thereof shall not be allowed. The
fire code official, upon finding any overcrowding conditions or obstructions in
aisles, passageways or other means of egress, or upon finding any condition
which constitutes a life safety hazard, shall be authorized to cause the event
to be stopped until such condition or obstruction is corrected.
   Section 108 Board Of Appeals
   108.1 Board Of Appeals Established. In order to hear and decide appeals of
orders, decisions or determinations made by the fire code official relative to
the application and interpretation of this code, there shall be and is hereby
created a board of appeals. The board of appeals shall be appointed by the
governing body and shall hold office at its pleasure. The fire code official
shall be an ex officio member of said board but shall have no vote on any
matter before the board. The board shall adopt rules of procedure for
conducting its business, and shall render all decisions and findings in writing
to the appellant with a duplicate copy to the fire code official.
   108.2 Limitations on Authority. An application for appeal shall be based on
a claim that the intent of this code or the rules legally adopted hereunder
have been incorrectly interpreted, the provisions of this code do not fully
apply, or an equivalent method of protection or safety is proposed. The board
shall have no authority to waive requirements of this code.
   108.3 Qualifications. The board of appeals shall consist of members who are
qualified by experience and training to pass on matters pertaining to hazards
of fire, explosions, hazardous conditions or fire protection systems, and are
not employees of the jurisdiction.
   Section 109 Violations
   109.3.2 Compliance with Orders and Notices. A notice of violation issued or
served as provided by this code shall be complied with by the owner, operator,
occupant or other person responsible for the condition or violation to which
the notice of violation pertains.
   109.3.3 Prosecution of Violations. If the notice of violation is not
complied with promptly, the fire code official is authorized to request the
legal counsel of the jurisdiction to institute the appropriate legal
proceedings at law or in equity to restrain, correct or abate such violation or
to require removal or termination of the unlawful occupancy of the structure in
violation of the provisions of this code or of the order or direction made
pursuant hereto.
   109.3.4 Unauthorized Tampering. Signs, tags or seals posted or affixed by
the fire code official shall not be mutilated, destroyed or tampered with, or
removed, without authorization from the fire code official.
   109.4 Violation Penalties. Persons who shall violate a provision of this
code or shall fail to comply with any of the requirements thereof or who shall
erect, install, alter, repair or do work in violation of the approved
construction documents or directive of the fire code official, or of a permit
or certificate used under provisions of this code, shall be guilty of a
misdemeanor, punishable by a fine of not more than five hundred dollars or by
imprisonment not exceeding six months, or both such fine and imprisonment. Each
day that a violation continues after due notice has been served shall be deemed
a separate offense.
   109.4.1 Abatement Of Violation. In addition to the imposition of the
penalties herein described, the fire code official is authorized to institute
appropriate action to prevent unlawful construction or to restrain, correct or
abate a violation; or to prevent illegal occupancy of a structure or premises;
or to stop an illegal act, conduct of business or occupancy of a structure on
or about any premises.
   Service Utilities
   112.1 Authority To Disconnect Service Utilities. The fire code official
shall have the authority to authorize disconnection of utility service to the
building, structure or system in order to safely execute emergency operations
or to eliminate an immediate hazard. The fire code official shall notify the
serving utility and, whenever possible, the owner and occupant of the building,
structure or service system of the decision to disconnect prior to taking such
action if not notified prior to disconnection. The owner or occupant of the
building, structure or service system shall be notified in writing as soon as
practical thereafter.
   Section 113 Fees
   113.1 Fees. A permit shall not be issued until the fees have been paid, nor
shall an amendment to a permit be released until the additional fee, if any,
has been paid.
   113.2 Schedule Of Permit Fees. A fee for each permit shall be paid as
required, in accordance with the schedule as established by the applicable
governing authority.
   113.3 Work Commencing Before Permit Issuance. Any person who commences any
work, activity or operation regulated by this code before obtaining the
necessary permits shall be subject to an additional fee established by the
applicable governing authority, which shall be in addition to the required
permit fees.
   113.4 Related Fees. The payment of the fee for the construction, alteration,
removal or demolition of work done in connection to or concurrently with the
work or activity authorized by a permit shall not relieve the applicant or
holder of the permit from the payment of other fees that are prescribed by law.
   113.5 Refunds. The applicable governing authority is authorized to establish
a refund policy.
   Section 305 Ignition Sources
   305.1 Clearance From Ignition Sources. Clearance between ignition sources,
such as luminaries, heaters, flame producing devices and combustible materials,
shall be maintained in an approved manner.
   305.2 Hot Ashes and Spontaneous Ignition Sources. Hot ashes, cinders,
smoldering coals or greasy or oily materials subject to spontaneous ignition
shall not be deposited in a combustible receptacle, within 10 feet (3048 mm) of
other combustible material including combustible walls and partitions or within
2 feet (610 mm) of openings to buildings.
   Exception: The minimum required separation distance to other combustible
materials shall be 2 feet (610 mm) where the material is deposited in a
covered, noncombustible receptacle placed on a noncombustible floor, ground
surface or stand.
   305.3 Open-Flame Warning Devices. Open-flame warning devices shall not be
used along an excavation, road, or any place where the dislodgment of such
device might permit the device to roll, fall or slide on to any area or land
containing combustible material.
   305.4 Deliberate or Negligent Burning. It shall be unlawful to deliberately
or through negligence set fire to or cause the burning of combustible material
in such a manner as to endanger the safety of persons or property.
   Section 307 Open Burning, Recreational Fires And Portable Outdoor Fireplaces
   307.1 General. A person shall not kindle or maintain or authorize to be
kindled or maintained any open burning unless conducted and approved in
accordance with sections 307.1.1 through 307.5.
   307.1.1 Prohibited Open Burning. Open burning shall be prohibited when
atmospheric conditions or local circumstances make such fires hazardous.
      Exception: Prescribed burning for the purpose of reducing the impact of
wildland fire when authorized by the fire code official.
   307.2 Permit Required. A permit shall be obtained from the fire code
official in accordance with section 105.6 prior to kindling a fire for
recognized silvicultural or range or wildlife management practices, prevention
or control of disease or pests, or a bonfire. Application for such approval
shall only be presented by and permits issued to the owner of the land upon
which the fire is to be kindled.
   307.2.1 Authorization. Where required by state or local law or regulations,
open burning shall only be permitted with prior approval from the state or
local air and water quality management authority, provided that all conditions
specified in the authorization are followed.
   307.3 Extinguishment Authority. When open burning creates or adds to a
hazardous situation, or a required permit for open burning has not been
obtained, the fire code official is authorized to order the extinguishment of
the open burning operation.
   307.4 Location. The location for open burning shall not be less than 50 feet
(15,240 mm) from any structure, and provisions shall be made to prevent the
fire from spreading to within 50 feet (15,240 mm) of any structure.
            Exceptions:
   1.   Fires in approved containers that are not less than 15 feet (4572 mm)
from a structure.
   2.   The minimum required distance from a structure shall be 25 feet (7620
mm) where the pile size is 3 feet (914 mm) or less in diameter and 2 feet (610
mm) or less in height.
   307.4.1 Bonfires. A bonfire shall not be conducted within 50 feet (15,240
mm) of a structure or combustible material unless the fire is contained in a
barbecue pit. Conditions which could cause a fire to spread within 50 feet
(15,240 mm) of a structure shall be eliminated prior to ignition.
   307.4.2 Recreational Fires. Recreational fires shall not be conducted within
25 feet (7620 mm) of a structure or combustible material. Conditions which
could cause a fire to spread within 25 feet (7620 mm) of a structure shall be
eliminated prior to ignition.
   307.4.3 Portable Outdoor Fireplaces. Portable outdoor fireplaces shall be
used in accordance with the manufacturer’s instructions and shall not be
operated within 15 feet (3048 mm) of a structure or combustible material.
            Exception: Portable outdoor fireplaces used at one and two-family
dwellings.
   307.5 Attendance. Open burning, bonfires, recreational fires and use of
portable outdoor fireplaces shall be constantly attended until the fire is
extinguished. A minimum of one portable fire extinguisher complying with
section 906 with a minimum 4-A rating or other approved on-site fire-
extinguishing equipment, such as dirt, sand, water barrel, garden hose or water
truck, shall be available for immediate utilization.
   Section 308 Open Flames
   308.1 General. Open flame, fire and burning on all premises shall be in
accordance with sections 308.1.1 through 308.5 and with other applicable
sections of this code.
   308.1.1 Where Prohibited. A person shall not take or utilize an open flame
or light in a structure, vessel, boat or other place where highly flammable,
combustible or explosive material is utilized or stored. Lighting appliances
shall be well-secured in a glass globe and wire mesh cage or a similar approved
device.
   308.1.2 Throwing or Placing Sources of Ignition. No person shall throw or
place, or cause to be thrown or placed, a lighted match, cigar, cigarette,
matches, or other flaming or glowing substance or object on any surface or
article where it can cause an unwanted fire.
   308.1.3 Torches For Removing Paint. Persons utilizing a torch or other
flame-producing device for removing paint from a structure shall provide a
minimum of one portable fire extinguisher complying with section 906 and with a
minimum 4-A rating, two portable fire extinguishers, each with a minimum 2-
A rating, or a water hose connected to the water supply on the premises where
such burning is done. The person doing the burning shall remain on the premises
1 hour after the torch or flame-producing device is utilized.
   308.1.4 Open-Flame Cooking Devices. Charcoal burners and other open-flame
cooking devices shall not be operated on combustible balconies or within 10
feet (3048 mm) of combustible construction.
            Exceptions:
   1.   One- and two-family dwellings.
   2.   Where buildings, balconies and decks are protected by an automatic
sprinkler system.
   3.   LP-gas cooking devices having LP-gas container with a water capacity
not greater than 2-1/2 pounds [nominal 1 pound (0.454 kg) LP-gas capacity].
   308.1.5 Location Near Combustibles. Open flames such as from candles,
lanterns, kerosene heaters and gas-fired heaters shall not be located on or
near decorative material or similar combustible materials.
   308.1.6 Open-Flame Devices. Torches and other devices, machines or processes
liable to start or cause fire shall not be operated or used in or upon wildfire
risk areas, except by a permit in accordance with section 105.6 secured from
the fire code official.
   Exception: Use within inhabited premises or designated campsites which are a
minimum of 30 feet (9144 mm) from grass-, grain-, brush- or forest-covered
areas.
      308.1.6.1 Signals And Markers. Flame-employing devices, such as lanterns
or kerosene road flares, shall not be operated or used as a signal or marker in
or upon wildfire risk areas.
      Exception: The proper use of fusees at the scenes of emergencies or as
required by standard railroad operating procedures.
      308.1.6.2 Portable Fueled Open-Flame Devices. Portable open-flame devices
fueled by flammable or combustible gases or liquids shall be enclosed or
installed in such a manner as to prevent the flame from contacting combustible
material.
      Exceptions:
   1.   LP-gas-fueled devices used for sweating pipe joints or removing paint
in accordance with chapter 61.
   2.   Cutting and welding operations in accordance with chapter 35.
   3.   Torches or flame-producing devices in accordance with section 308.4.
   4.   Candles and open-flame decorative devices in accordance with section
308.3.
   308.1.7 Religious Ceremonies. When, in the opinion of the fire code
official, adequate safeguards have been taken, participants in religious
ceremonies are allowed to carry hand-held candles. Hand-held candles shall not
be passed from one person to another while lighted.
      308.1.7.1 Aisles and Exits. Candles shall be prohibited in areas where
occupants stand, or in an aisle or exit.
      308.1.8 Flaming Food and Beverage Preparation. The preparation of flaming
foods or beverages in places of assembly and drinking or dining establishments
shall be in accordance with sections 308.1.8.1 through 308.1.8.5.
         308.1.8.1 Dispensing. Flammable or combustible liquids used in the
preparation of flaming foods or beverages shall be dispensed from one of the
following:
         1.   A 1-ounce (29.6 ml) container; or
         2.   A container not exceeding 1-quart (946.5 ml) capacity with a
controlled pouring device that will limit the flow to a 1-ounce (29.6 ml)
serving.
         308.1.8.2 Containers Not In Use. Containers shall be secured to
prevent spillage when not in use.
         308.1.8.3 Serving Of Flaming Food. The serving of flaming foods or
beverages shall be done in a safe manner and shall not create high flames. The
pouring, ladling or spooning of liquids is restricted to a maximum height of 8
inches (203 mm) above the receiving receptacle.
         308.1.8.4 Location. Flaming foods or beverages shall be prepared only
in the immediate vicinity of the table being serviced. They shall not be
transported or carried while burning.
         308.1.8.5 Fire Protection. The person preparing the flaming foods or
beverages shall have a wet cloth towel immediately available for use in
smothering the flames in the event of an emergency.
   308.2 Permits Required. Permits shall be obtained from the fire code
official in accordance with section 105.6 prior to engaging in the following
activities involving open flame, fire and burning:
   1.   Use of a torch or flame-producing device to remove paint from a
structure.
   2.   Use of open flame, fire or burning in connection with group A or E
occupancies.
   3.   Use or operation of torches and other devices, machines or processes
liable to start or cause fire in or upon wildfire risk areas.
   308.3 Group A Occupancies. Open-flame devices shall not be used in a group A
occupancy.
   Exceptions:
   1.   Open-flame devices are allowed to be used in the following situations,
provided approved precautions are taken to prevent ignition of a combustible
material or injury to occupants:
   1.1.   Where necessary for ceremonial or religious purposes in accordance
with section 308.1.7.
   1.2.   On stages and platforms as a necessary part of a performance in
accordance with section 308.3.2.
   1.3.   Where candles on tables are securely supported on substantial
noncombustible bases and the candle flames are protected.
   2.   Heat-producing equipment complying with chapter 6 and the California
mechanical code.
   3.   Gas lights are allowed to be used provided adequate precautions
satisfactory to the fire code official are taken to prevent ignition of
combustible materials.
   308.3.1 Open-Flame Decorative Devices. Open-flame decorative devices shall
comply with all of the following restrictions:
   1.   Class I and class II liquids and LP-gas shall not be used.
   2.   Liquid- or solid-fueled lighting devices containing more than 8 ounces
(237 ml) of fuel must self-extinguish and not leak fuel at a rate of more than
0.25 teaspoon per minute (1.26 ml per minute) if tipped over.
   3.   The device or holder shall be constructed to prevent the spillage of
liquid fuel or wax at the rate of more than 0.25 teaspoon per minute (1.26 ml
per minute) when the device or holder is not in an upright position.
   4.   The device or holder shall be designed so that it will return to the
upright position after being tilted to an angle of 45 degrees from vertical.
   Exception: Devices that self-extinguish if tipped over and do not spill fuel
or wax at the rate of more than 0.25 teaspoon per minute (1.26 ml per minute)
if tipped over.
   5.   The flame shall be enclosed except where openings on the side are not
more than 0.375-inch (9.5 mm) diameter or where openings are on the top and the
distance to the top is such that a piece of tissue paper placed on the top will
not ignite in 10 seconds.
   6.   Chimneys shall be made of noncombustible materials and securely
attached to the open-flame device.
   Exception: A chimney is not required to be attached to any open-flame device
that will self-extinguish if the device is tipped over.
   7.   Fuel canisters shall be safely sealed for storage.
   8.   Storage and handling of combustible liquids shall be in accordance with
chapter 57.
   9.   Shades, where used, shall be made of noncombustible materials and
securely attached to the open flame device holder or chimney.
   10.   Candelabras with flame-lighted candles shall be securely fastened in
place to prevent overturning, and shall be located away from occupants using
the area and away from possible contact with drapes, curtains or other
combustibles.
   308.3.2 Theatrical Performances. Where approved, open-flame devices used in
conjunction with theatrical performances are allowed to be used when adequate
safety precautions have been taken in accordance with NFPA 160.
   General Requirements
   308.4 Group R Occupancies. Open flame, fire and burning in group R
occupancies shall comply with the requirements of sections 308.1 through
308.1.6.2 and section 308.4.1.
   308.4.1 Group R-2 Dormitories. Candles, incense and similar open-flame-
producing items shall not be allowed in sleeping units in group R-2 dormitory
occupancies.
   308.5 Group I, R-2.1, R-3.1, R-4 Occupancies Or Any Licensed Care Facility.
A person shall not utilize or allow to be utilized, an open flame in group I,
R-2.1, R-3.1, R-4 occupancies or any licensed care facilities.
   Section 503 Fire Apparatus Access Roads
   503.1 Where Required. Fire apparatus access roads shall be provided and
maintained in accordance with sections 503.1.1 through 503.1.3.
   503.1.1 Buildings And Facilities. Approved fire apparatus access roads shall
be provided for every facility, building or portion of a building hereafter
constructed or moved into or within the jurisdiction. The fire apparatus access
road shall comply with the requirements of this section and shall extend to
within 150 feet (45,720 mm) of all portions of the facility and all portions of
the exterior walls of the first story of the building as measured by an
approved route around the exterior of the building or facility.
   Exception: The fire code official is authorized to increase the dimension of
150 feet (45,720 mm) where:
   1.   The building is equipped throughout with an approved automatic
sprinkler system installed in accordance with section 903.3.1.1, 903.3.1.2 or
903.3.1.3.
   2.   Fire apparatus access roads cannot be installed because of location on
property, topography, waterways, nonnegotiable grades or other similar
conditions, and an approved alternative means of fire protection is provided.
   3.   There are not more than two group R-3 or group U occupancies.
   503.1.2 Additional Access. The fire code official is authorized to require
more than one fire apparatus access road based on the potential for impairment
of a single road by vehicle congestion, condition of terrain, climatic
conditions or other factors that could limit access.
   503.1.3 High-Piled Storage. Fire department vehicle access to buildings used
for high-piled combustible storage shall comply with the applicable provisions
of chapter 32.
   503.2 Specifications. Fire apparatus access roads shall be installed and
arranged in accordance with sections 503.2.1 through 503.2.8.
[Cal. Code of Regulations Title 19, Division 1, Chapter 1, Subchapter 1,
Article 3, §3.05(a)] Fire department access and egress. (Roads)
   (a)   Roads. Required access roads from every building to a public street
shall be all-weather hard-surfaced (suitable for use by fire apparatus) right-
of-way not less than 20 feet in width. Such right-of-way shall be unobstructed
and maintained only as access to the public street.
   Exception: The enforcing agency may waive or modify this requirement if in
his opinion such all-weather hard-surfaced condition is not necessary in the
interest of public safety and welfare.
   503.2.1 Dimensions. Fire apparatus access roads shall have an unobstructed
width of not less than 20 feet (6096 mm), exclusive of shoulders, except for
approved security gates in accordance with section 503.6, and an unobstructed
vertical clearance of not less than 13 feet 6 inches (4115 mm).
   503.2.2 Authority. The fire code official shall have the authority to
require an increase in the minimum access widths where they are inadequate for
fire or rescue operations.
   503.2.3 Surface. Fire apparatus access roads shall be designed and
maintained to support the imposed loads of fire apparatus and shall be surfaced
so as to provide all-weather driving capabilities.
   503.2.4 Turning Radius. The required turning radius of a fire apparatus
access road shall be determined by the fire code official.
   503.2.5 Dead Ends. Dead-end fire apparatus access roads in excess of 150
feet (45,720 mm) in length shall be provided with an approved area for turning
around fire apparatus.
   503.2.6 Bridges And Elevated Surfaces. Where a bridge or an elevated surface
is part of a fire apparatus access road, the bridge shall be constructed and
maintained in accordance with AASHTO HB-17. Bridges and elevated surfaces shall
be designed for a live load sufficient to carry the imposed loads of fire
apparatus. Vehicle load limits shall be posted at both entrances to bridges
when required by the fire code official. Where elevated surfaces designed for
emergency vehicle use are adjacent to surfaces which are not designed for such
use, approved barriers, approved signs or both shall be installed and
maintained when required by the fire code official.
   503.2.7 Grade. The grade of the fire apparatus access road shall be within
the limits established by the fire code official based on the fire department’s
apparatus.
   503.2.8 Angles Of Approach And Departure. The angles of approach and
departure for fire apparatus access roads shall be within the limits
established by the fire code official based on the fire department’s apparatus.
   503.3 Marking. Where required by the fire code official, approved signs or
other approved notices or markings that include the words NO PARKING-FIRE LANE
shall be provided for fire apparatus access roads to identify such roads or
prohibit the obstruction thereof. The means by which fire lanes are designated
shall be maintained in a clean and legible condition at all times and be
replaced or repaired when necessary to provide adequate visibility.
   503.4 Obstruction Of Fire Apparatus Access Roads. Fire apparatus access
roads shall not be obstructed in any manner, including the parking of vehicles.
The minimum widths and clearances established in section 503.2.1 shall be
maintained at all times.
   503.4.1 Traffic Calming Devices. Traffic calming devices shall be prohibited
unless approved by the fire code official.
   503.5 Required Gates Or Barricades. The fire code official is authorized to
require the installation and maintenance of gates or other approved barricades
across fire apparatus access roads, trails or other accessways, not including
public streets, alleys or highways. Electric gate operators, where provided,
shall be listed in accordance with UL 325. Gates intended for automatic
operation shall be designed, constructed and installed to comply with the
requirements of ASTM F2200.
   503.5.1 Secured Gates And Barricades. When required, gates and barricades
shall be secured in an approved manner. Roads, trails and other accessways that
have been closed and obstructed in the manner prescribed by section 503.5 shall
not be trespassed on or used unless authorized by the owner and the fire code
official.
      Exception: The restriction on use shall not apply to public officers
acting within the scope of duty.
   503.5.2 Fences And Gates. School grounds may be fenced and gates therein may
be equipped with locks, provided that safe dispersal areas based on 3 square
feet (0.28 m2) per occupant are located between the school and the fence. Such
required safe dispersal areas shall not be located less than 50 feet (15,240
mm) from school buildings. Every public and private school shall conform with
section 32020 of the Education Code which states:
      The governing board of every public school district, and the governing
authority of every private school, which maintains any building used for the
instruction or housing of school pupils on land entirely enclosed (except for
building walls) by fences of walls, shall, through cooperation with the local
law enforcement and fire-protection agencies having jurisdiction of the area,
make provision for the erection of gates in such fences or walls. The gates
shall be of sufficient size to permit the entrance of the ambulances, police
equipment and fire-fighting apparatus used by the law enforcement and fire-
protection agencies. There shall be no less than one such access gate and there
shall be as many such gates as needed to assure access to all major buildings
and ground areas. If such gates are to be equipped with locks, the locking
devices shall be designed to permit ready entrance by the use of the chain or
bolt-cutting devices with which the local law enforcement and fire-protection
agencies may be equipped.
   503.6 Security Gates. The installation of security gates across a fire
apparatus access road shall be approved by the fire chief. Where security gates
are installed, they shall have an approved means of emergency operation. The
security gates and the emergency operation shall be maintained operational at
all times. Electric gate operators, where provided, shall be listed in
accordance with UL 325. Gates intended for automatic operation shall be
designed, constructed and installed to comply with the requirements of ASTM F
2200.
   Appendix D Fire Apparatus Access Roads
   Section D101 General
   D101.1 Scope. Fire apparatus access roads shall be in accordance with this
appendix and all other applicable requirements of the California fire code.
   Section D102 Required Access
   D102.1 Access And Loading. Facilities, buildings or portions of buildings
hereafter constructed shall be accessible to fire department apparatus by way
of an approved fire apparatus access road with an asphalt, concrete or other
approved driving surface capable of supporting the imposed load of fire
apparatus weighing at least 75,000 pounds (34,050 kg).
   Section D103 Minimum Specifications
   D103.1 Access Road Width With A Hydrant. Where a fire hydrant is located on
a fire apparatus access road, the minimum road width shall be 26 feet (7925
mm), exclusive of shoulders (see figure D103.1).
   D103.2 Grade. Fire apparatus access roads shall not exceed 10 percent in
grade.
   Exception: Grades steeper than 10 percent as approved by the fire chief.
   D103.3 Turning Radius. The minimum turning radius shall be determined by the
fire code official.
   D103.4 Dead Ends. Dead-end fire apparatus access roads in excess of 150 feet
(45,720 mm) shall be provided with width and turnaround provisions in
accordance with table D103.4.
   D103.5 Fire Apparatus Access Road Gates. Gates securing the fire apparatus
access roads shall comply with all of the following criteria:
   1.   The minimum gate width shall be 20 feet (6096 mm).
   2.   Gates shall be of the swinging or sliding type.
   3.   Construction of gates shall be of materials that allow manual operation
by one person.
   4.   Gate components shall be maintained in an operative condition at all
times and replaced or repaired when defective.
   5.   Electric gates shall be equipped with a means of opening the gate by
fire department personnel for emergency access. Emergency opening devices shall
be approved by the fire code office.
(Ord. 617, passed 6-3-2014)
§ 7-2-4 CONFLICT OF CODES.
   If or when there arises a conflict between the 2013 California Fire Code and
the 2012 International Fire Code, the most restrictive of the codes shall
apply.
(Ord. 617, passed 6-3-2014)
§ 7-2-5 MODIFICATIONS.
   (A)   The Chief may modify any of the provisions of the fire code upon
application in writing by the owner or lessee, or his or her duly authorized
agent, when the Chief determines there are practical difficulties in the way of
carrying out the strict letter of the code; provided, that the spirit of the
code shall be observed, public safety secured and substantial justice done. The
particulars of such modification when granted or allowed and the decision of
the Chief or his or her designated representative thereof shall be entered upon
the records of the Department and a signed copy shall be furnished by the
applicant.
   (B)   For the purposes of this section, the cost of compliance with the
provisions of the fire code shall not constitute a practical difficulty.
(Ord. 617, passed 6-3-2014)
CHAPTER 3: RESERVED
Editor’s note:
   This chapter was reserved by ord. 569, passed 5-6-2008.
CHAPTER 4: FIREWORKS
Section
7-4-1 Definitions
7-4-2 General prohibition against possession, sale or use of fireworks
7-4-3 Exception; sale of safe and sane fireworks allowed with permit
7-4-4 Prerequisites for issuance of permit
7-4-5 Criteria for inclusion in city permit lottery and permit issuance
7-4-6 Procedure for City of Livingston lottery, Council selection of nonprofits
and permit issuance
7-4-7 Safe and sane fireworks stand; operating regulations
7-4-8 Safe and sane fireworks stand; regulations of structure
7-4-9 General requirements for permittees
7-4-10 Revocation of permit; appeal
7-4-11 Limitation on places and hours of discharge of fireworks
7-4-12 Supervision of minors
7-4-13 Wholesale storage of fireworks
7-4-14 Seizure of fireworks
7-4-15 Concurrent authorities
7-4-16 Administrative penalties
7-4-17 Severability
§ 7-4-1 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   AFFILIATED ORGANIZATIONS.
      1.   Organizations incorporated under the same charter or organization
and their organizations and auxiliaries unless the auxiliary is incorporated
under a different charter;
      2.   Organizations sharing the same officers, place of meetings and/or
national parent organization;
      3.   Subdivisions and/or factional divisions of organizations however
named or delineated; and
      4.   Suborganizations, one of whose primary purpose is to provide
financial and/or manpower support to a parent nonprofit organization. Different
organizations affiliated with and officially recognized by any elementary,
junior high, high school and/or school district that serves, in whole or in
part, the residents of the city shall be presumed to be affiliated
organizations (i.e., boosters of high school football and boosters of high
school basketball), unless recognized as a separate nonprofit by either the
state or the IRS.
   BUILDING INSPECTOR. The Livingston building inspector and his or her
designees.
   CITY CLERK. The Livingston City Clerk and his or her designees.
   DANGEROUS FIREWORKS.
      1.   Any fireworks which contain any of the following:
         (a)   Arsenic sulfide, arsenates or arsenites;
         (b)   Boron;
         (c)   Chlorates, except in colored smoke mixture in which an equal or
greater amount of sodium bicarbonate is included; in caps and party poppers;
         (d)   On those small items (such as ground spinners) wherein the total
powder content does not exceed four grams of which not greater than 15% (or 600
milligrams) is potassium, sodium or barium chlorate;
         (e)   Gallates or gallic acid;
         (f)   Magnesium (magnesium-aluminum alloys, called magnalium, are
permitted);
         (g)   Mercury salts;
         (h)   Phosphorus (red or white except that red phosphorus is
permissible in caps and party poppers);
         (i)   Picrates or picric acid;
         (j)   Thiocyanates;
         (k)   Titanium, except in particle size greater than 100-mesh; or
         (l)   Airconium.
      2.   Firecrackers;
      3.   Skyrockets and rockets, including all devices which employ any
combustible or explosive material and which rise in the air during discharge;
      4.   Roman candles, including all devices which discharge balls of fire
into the air;
      5.   Chasers, including all devices which dart or travel about the
surface of the ground during discharge;
      6.   Sparklers more than ten inches in length or one-fourth of an inch in
diameter;
      7.   All fireworks designed and intended by the manufacturer to create
the element of surprise upon the user. These items include, but are not limited
to, auto-foolers, cigarette loads, exploding golf balls and trick matches;
      8.   Fireworks known as devil on the walk or any other firework which
explodes through means of friction, unless otherwise classified by the State
Fire Marshal;
      9.   Torpedoes of all kinds which explode on impact;
      10.   Fireworks kits; and
      11.   Such other fireworks examined and tested by the State Fire Marshal
and determined by him or her, with the advice of the State Board of Fire
Services, to possess characteristics of design or construction which make such
fireworks unsafe for use by any person not specially qualified or trained in
the use of fireworks.
   EXEMPT FIREWORKS. Any special item containing pyrotechnic compositions which
the State Fire Marshal, with the advice of the State Fire Advisory Board, has
investigated and determined to be limited to industrial, commercial,
agricultural use or religious ceremonies when authorized by a permit granted by
the authority having jurisdiction.
   FIREWORKS. Any device containing chemical elements and chemical compounds
capable of burning independently of the oxygen of the atmosphere and producing
audible, visual, mechanical or thermal effects which are useful as pyrotechnic
devices or for entertainment. The term FIREWORKS includes, but is not limited
to, devices designated by the manufacturer as fireworks, torpedoes, skyrockets,
roman candles, rockets, daygo bombs, sparklers, party poppers, paper caps,
chasers, fountains, smoke sparks, aerial bombs and fireworks kits.
   LOTTERY. A random selection process conducted by the City Council at the
second regularly scheduled Council meeting in March for the selection of
nonprofits that will be issued permits to sell safe and sane fireworks. For
2014, the lottery will be held at the second regularly scheduled Council
meeting in April.
   NONPROFIT ORGANIZATION.
      1.   Any nonprofit association, charity, or corporation organized
primarily for veteran, patriotic, welfare, civic betterment, youth activities
or charitable purposes;
      2.   A group which is an integral part of a recognized nonprofit national
organization; or
      3.   An organization affiliated with and officially recognized by an
elementary, junior high, high school and/or school district that serves, in
whole or in part, the residents of the city. All nonprofit organizations must
be recognized by either the IRS or the State of California. Evidence of
nonprofit status shall consist of a “letter of determination” from the IRS or
recognition from the California Secretary of State. If this letter cannot be
obtained, other evidence must be offered and the City Manager will determine
its validity.
   PERSON. Any individual, firm, partnership, joint venture, association,
concern, corporation, state, trust, business trust, receiver, syndicate, or any
other group or combination acting as a unit.
   PRINCIPAL AND PERMANENT MEETING PLACE. Shall include, but is not limited to,
a permanent structure, playing field, geographic area, or service population,
which resides in or is located within the City of Livingston.
   SAFE AND SANE FIREWORKS (a.k.a. STATE APPROVED FIREWORKS). Any fireworks
which do not come within the definition of “dangerous fireworks” or “exempt
fireworks”.
(Ord. 611, passed 3-4-2014)
§ 7-4-2 GENERAL PROHIBITION AGAINST POSSESSION, SALE OR USE OF FIREWORKS.
   No person may manufacture, import, export, store, possess, sell, use,
display or discharge dangerous fireworks as defined in this chapter within the
city. No person may possess, sell, use, display or discharge safe and sane
fireworks within the city except as specifically provided in this chapter.
(Ord. 611, passed 3-4-2014)
§ 7-4-3 EXCEPTION; SALE OF SAFE AND SANE FIREWORKS ALLOWED WITH PERMIT.
   It shall only be lawful to sell or display safe and sane fireworks within
the city with a city issued permit during the time period set forth in this
chapter.
(Ord. 611, passed 3-4-2014)
§ 7-4-4 PREREQUISITES FOR ISSUANCE OF PERMIT.
   (A)   No permit to sell safe and sane fireworks shall be issued to any
person, except nonprofit organizations, as defined in this chapter. Permits
shall be issued using a lottery system and by City Council selection, as
explained more fully below.
   (B)   Applications from qualified nonprofit organizations desiring to
participate in the lottery selection must be received by the City Clerk prior
to February 1 each year, with the exception of 2014, when the applications can
be submitted prior to April 1. The City Manager shall determine whether the
applicant nonprofit organization is qualified, pursuant to this chapter, to be
included in the lottery selection process. An applicant who is denied
participation in the lottery selection process may appeal the City Manager’s
decision by submitting a written appeal, accompanied by an appeal fee as set by
the City Council, to the City Clerk within 15 days of the City Manager’s
decision. The City Council shall consider the appeal prior to conducting the
lottery selection for the issuance of permits at its second regularly scheduled
Council meeting in March and shall consider public comment and any evidence
presented by the applicant at that time. The City Council may revise, modify or
sustain the denial after the public hearing, and its decision shall be final.
If the Council decides to reverse the City Manager’s decision, the applicant
will be included in the lottery. For 2014, the lottery will be held at the
second regularly scheduled meeting in April.
   (C)   A nonprofit organization, including its affiliated organizations, may
submit no more than one application for a permit to sell safe and sane
fireworks within the city. If more than one application is submitted on behalf
of any nonprofit organization, including an affiliated organization, only the
first request submitted will be honored and entered into the lottery.
   (D)   One permit entitles the qualified nonprofit organization to one
fireworks stand, which shall operate on the location listed on the permit.
   (E)   The maximum number of permits which may be issued and the maximum
number of safe and sane fireworks stands that will be permitted pursuant to
this chapter during any one calendar year shall not exceed one permit for each
3,000 residents of the city, or fraction thereof, based on the latest
California Department of Finance estimate published before the end of the
permit application filing period.
   (F)   Applicants selected to receive a permit to sell safe and sane
fireworks under the lottery process will not be allowed to participate in the
lottery for the next calendar year.
   (G)   Two or more qualified applicants may be issued a permit as a joint
venture. Applicants wishing to be considered as joint ventures must list the
other nonprofit(s) they would like to be joined with on their application.
Joint ventures may each submit a separate application listing the other
nonprofit(s) on the application.
   (H)   1.   Permits issued pursuant to this chapter are valid only during the
period specified on the permit in the calendar year issued.
      2.   Retail sales of safe and sane fireworks shall be permitted only from
temporary fireworks stands. The sale of safe and sane fireworks from any other
building or structure is prohibited.
(Ord. 611, passed 3-4-2014)
§ 7-4-5 CRITERIA FOR INCLUSION IN CITY PERMIT LOTTERY AND PERMIT ISSUANCE.
   In order to be eligible for inclusion on the city permit lottery and to be
issued a permit to sell safe and sane fireworks, a nonprofit organization must:
   (A)   Have had its principal and permanent meeting place in an area which is
within the city limits for a minimum of one year continuously preceding the
filing of the permit application or, in the case of a nonprofit organization
affiliated with and officially recognized by an elementary, junior high, high
school and/or school district that serves in whole or in part, the residents of
the city, such nonprofit organization shall have been affiliated or officially
recognized by the school and/or school district for a minimum of one year
continuously preceding the filing of the permit application; and
   (B)   Have at least 15 members.
(Ord. 611, passed 3-4-2014)
§ 7-4-6 PROCEDURE FOR CITY OF LIVINGSTON LOTTERY, COUNCIL SELECTION OF
NONPROFITS AND PERMIT ISSUANCE.
   (A)   The City Council shall conduct a random lottery drawing at the second
regular meeting in March each year. For 2014, the lottery will be held at the
second regularly scheduled meeting in April. Qualified nonprofit organizations
who have submitted applications pursuant to this chapter shall be included in
the lottery. The selection process will be random and will only be used if the
city receives more applications than available booths. The City Council will
draw two alternates during the lottery process in case a selected nonprofit
fails to meet the requirements of this chapter. Prior to the lottery, the
Council will hear any appeals submitted pursuant to §
7-4-4 of this chapter. If an alternate is needed to step in, the first
alternate selected during the lottery shall be given priority. The alternate
shall receive two weeks, from the day of selection to comply with all
requirements under this chapter.
   (B)   The City Council shall have the discretion to select up to two
nonprofit organizations outside of the lottery process.
      1.   Nonprofits wishing to be considered by the City Council for such
discretionary selection shall submit applications similar to all other
nonprofit organizations requesting to participate in the lottery, pursuant to §
7-4-4 of this chapter.
      2.   The City Council will consider the applications and select up to two
nonprofits at the second regular meeting in March each year. For 2014, the
selection will occur at the second regularly scheduled meeting in April.
      3.   The City Council shall have the discretion to have these two
discretionary selections be determined as part of the lottery if they desire.
      4.   Nonprofits submitting requests to the Council for selection outside
the lottery process will automatically be included in the lottery. If the
nonprofit is selected by both the Council using a discretionary selection and
the lottery, the nonprofit will only be issued one permit and another nonprofit
will be selected randomly using the lottery.
      5.   As part of the application for a discretionary selection, applicants
must also include a written statement describing the reasons why they believe
the City Council should select their nonprofit organization.
   (C)   All nonprofit organizations receiving a permit in the lottery or
selected by the City Council as part of the Council’s two selections, shall
complete permit application on forms supplied by the city as required under §
7-4-4 of this chapter. Every application shall include, but not be limited to,
the following:
      1.   Name, address and phone number of the nonprofit organization;
      2.   Brief statement of services and benefits provided to citizens of the
city;
      3.   Nonrefundable application fee of $25;
      4.   Federal tax identification number;
      5.   Principal permanent meeting place of the nonprofit organization;
      6.   Roster of active members of the nonprofit organization;
      7.   Proof of tax exempt status. Evidence of nonprofit status shall
consist of a “letter of determination” from the IRS or recognition from the
California Secretary of State. If this letter cannot be obtained, other
evidence must be offered and the City Manager will determine its validity; and
      8.   The proposed location of the fireworks stand.
   (D)   Upon notification of permit approval by the city, either by way of the
lottery process or Council selection, a nonprofit organization qualifying for a
permit must provide the following:
      1.   Two hundred fifty dollar nonrefundable permit fee;
      2.   One hundred dollar refundable cleanup bond. Prior to the issuance of
a permit, each applicant shall file with the City Clerk, a check made payable
to the city in the amount of $100 to assure compliance with the provisions of
this chapter. Such deposit shall be refundable upon, including, but not limited
to, the removal of the stand and the cleaning of the site to the satisfaction
of the city building inspector. In the event the permittee does not so comply
or remove the stand or clean the site, in the manner required by the city
building inspector or his or her designee, the city may clean the site itself
and shall deduct the cost thereof from the permittee’s deposit;
      3.   Written permission for use of the property upon which said proposed
stand will be located;
      4.   (a)   Proof of insurance in a form acceptable to the City Manager.
The policy or policies of insurance required by this section shall be endorsed
to designate the property owner, charitable organization and the city,
including its elected official officers, agents, representatives, employees and
volunteers as additional insureds thereunder. The insurance shall afford
coverage, in addition to and excluding defense costs, of at least $1,000,000
per occurrence and $2,000,000 in the general aggregate and shall include the
following:
            (1)   Public liability insurance combined single limit, bodily
injury, and property damage, each occurrence;
            (2)   Premises/operations liability; and
            (3)   Products liability, including completed operations liability.
         (b)   All insurance policies shall be endorsed to be primary insurance
as to the city its elected officials, officers, agents, representatives,
employees and volunteers and any other insurance, deductible or self-insurance
maintained by the city, its elected officials, officers, agents,
representatives, employees and volunteers shall be considered excess insurance
over and above the applicant’s insurance and shall not contribute with this
primary insurance. The policies shall also provide that the insurer will not
cancel the insured’s coverage without 15 days’ written notice to the City
Manager of the city.
      5.   The applicants shall save, hold harmless and indemnify the city, its
elected officials, officers, agents, representatives, employees and volunteers
from all claims, demands, judgments, costs or expenses in law or equity that
may arise from or are in any way related to any work performed by the
permittee, his or her agents, or employees under the terms of any permit issued
under this chapter;
      6.   Temporary sales tax permit issued by the local office of the State
Board of Equalization;
      7.   A validly issued and unexpired State Fire Marshal retail sales
permit;
      8.   Site plan graphically showing the orientation of the stand at the
proposed location. The site plan shall show utilities, location of permanent
and temporary structures, curb cuts and/or driveways, parking lots and identify
the nearest sanitary facilities and fire hydrants; and
      9.   Approval from the Police Department and Public Works Department that
operation at the fireworks stand at the proposed location will not present any
substantial hazard to vehicular or pedestrian traffic.
   (E)   Should an approved nonprofit organization fail to provide the
aforementioned items, the nonprofit organization’s claim on the permit will
become null and void and the permit shall be issued to the alternate nonprofit
selected during the lottery.
   (F)   Any city permit issued pursuant to this chapter shall be subject to
the requirement that at least one or more representatives of each nonprofit
organization shall attend a safe and sane fireworks stand operator safety
seminar each year conducted by the licensed fireworks wholesaler or other city
approved organization that is supplying the safe and sane fireworks to the
nonprofit organization. City permits will be distributed at the conclusion of
said safe and sane fireworks stand operator safety seminar. Should at least one
representative of an approved nonprofit organization not attend the safety
seminar, said nonprofit organization shall lose all claims to its permit. Any
permits lost in this fashion will remain unused for the duration of the
fireworks season for which such permit was intended.
   (G)   Permits may be issued with conditions to ensure that the fireworks
stand will be operated in a safe and legal manner, will not disturb the peace
and quiet of the neighborhood and will not constitute a burden on city
resources.
(Ord. 611, passed 3-4-2014)
§ 7-4-7 SAFE AND SANE FIREWORKS STAND; OPERATING REGULATIONS.
   (A)   No person shall knowingly sell fireworks to any person under the age
of 18.
   (B)   Each safe and sane fireworks stand must have an adult in attendance
and in charge thereof while fireworks are stored therein. Sleeping in the stand
is forbidden.
   (C)   The sale of fireworks shall begin no earlier than 12:00 p.m. (noon) on
June 28 and shall not continue after 10:00 p.m. July 4 of the same year.
   (D)   No person other than the permitted nonprofit organization, or
nonprofit organizations in case of a joint venture, shall operate, share or
otherwise participate in the profits of the stand for which the permit is
issued.
   (E)   No person other than the individuals who are members of the permitted
nonprofit organization, or nonprofit organizations in case of a joint venture,
or the wives, husbands, parents or adult children of such members shall sell or
otherwise participate in the sale of safe and sane fireworks.
   (F)   No person shall be paid any consideration by the permitted nonprofit
organization, or nonprofit organizations in case of a joint venture, or any
wholesaler/dealer of safe and sane fireworks for selling or otherwise
participating in the sale of safe and sane fireworks at such stand; provided,
however, that compensation may be paid for licensed security personnel during
the sale or nonsale hours and to the party authorizing the location of the
stand on its property.
   (G)   No person under the age of 18 shall sell or participate in the sale of
safe and sane fireworks at such stand.
   (H)   The sale of other items or commodities (e.g., consumables) in
conjunction with the sale of safe and sane fireworks is strictly prohibited.
   (I)   No fireworks shall be placed in any fireworks stand until a permit for
such stand has been issued by the city.
   (J)   Fireworks shall be stored, handled and displayed only in closed
packages.
   (K)   Fireworks shall not be sold or transferred to any consumer other than
from a fireworks stand.
(Ord. 611, passed 3-4-2014)
§ 7-4-8 SAFE AND SANE FIREWORKS STAND; REGULATIONS OF STRUCTURE.
   (A)   No stand shall be located within 20 feet of any other building or
within 100 feet of a location where gasoline or other flammable liquid is
stored or dispensed.
   (B)   No fireworks stand shall be operated in any way that creates or
permits a fire nuisance to exist. FIRE NUISANCE means anything or any act which
increases, or may cause, the hazard or menace of fire, or which may obstruct,
delay or hinder, or may become the cause of any obstruction, delay or
hindrance, to the prevention or extinguishment of fire. The Fire Chief or
designee shall have the authority to determine that a fire nuisance exists.
   (C)   No stand shall be located closer than ten feet to any street.
   (D)   No fuel powered generator or similar equipment shall be allowed within
25 feet of a stand.
   (E)   Stands need not comply with the provisions of the building code of the
city; provided, however, that all stands shall be erected such that they are
constructed in a manner which will reasonably ensure the safety of attendants
and patrons in the opinion of the building inspector. Any electrical use shall
be subject to the following:
      1.   No switches inside the stand;
      2.   Lighting fixtures to be with protective covers;
      3.   Extension cords to the stand are to be heavy duty and protected from
vehicular damage. Romex is not an acceptable extension cord. The extension cord
shall be of 20 amp minimum capacity;
      4.   Interior lighting to be at center ceiling level and sturdily
installed. All connections to use wire nuts or approved clamps;
      5.   All wiring and fixtures to be three-wire and grounded; and
      6.   The use of portable lighting outside of the stand is recommended. If
a pole is placed in the ground to support a light, a city permit is required.
   (F)   Stands may use shading devices such as canopies or awnings for the
convenience of patrons provided that:
      1.   The location and dimensions of the awning are shown on the approved
site plan;
      2.   The awning does not cover or impede any public rights-of-way;
      3.   The awning is freestanding, not anchored or tied to any public
property such as light or electrical poles;
      4.   The awning does not cover the booth or any portion thereof;
      5.   The awning provides shade from the top only (no sides). Banners,
signs or other items on or hanging from the awning or canopy are prohibited;
      6.   The awning meets all Fire Code specifications as adopted by the
city, including retardancy and setback requirements; and
      7.   Display or sale of fireworks from the awning or canopy area is
prohibited.
   (G)   Each stand shall have at least two exits. Each stand in excess of 40
feet in length shall have at least three exits spaced approximately equal
distance apart. Exit doors shall be not less than 24 inches wide and six feet
in height and shall swing in the direction of egress.
   (H)   The stand shall not be illuminated by an open flame or exposed heating
elements. Heating and lighting appliances shall be approved by Underwriters
Laboratories or similar authority, and shall be maintained in good condition.
   (I)   All weeds and combustible materials shall be cleared from the location
of the fireworks stand to a distance of at least 25 feet surrounding the
fireworks stand. All trash resulting from the operation of the fireworks stand
must be removed on a daily basis.
   (J)   “NO SMOKING” signs with letters at least four inches high shall be
prominently displayed on all sides and in the stand. Smoking shall be
prohibited within 50 feet of the stand.
   (K)   No person shall light, cause to be lighted or permit to be lighted any
safe and sane fireworks or combustible material within 50 feet of any stand.
   (L)   Each stand shall be equipped with two fire extinguishers approved by
the city, in good working order and easily accessible for use in case of fire.
(Ord. 611, passed 3-4-2014)
§ 7-4-9 GENERAL REQUIREMENTS FOR PERMITTEES.
   (A)   The fireworks stand and all accompanying debris or litter shall be
removed from the temporary location by July 12.
   (B)   Overnight storage of fireworks shall only be done in two ways:
      1.   The permittee may store the fireworks in an enclosed, locked vehicle
or cargo container; or
      2.   The permittee may keep the fireworks in the fireworks stand
overnight on the condition that there is a competent, nonsleeping adult(s)
present at all times.
   (C)   All unsold stock of fireworks as of July 4 shall be returned to the
wholesaler/distributor. On closing of the stand, all litter shall be removed
from the premises.
   (D)   Each stand must post its city issued permit, its temporary sales tax
permit from the California State Board of Equalization, its State Fire Marshal
retail sales permit and proof of its required insurance in a prominent place
inside the stand.
(Ord. 611, passed 3-4-2014)
§ 7-4-10 REVOCATION OF PERMIT; APPEAL.
   (A)   The City Fire Chief or other employee designated by the City Manager
may act as inspecting officers, and may revoke, immediately and without notice
or hearing, the permit of any permittee where a fire nuisance exists or where
personal injury may occur. If the revocation occurs between June 22 and July 4
(inclusive), the inspecting officer shall inform the permittee that the
permittee may seek review of the inspecting officer’s decision by the City
Manager, or the City Manager’s designee, on the next business day. At the
earliest opportunity on the next business day after the revocation, the
inspecting officer shall provide the City Manager, or the City Manager’s
designee, with written notice that a fireworks permit has been revoked,
including the name of the permittee and a brief statement of the grounds for
revocation. The City Manager, or the City Manager’s designee, shall meet with
the permittee and the inspecting officer on that day, upon the permittee’s
request, to review the inspecting officer’s decision. The decision of the City
Manager, or the City Manager’s designee, shall be final. If the revocation
occurs before June 22 or after July 4, the appeal procedures of subsection (B)
of this section shall apply.
   (B)   The inspecting officer may revoke the permit of any permittee who
violates any provision of this chapter. Such revocation shall take effect five
days after the inspecting officer verbally notifies the permittee of its
violation, during which time the permittee may seek review of the inspecting
officer’s decision by submitting a written request for review to the City
Manager, or the City Manager’s designee. The inspecting officer shall provide
the City Manager, or the City Manager’s designee, with written notice that a
fireworks permit violation has occurred for which the permit shall be revoked
within five days, including the name of the permittee and a brief statement of
the grounds for revocation. Upon request of the permittee, the City Manager or
the City Manager’s designee, shall meet with the permittee and the inspecting
officer to review the inspecting officer’s decision. The decision of the City
Manager, or the City Manager’s designee, shall be final.
(Ord. 611, passed 3-4-2014; Ord. 617, passed 6-2-2014)
§ 7-4-11 LIMITATION ON PLACES AND HOURS OF DISCHARGE OF FIREWORKS.
   (A)   Possession or use of safe and sane fireworks temporarily permitted.
Notwithstanding any provisions of this chapter to the contrary, the possession
of safe and sane fireworks shall be lawful during the period of 12:00 p.m.
(noon) on June 28 through 12:00 p.m. (noon) on July 6 of the same calendar
year, provided, however, that it shall be unlawful to possess any modified or
altered safe and sane firework. It shall be unlawful to use or discharge any
safe and sane fireworks except between the hours of 9:00 a.m. and 11:00 p.m. on
the days on which said safe and sane fireworks may be possessed.
   (B)   Property owner consent. It shall be unlawful to ignite or otherwise
use any safe and sane fireworks, or permit the discharge thereof, upon, over,
or onto the property of another without his or her consent.
   (C)   Distance from dwellings. It is recommended that safe and sane
fireworks not be ignited or used within 25 feet of any residence, dwelling or
other structure used for human habitation.
(Ord. 611, passed 3-4-2014)
§ 7-4-12 SUPERVISION OF MINORS.
   It shall be unlawful for any person having the care, custody or control of a
minor (under 18 years old) to permit such minor to discharge, explode, fire or
set off any safe and sane fireworks unless such minor does so under the direct
supervision of a person over 18 years of age and during the hours and on the
days permitted by this chapter.
(Ord. 611, passed 3-4-2014)
§ 7-4-13 WHOLESALE STORAGE OF FIREWORKS.
   Wholesale storage of safe and sane fireworks by the fireworks importers/
distributors is not allowed in the city.
(Ord. 611, passed 3-4-2014)
§ 7-4-14 SEIZURE OF FIREWORKS.
   The Police Chief, Fire Chief or other designated employee by the City
Manager may act as inspecting officers and may seize, take, remove or cause to
be removed, at the expense of the permittee or licensed fireworks wholesaler,
whichever is applicable, all stock of fireworks offered or exposed for sale,
stored or held in violation of this chapter when such violation creates an
imminent threat to public health or safety.
(Ord. 617, passed 6-3-2014)
§ 7-4-15 CONCURRENT AUTHORITIES.
   This chapter is not the exclusive regulation for fireworks within the city.
It shall supplement and be in addition to the other regulatory codes, statutes,
regulations and ordinances heretofore and hereinafter enacted by the city, the
state or any other legal entity or agency having jurisdiction.
(Ord. 611, passed 3-4-2014)
§ 7-4-16 ADMINISTRATIVE PENALTIES.
   (A)   The administrative citation penalty for all violations of this
Chapter, within a rolling twelve-month period shall be as follows:
      1.   One thousand dollars ($1,000.00) per violation. Each violation of
this Chapter shall be a separate violation. In addition, each discharge of a
firework in violation of this Chapter shall be a separate violation; and as a
result, subject to administrative penalties in the amount of $1,000.00 per
discharge of a firework in violation of this Chapter.
   (B)   A violation of this Chapter shall be criminally charged as a
misdemeanor. In addition to any other remedy allowed by law, anyone who
violates this Chapter is subject to all remedies available pursuant to the
Livingston Municipal Code. Violations of this Chapter are declared to be a
public nuisance. Anyone who violates this chapter shall be liable for all the
costs incurred by the City, including but not limited to attorney's fees and
administrative processing and/or enforcement, relating to the violation. Any
fines pursuant to this chapter, if delinquent, may be recoverable by property
lien or special assessment.
(Ord. 611, passed 3-4-2014; Ord. 651, passed 5-16-2023; Ord. 654, passed 5-21-
2024)
§ 7-4-17 SEVERABILITY.
   If any section, subsection, sentence, clause or phrase of this chapter that
is for any reason held to be invalid or unconstitutional by the decision of any
court of competent jurisdiction, such decision shall not affect the remaining
portions of this chapter. The City Council hereby declares that it would have
passed this chapter and each section, subsection, sentence, clause, or phrase
thereof, irrespective of the fact that any one or more sections, subsections,
sentences, clauses, or phrases be declared invalid or unconstitutional.
(Ord. 611, passed 3-4-2014)
CHAPTER 5: EXPLOSIVES
Section
7-5-1 Restrictions; penalty
§ 7-5-1 RESTRICTIONS; PENALTY.
   (A)   Restrictions. It shall be unlawful for any person, either as
principal, agent or employee, to store, manufacture, sell or use any dynamite,
TNT or other explosive or explosive compound material within the city;
provided, however, that said dynamite, TNT, explosive or explosive compound or
material may be sold, stored or used within the city upon first obtaining a
permit therefor from the Merced County Fire Prevention Office.
   (B)   Penalty. Any person who shall violate any of the provisions of this
section shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction thereof shall be
punishable as provided in the 2013 California Building Code.
(Ord. 617, passed 6-3-2014)
TITLE 8: HEALTH AND SANITATION
CHAPTER 1: PROPERTY NUISANCES
Section
8-1-1 Purpose
8-1-2 Definitions
8-1-3 Property nuisances unlawful
8-1-4 General conditions constituting property nuisances
8-1-5 Specific conditions constituting property nuisances
8-1-6 Abatement of unlawful property nuisances
§ 8-1-1 PURPOSE.
   This chapter is established to create a more definitive set of regulations,
which are cumulative with, and additional to, other provisions of this code, to
facilitate the abatement of property nuisances that are deleterious to the
social, economic and physical well being of the community. The intent of the
City Council in adopting this chapter and the purpose thereof is to protect the
inhabitants of the city against all forms of property nuisances, which are
injurious to health, or detrimental to the public safety, morals or general
welfare, or are indecent, or offensive to the senses or an obstruction to the
free use of property to such an extent as to interfere with the comfortable
enjoyment or life or property by the entire community or neighborhood, or by
any considerable number of persons.
(Ord. 572, passed 5-20-2008)
§ 8-1-2 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, and in addition to the definitions set
forth in various portions of this code, certain terms, words and their
derivatives shall be defined as set forth in the zoning regulations of this
code.
(Ord. 572, passed 5-20-2008)
§ 8-1-3 PROPERTY NUISANCES UNLAWFUL.
   It is unlawful for any person owning, leasing, occupying or having charge or
possession of any property to maintain it in such a manner that it is
determined by the city that a property nuisance exists upon such property.
(Ord. 572, passed 5-20-2008)
§ 8-1-4 GENERAL CONDITIONS CONSTITUTING PROPERTY NUISANCES.
   A property nuisance shall exist whenever any of the following conditions
exist:
   (A)   Dangerous condition. The condition of the property endangers the life,
limb, health, property, safety or welfare of the public or occupants of the
property;
   (B)   Unsightly. The condition of the property is unsightly in appearance
and is out of harmony or conformity with the maintenance standards of adjacent
or surrounding properties so as to cause a diminution of the enjoyment, use or
property values of such proximal properties;
   (C)   Property values. The condition of the property contributes to the
establishment of a prevalence of depreciated values, impaired investments or
social or economic maladjustments;
   (D)   General welfare. The condition of the property is otherwise
detrimental to the public health, safety or general welfare; or
   (E)   Public nuisance. The condition of the property constitutes a nuisance
or public nuisance as defined by Cal. Civil Code §§ 3479 or 3480, respectively.
(Ord. 572, passed 5-20-2008)
§ 8-1-5 SPECIFIC CONDITIONS CONSTITUTING PROPERTY NUISANCES.
   The following are expressly declared to be property nuisances.
   (A)   Substandard buildings or structures. Buildings or structures or
portions of such buildings or structures having one or more or a portion of the
following conditions:
      1.   Unoccupied. Buildings or structures that are not properly secured or
closed and are accessible to juveniles, transients or others not legally
entitled to such access;
      2.   Unfinished. Buildings or structures that are unfinished and that
have been in the course of construction or demolition for an unreasonable
period of time, but not less than six months; provided however, that such time
period may be extended if orderly progress is demonstrated to the building
official;
      3.   Inadequate sanitation.
         (a)   Lack of hot or cold running water to plumbing fixtures in a
dwelling unit or hotel;
         (b)   Lack of minimum amounts of natural light and ventilation
required by the building and safety codes;
         (c)   Room and space dimensions less than required by the building and
safety codes;
         (d)   Dampness of habitable rooms; or
         (e)   Violation of any applicable provisions of any health ordinances
as adopted by the city or by the county.
      4.   Structural hazards.
         (a)   Deteriorated or inadequate foundations;
         (b)   Defective, deteriorated or inadequate size flooring or floor
supports;
         (c)   Defective, deteriorated or inadequate size members of walls,
partitions or other vertical supports;
         (d)   Defective, deteriorated or inadequate size ceiling, roof or
other horizontal supports; or
         (e)   Defective, damaged or inadequately constructed fireplaces or
chimneys.
      5.   Inadequate or hazardous wiring.
         (a)   Lack of required electrical lighting or convenience outlets. In
existing residential occupancies, every habitable room is required to contain
at least two supplied outlets or one supplied outlet and one supplied electric
fixture. Every water closet compartment, bathroom, laundry room, furnace room
and public hallway in such occupancies is required to contain at least one
supplied electric fixture; or
         (b)   Inadequate or hazardous wiring, except that wiring that
conformed with applicable laws in effect at the time of installation and that
has been maintained in good and safe condition and is being used in a safe
manner shall not be prohibited by this provision.
      6.   Inadequate or faulty plumbing.
         (a)   Lack of plumbing fixtures required by this code; or
         (b)   Plumbing that has not been maintained in good condition or has
improper or excessive cross connections.
      7.   Inadequate or faulty mechanical equipment.
         (a)   Lack of safe, adequate heating facilities in a dwelling,
apartment house or hotel;
         (b)   Lack of or improper operation of, required ventilating
equipment; or
         (c)   Inadequate or faulty mechanical equipment, including vents,
except that which conformed with all applicable laws in effect at the time of
installation and which has been maintained in good and safe condition shall not
be prohibited by this provision.
      8.   Faulty weather protection.
         (a)   Lack of sound and effective roof covering;
         (b)   Lack of sound and effective exterior wall covering;
         (c)   Broken windows or doors;
         (d)   Deteriorated or ineffective waterproofing of foundation walls or
floors; or
         (e)   Unpainted buildings or structures or those where the condition
of the paint has deteriorated to an extent to allow dry rot, warping, termite
infestation, rust and appearance incompatible to the neighborhood and generally
acceptable standards.
      9.   Faulty materials of construction. Use of any faulty materials of
construction except those that are allowed or approved by the city and that
have been adequately maintained in good and safe condition;
      10.   Unsanitary. Buildings or structures having an accumulation of
vegetation, junk, dead organic matter, debris, garbage, offal, rat harborages,
stagnant water, or similar materials or conditions;
      11.   Hazardous. Any building or structure that is otherwise determined
to be unsafe for any reason;
      12.   Fire hazard. Any building, structure, device, apparatus, equipment,
combustible waste or vegetation that is maintained in such a condition as to
cause a fire or explosion or provide a ready fuel to augment the spread and
intensity of fire or explosion arising from any cause;
      13.   Inadequate fire structures or firefighting equipment. All buildings
or structures that are not provided with adequate ingress and egress facilities
or fire resistive construction or fire extinguishing system or equipment as
required by the building and safety codes, except those buildings or structures
that conformed with all applicable laws at the time of their construction, and
that provide adequate safe ingress and egress, and that have fire resistive
integrity and fire extinguishing systems and equipment that provide adequate
fire safety shall not be prohibited by this provision;
      14.   Improper occupancy. All buildings or portions of buildings occupied
or used for any purpose for which they were not designed or intended to be
used;
      15.   Substandard building or structure exteriors. Improperly maintained
building or structure exteriors, including building or structure exteriors, in
a state of neglect or damage, from fire, and other causes, or in need of
repairs such as painting, weatherproofing or insect extermination;
      16.   Substandard swimming pools. Maintaining a swimming pool in a manner
that permits the swimming pool to become a breeding place for mosquitoes or
other vectors. For the purposes of this subsection (A)16., SWIMMING POOL means
any public or private artificial basin, chamber, tank, or other structure
located above, at or below grade and used or intended to be used for wading,
swimming, diving, bathing or any other form of water recreation, therapy or
sport.
   (B)   Substandard property. Property or portions of property having one or
more of the following conditions:
      1.   Substandard buildings. Buildings that do not meet all applicable
requirements of the city’s building ordinances and regulations;
      2.   Overgrown and dead vegetation. Keeping of property with overgrown,
diseased, dead or decaying vegetation that constitutes a safety hazard,
including lawns, weeds, plants, shrubs, hedges and trees and including any such
vegetation within parkway areas of the property subject to utility and city
easements. Keeping of property with vegetation that presents a safety hazard or
restricts, impedes or obstructs the use of a public right-of-way, street,
easement, sidewalk or roadway; provided however, that overgrown or dead
vegetation, in side and rear yards not visible to the general public must be
determined a safety or health hazard or in violation of the city’s weed
abatement ordinances and regulations before enforcement is initiated. There
shall be a conclusive presumption that vegetation is overgrown under this
subsection (B) if the vegetation has not been properly cut and trimmed within
30 days after written notification that such vegetation is overgrown;
      3.   Equipment visible in front or side yards. The storage of any machine
or machinery, including any boat, vehicle, recreational vehicle, camper, all-
terrain vehicle or other similar equipment, shall be prohibited in front, side
or rear yards where visible from a street, public right-of-way or public place,
except the parking of vehicles as expressly permitted by provisions of the
city’s zoning ordinances or regulations;
      4.   Garbage cans. Garbage cans stored in front or side yards and visible
from public streets, except when placed in places of collection at the time
permitted and in full compliance with the provisions of this code;
      5.   Lack of landscaping. Landscaping not provided or maintained as
required by the city’s zoning ordinances or regulations;
      6.   Stagnant water or excavations. Existence of pooling of stagnant
water or any excavations that, after a rain, could cause pools or ponds of
stagnant water, excepting swimming pools, fountains or similar water features
that are well maintained;
      7.   Unsightly appearance. Any device, decoration, design, inscription,
fence, structure, clothesline or vegetation that is unsightly by reason of its
condition or its inappropriate location;
      8.   Human-made debris. Keeping of property, including any parkway, areas
with lumber, junk, trash, debris, salvage material, packing boxes; abandoned,
neglected and broken equipment, including visually damaged vehicles; abandoned,
discarded or unused objects of equipment, such as furniture, stoves,
refrigerators, freezers, cans, containers or boxes;
      9.   Organic debris. Keeping of property, including parkway areas, with
an accumulation of weeds, vegetation, junk, dead organic matter, debris,
garbage, offal, rat harborages, stagnant water, or similar materials or
conditions;
      10.   Fire hazard. Keeping of property with combustible waste or
vegetation that is in such condition as to cause a fire or explosion or to
provide a ready fuel to augment the spread and intensity of fire or explosion
arising from any cause;
      11.   Attractive nuisances. Allowing the existence of any attractive
nuisance. ATTRACTIVE NUISANCE includes, but is not limited to, abandoned,
broken or neglected equipment and machinery; hazardous pools, ponds and
excavations; abandoned wells, shafts or basements; abandoned refrigerators or
motor vehicles; any structurally unsound fence or structure; or any other
lumber, trash, garbage, rubbish, refuse, fence, debris or vegetation, when such
may prove a hazard for inquisitive minors;
      12.   Visual blight. Allowing property to become defective, unsightly or
in some other condition of deterioration or disrepair that may cause a
substantial decrease in the property values or similar detriment to surrounding
properties, or an adverse effect on the health, safety or welfare of the
citizens, residents and visitors of the city. Visual blight conditions include,
but are not limited to, the presence of any improvement, including, but not
limited to, buildings, garages, carports, wooden fences, block walls, roofs or
gutters, in which the condition of the patio, stucco, siding or other exterior
coating has become so deteriorated as to permit decay, excessive checking,
cracking or warping so as to render the improvement or property unsightly and
in a state of disrepair;
      13.   Accumulation of dirt. The accumulation of dirt, litter or debris in
vestibules, doorways or the adjoining sidewalks of commercial or industrial
buildings;
      14.   Unused signs. The maintenance of signs or sign faces relating to
uses no longer conducted or products no longer sold on vacant commercial
buildings more than 45 days after such building becomes vacant;
      15.   Deteriorated signs. The maintenance of signs in deteriorated
condition on commercial or industrial buildings;
      16.   Hazardous substances. The storage, discharge, holding, handling,
maintenance, or use of any hazardous or toxic substances, as defined by
applicable federal, state or local laws or regulations:
         (a)   In violation of federal, state or local laws or regulations;
         (b)   In such a manner to affect in any way air or water quality; or
         (c)   In such a manner as to create an identifiable risk of accidental
release of the substances which release might adversely affect the health or
safety of persons, damage property or adversely affect air or water quality.
      17.   Storage vessels. The failure to remove underground or aboveground
storage vessels or tanks within six months after the use of such tanks or
vessels ceases;
      18.   Zoning or Building Code violations. The maintenance of any
building, structure or property that has been constructed or is maintained in
violation of any specific requirement or prohibition applicable to the building
or structure or property, contained in the city’s building or zoning ordinances
or regulations, or any law or any ordinance of the city or state relating to
the condition, location, maintenance or construction of buildings and property;
and
      19.   Drainage problems. Land, the topography, geology or configuration
of which whether in natural state or as a result of grading operations,
excavation or fill, causes erosion, subsidence or surface water drainage
problems of such magnitude as to be injurious or potentially injurious to the
public health, safety and welfare or to adjacent properties.
   (C)   Abandoned, wrecked, dismantled or inoperative vehicles or parts
thereof. This section is adopted in addition to and in accordance with the
determination made by the state under Cal. Vehicle Code § 22660 that abandoned,
wrecked, dismantled or inoperative vehicles or parts thereof on private or
public property creates a condition tending to reduce the value of private
property, to promote blight and deterioration, to invite plundering, to create
fire hazards, to constitute an attractive nuisance creating a hazard to the
health and safety of minors, to create a harborage for rodents and insects, to
be injurious to the health, safety and general welfare, and therefore should be
declared and removed as public nuisances.
      1.   Violations.
         (a)   It is unlawful and an infraction for any person to abandon,
store, leave or permit the abandonment, storing or leaving of any licensed or
unlicensed vehicle or parts thereof which is abandoned, wrecked, dismantled or
inoperative upon any private property or public property, including highways,
within the city for a period in excess of 72 or more consecutive hours unless
an exception as set forth applies.
         (b)   It is unlawful and an infraction for any person to fail or
refuse to remove an abandoned, wrecked, dismantled or inoperative vehicle or
part thereof, or refuse to abate such nuisance when ordered to do so in
accordance with the abatement provisions of this chapter or state law, where
such state law is applicable.
      2.   Enforcement/authority of private contractor. The city staff person
designated to enforce this chapter may enter upon private or public property to
examine a vehicle, or parts thereof, obtain information as to the identity of
the vehicle, and remove or cause the removal of a vehicle or parts thereof
declared to be a public nuisance pursuant to this chapter. Where the City
Council has contracted with or granted a franchise to any person(s) to remove
vehicles pursuant to this chapter, such person(s) shall be authorized to enter
upon private property or public property to remove or cause the removal of a
vehicle or parts thereof declared to be a nuisance pursuant to this chapter.
      3.   Noticing requirements.
         (a)   A ten-day notice of intention to abate and remove the vehicle,
or parts thereof, as a public nuisance shall be mailed by registered or
certified mail to the owner of the land as shown on the last equalized
assessment roll and to the last registered and legal owner of record of the
vehicle, unless the vehicle is in such condition that identification numbers
are not available to determine ownership.
         (b)   A notice of intention to abate shall not be required if:
            (1)   The property owner and the owner of the vehicle have signed
releases authorizing removal and waive further interest in the vehicle or part
thereof; or
            (2)   All of the following conditions are satisfied:
               A.   The vehicle or part thereof is inoperable due to the
absence of a motor, transmission or wheels, and is incapable of being towed;
               B.   The vehicle or part thereof is valued at less than $300 by
the Police Chief or his or her designee; and
               C.   The Building Department has determined that the vehicle or
part thereof is a public nuisance presenting an immediate threat to public
health or safety; and
               D.   The property owner has signed a release authorizing the
removal and waiving further interest in the vehicle or part thereof.
         (c)   If a vehicle is removed pursuant to subsection (C)3.(b)(2) of
this section, prior to final disposition, a notice of intent to dispose of the
vehicle or parts thereof shall be mailed by registered or certified mail to the
last registered and legal owner of record of the vehicle. If the vehicle or
parts thereof is not claimed and removed from the scrap yard, automobile
dismantler’s yard or public disposal area where it is being stored within 12
days after the notice to dispose of vehicle is mailed, final disposition may
proceed.
      4.   Cost recovery. The administrative “enforcement costs” (see §
1-19-2 of this code) and the costs of abatement and removal of the vehicle or
parts thereof may be charged against the owner of the land on which the abated
vehicle or parts thereof is located, in accordance with the procedures set
forth in Title 1, Chapter 19 of this code. Unpaid charges shall be assessed
against the parcel of land pursuant to Cal. Gov’t Code §§ 25845 or 38773.5, and
shall be transmitted to the tax collector for collection. Said assessment shall
have the same priority as other county taxes. If it is determined at the public
hearing held pursuant to this chapter that the vehicle was placed on the land
without the consent of the landowner and that he or she has not subsequently
acquiesced in its presence, costs shall not be assessed against the property
upon which the vehicle is located, or otherwise sought from the landowner.
      5.   Administrative hearing procedure and appeal. The owner of the
vehicle or the land notified of the city’s intention to abate a vehicle or part
thereof as a public nuisance under this chapter may request an administrative
hearing, pursuant to §
1-18-10 of this code within ten days of the city’s mailing of the notice of
intention to abate and remove the vehicle, or part thereof. Except as expressly
provided below and in this chapter, all administrative procedures governing
requesting and conducting the administrative hearing on the question of
abatement and removal or disposal of a vehicle or parts thereof, shall be those
set forth in Title 1, Chapter 18 of this code. If at the conclusion of the
administrative hearing, the hearing officer finds that a vehicle or part
thereof has been abandoned, wrecked, dismantled, or is inoperative on public or
private property, the officer shall order the same removed from the property as
a public nuisance and disposed of as provided in this chapter. The order
requiring removal shall include a description of the vehicle, or part thereof,
and the correct identification number and license number, if available, written
findings explaining the officer’s conclusion and a determination of the
administrative enforcement costs and the cost of removal to be charged against
the owner of the parcel of land on which the vehicle, or part thereof, is
located. The hearing officer’s decision may be appealed within ten days of the
order.
      6.   Vehicle disposal. Five days after the hearing officer’s decision
declaring the vehicle or parts thereof to be a public nuisance or 15 days from
the date of mailing of notice of intention to abate, whichever date is later,
the vehicle or parts thereof may be disposed of by removal to a scrap yard or
automobile dismantler’s yard. After a vehicle has been removed, it shall not
thereafter be reconstructed or made operable unless it is a vehicle which
qualifies for either horseless carriage license plates or historical vehicle
license plates pursuant to Cal. Vehicle Code § 5004, in which case the vehicle
may be reconstructed or made operable.
      7.   Notice to Department of Motor Vehicles. Within five days after the
date of removal of the vehicle or parts thereof, notice shall be given to the
Department of Motor Vehicles by the persons authorized to remove the vehicle
identifying the vehicle or parts thereof removed. At the same time there shall
be transmitted to the Department of Motor Vehicles evidence of registration
available, including registration certificates, certificates of title and
license plates.
      8.   Exceptions. This section shall not apply to:
         (a)   A vehicle or part thereof, which is completely enclosed within a
building in a lawful manner where it is not visible from a highway or other
public or private property;
         (b)   A vehicle or part thereof, which is stored or parked in a lawful
manner on private property in connection with the business of a licensed
dismantler, licensed vehicle dealer or a junkyard; and
         (c)   Nothing in this section authorizes the maintenance of a public
or private nuisance as defined under provision of law other than Cal. Vehicle
Code Chapter 10 (commencing with § 22650) of Division 11 and this chapter.
      9.   Nonexclusivity of regulation. This chapter is not the exclusive
regulation of abandoned, wrecked, dismantled or inoperative vehicles within the
city and/or county. It shall supplement and be in addition to the other
regulatory codes, statutes and ordinances heretofore and hereafter enacted by
the city, county, the state or any other legal entity having jurisdiction.
(Ord. 572, passed 5-20-2008; Ord. 575, passed 8-5-2008)
§ 8-1-6 ABATEMENT OF UNLAWFUL PROPERTY NUISANCES.
   (A)   In addition to any other remedies available to the city by law,
administration of the provisions of this chapter, including abatement of
unlawful property nuisances pursuant to administrative authority, may be
accomplished consistent with procedures set forth in Title 1, Chapter 18,
Administrative Citations, of this code or consistent with the zoning
regulations of this code.
   (B)   Pursuant to Title 1, Chapter 19 of this code, the City Manager and his
or her designee(s) may cause the abatement of any nuisance, as defined in this
chapter, and may collect the expense of such abatement as provided therein.
   (C)   The provisions of this section shall not in any manner limit or
restrict the city or the City Attorney from enforcing this code or abating
property nuisances in any other manner provided by law.
(Ord. 572, passed 5-20-2008)
CHAPTER 2: WASTES AND RECYCLABLE MATERIALS
Section
8-2-1 General definitions
8-2-2 Purpose
8-2-3 Provisions of chapter deemed incorporated into solid waste service
agreements
8-2-4 Authority to establish administrative procedures and supplementary rules
and regulations
8-2-5 Right of further regulation reserved
8-2-6 Right to refuse to provide solid waste service
8-2-7 Public Works Department responsible for solid waste services and oversees
implementation of this chapter
8-2-8 Public Works Director duties
8-2-9 General sanitary condition required
8-2-10 Use of buildings, lots and premises as dumping grounds
8-2-11 Depositing animal carcasses and animal byproducts
8-2-12 Accumulation, collection, transportation, storage or depositing on
private or public property
8-2-13 Use of public refuse receptacles or public collection containers
8-2-14 Littering prohibited
8-2-15 Scavenging prohibited
8-2-16 Burying or burning prohibited; exception
8-2-17 Special arrangements and permits for disposal of certain items required
8-2-18 Right of the city to manage and control
8-2-19 Importation of waste to the city prohibited
8-2-20 Intermediate storage tank use prohibited
8-2-21 Contracts, permits, franchises, and licenses for collection and disposal
8-2-22 Application for contract, permit, franchise or license
8-2-23 Business license required
8-2-24 Unlawful to exceed designated charges and prices
8-2-25 Duties of city contract agents, licensees, franchisees and permittees
8-2-26 City collection and disposal service required
8-2-27 Unlawful to interfere or hinder
8-2-28 Single-family residential collection services
8-2-29 Single-family residential dwelling unit collection service frequency
8-2-30 Single-family residential dwelling unit collection containers
8-2-31 Multi-family residential, commercial, industrial, institutional and
governmental collection services
8-2-32 Multi-family residential, commercial, industrial, institutional and
governmental collection frequency
8-2-33 Multi-family residential, commercial, industrial, institutional and
governmental collection containers
8-2-34 Waivers for generators
8-2-35 Requirements for commercial edible food generators
8-2-36 Requirements for food recovery organizations, services and regional
agencies
8-2-37 Requirements for haulers and facility operators
8-2-38 Self-hauler requirements
8-2-39 Containers for new construction
8-2-40 Solid waste transportation and cleanup responsibility
8-2-41 Unauthorized use of collection containers; temporary collection service
locations
8-2-42 Disposal by tree surgeons, professional tree trimmers, and landscaping
service providers
8-2-43 Right to enter private property for the purpose of collection
8-2-44 Misrepresentation in application or service agreement
8-2-45 Customer responsibility
8-2-46 Forwarding unpaid service balances
8-2-47 Discontinuance of service by customer
8-2-48 Service charges
8-2-49 Free service prohibited
8-2-50 Application of utility bill payments
8-2-51 Mandatory solid waste source reduction, diversion and recycling
8-2-52 Mandatory recycling for single-family dwelling units
8-2-53 Mandatory recycling for multi-family, commercial, industrial,
institutional and governmental units
8-2-54 Source reduction and recycling plans required
8-2-55 Mandatory recycling of construction and demolition waste
8-2-56 Collection of recyclable materials by contract, license, franchise or
permit allowed
8-2-57 Emergency removal of solid wastes
8-2-58 Commercial and industrial material recovery facilities and recycling
stations
8-2-59 Commercial and industrial construction rubbish facilities
8-2-60 Commercial and industrial household hazardous waste facilities
8-2-61 Commercial and industrial hazardous waste facilities
8-2-62 Commercial and industrial infectious waste and liquid industrial waste
facilities
8-2-63 Commercial and industrial green waste facilities
8-2-64 Indemnification, insurance and bonds
8-2-65 Independent contractor
8-2-66 Contracts, franchises, licenses or permits not assignable
8-2-67 Revocation of city contract, franchise, license or permit
8-2-68 Fees, franchises, permits and licenses
8-2-69 Compliance with CalGreen recycling requirements
8-2-70 Water efficient landscape and irrigation ordinance requirements
8-2-71 Procurement requirements for jurisdiction departments, direct service
providers and vendors
8-2-72 Right of entry for inspection and records examination
8-2-73 Violations and enforcement
8-2-74 Severability
8-2-75 Penalty
§ 8-2-1 GENERAL DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   ACCUMULATE. To collect, gather or pile up any solid waste on any premises in
the corporate limits of the City of Livingston.
   ANIMAL. Any equine or bovine animal, goat, sheep, swine, domestic cat, dog,
poultry or other domesticated beast or bird. The term shall include wild or
game animals whenever necessary to effectively control or eradicate diseases.
   ANIMAL BYPRODUCTS. The bones, fat, grease, meats and blood waste generated
by the processing of meat for animal or human consumption at locations
including, but not limited to, butchering facilities, slaughterhouses, markets,
restaurants, processing facilities or packaging plants.
   BLACK CONTAINER. Any bin, can, receptacle or any other type of receptacle or
depository designated by the city or a city-designated waste removal company
for the deposit, storage and collection of garbage not designated for
collection in the green container.
   BROKER.
      1.   Any person owning, managing or operating a business to accumulate,
collect, handle, transport or dispose of offal, slop, swill, debris, refuse,
garbage, rubbish, construction rubbish, hazardous waste, household hazardous
waste, infectious wastes, industrial liquid waste, recycling materials, green
wastes or any other solid waste imported, produced or found within the city
limits; or
      2.   Any person engaged in the business of buying meat obtained from a
dead animal and reselling such meat in an uncooked form.
   CITY. The City of Livingston.
   CITY COUNCIL. The City Council of the City of Livingston.
   CITY MANAGER. The City of Livingston City Manager, his or her designee as
well as the employees working under his or her supervision.
   COLLECTION. The operation of gathering together and transporting solid waste
to the point of disposal.
   COLLECTOR.
      1.   A person accumulating, handling and transporting or delivering
offal, slop, swill, debris, refuse, garbage, rubbish, construction rubbish,
hazardous waste, household hazardous waste, infectious wastes, industrial
liquid waste, recycling materials, green wastes or any other solid waste
imported, produced or found within the city limits; or
      2.   Any person engaged in the business of collecting dead animals.
   COMMERCIAL BUSINESS or COMMERCIAL. A firm, partnership, proprietorship,
joint-stock company, corporation or association, whether for-profit or
nonprofit, strip mall, industrial facility, or a multi-family residential
dwelling, or as otherwise defined in Cal. Code of Regulations Title 14, § 18982
(a)(6). A multi-family residential dwelling that consists of fewer than five
units is not a COMMERCIAL BUSINESS for purposes of implementing this chapter.
    COMMERCIAL EDIBLE FOOD GENERATOR. A tier one or a tier two COMMERCIAL
EDIBLE FOOD GENERATOR as defined in this chapter or as otherwise defined in 14
Cal. Code of Regulations Title 14, § 18982(a)(73) and (a)(74). For the purposes
of this definition, food recovery organizations and food recovery services are
not COMMERCIAL EDIBLE FOOD GENERATORS pursuant to Cal. Code of Regulations
Title 14, § 18982(a)(7).
   COMPLIANCE REVIEW. A review of records by the City of Livingston to
determine compliance with this chapter.
   COMMUNITY COMPOSTING. Any activity that composts green material,
agricultural material, food material and vegetative food material, alone or in
combination, and the total amount of feedstock and compost on-site at any one
time does not exceed 100 cubic yards and 750 square feet, as specified in Cal.
Code of Regulations Title 14 § 17855(a)(4); or, as otherwise defined by CCR
Title 14, § 18982(a)(8).
   COMPOST. Holds the same meaning as in Cal. Code of Regulations Title 14, §
17896.2(a)(4), which stated, as of the effective date of this chapter, that
COMPOST means the product resulting from the controlled biological
decomposition of organic solid wastes that are source separated from the
municipal solid waste stream, or which are separated at a centralized facility.
   COMPOSTABLE PLASTIC. Plastic materials that meet the ASTM D6400 standard for
compostability, or as otherwise described in Cal. Code of Regulations Title 14,
§ 18984.2(a)(1)(C).
   CONTAINER CONTAMINATION or CONTAMINATED CONTAINER. A container, regardless
of color, that contains prohibited container contaminants, or as otherwise
defined in Cal. Code of Regulations Title 14, § 18982(a)(55).
   CONSTRUCTION WASTE or DEMOLITION WASTE. Solid waste material resulting from
building construction, alteration, repair, demolition, including brick, stone,
cement, lumber, plaster, and drywall; packaging or rubble resulting from
construction, remodeling, repair and demolition operations on pavements or
residential, commercial, industrial, institutional and governmental buildings
and other structures.
   CONTAINER. Residential, commercial, industrial, institutional and government
cans, bins, dumpsters approved and provided by the city, city contract agent,
licensee, franchisee or permittee for the accumulation and collection of
garbage, refuse, rubbish, hazardous waste, household hazardous waste,
construction rubbish, recyclable materials, green waste or any other solid
wastes from any premises within the city.
   CONTRACT AGENT. If the City Council determines to award such a contract to a
private business, an agent or employee of an agent of the city, or any person
thereof with whom the city shall have duly contracted, under the terms
hereinafter set out in the provisions of this chapter, and under the provisions
of the laws of the state, with amendments thereto, to accumulate, collect,
handle, transport, store or dispose of garbage, refuse, rubbish, construction
rubbish, hazardous waste, household hazardous waste, infectious waste,
industrial fluids, recyclable materials, green waste and all other solid waste.
   COUNTY. The County of Merced.
   CUSTOMER or CONSUMER. Each owner and/or occupant of each building, lot or
parcel in the city from which refuse, rubbish, garbage, recyclable materials or
green waste are generated or which refuse, rubbish, garbage, recyclable
materials, or green waste are required to be collected pursuant to this
chapter.
   DEAD ANIMAL. The carcass, or any part thereof, of a bovine animal, goat,
sheep, swine, domestic cat, dog, poultry or other domesticated beast or bird.
The term shall include wild or game animals.
   DESIGNATED SOURCE SEPARATED ORGANIC WASTE FACILITY. As defined in Cal. Code
of Regulations Title 14, § 18982(14.5), a solid waste facility that accepts a
source separated organic waste collection stream as defined in Cal. Code of
Regulations Title 14, § 17402(a)(26.6) and complies with one of the
requirements according to facility type in Cal. Code of Regulations Title 14,
§§ 18982(a)(14.5)(A) through 18982(a)(14.5)(B).
   DESIGNEE.
      1.   An entity that the city contracts with or otherwise arranges to
carry out any of the city’s responsibilities of this chapter.
      2.   A DESIGNEE may be a government entity, a hauler, a private entity or
a combination of those entities.
   DEVELOPMENT. Any new or existing project, facility or building, the users of
which generate waste within and/or on the property.
   DISABLED CUSTOMER.
      1.   Anyone who has applied at the city and has been designated as a
DISABLED CUSTOMER by the city, because he or she has provided adequate
documentation and has been determined by the city as meeting one or more of the
following criteria:
         (a)   Has been found to be permanently handicapped by the California
Department of Motor Vehicles;
         (b)   Has been found to be totally and permanently disabled by the
Social Security Administration under any of their programs including, but not
limited to, the Social Security Disability Insurance Program under Title II of
the Social Security Act, being 42 U.S.C. §§ 401 et seq., and including, but not
limited to, the supplemental security income program under Title XVI of the
Social Security Act, being 42 U.S.C. §§ 1381 through 1385;
         (c)   Has been determined to be permanently disabled by any branch of
the military or veterans’ administration; or
         (d)   The City Manager or his or her designee has determined that the
individual is disabled based on the statement of a licensed physician.
      2.   No customer shall be designated as a DISABLED CUSTOMER if there is
an able bodied person residing at the customer’s house.
   DISPOSAL. The complete operation of transporting, treating and disposing of
accumulations of garbage, refuse, rubbish, construction rubbish, hazardous
waste, household hazardous waste, infectious waste, liquid industrial waste,
recyclable materials and green waste and of the product or residue arising from
such treatment.
   DUMP. To discard or relinquish control or possession of any waste, and
includes any act of littering.
   DWELLING UNIT. A residential, single-family dwelling and each separate
apartment dwelling of a duplex, triplex or fourplex up to and including four
apartments, including upstairs, basement, garage or detached apartment or
housing units. The term does not include commercial units, industrial units or
institutional users.
   EDIBLE FOOD. Food intended for human consumption, or as otherwise defined in
14 Cal. Code of Regulations Title 14, § 18982(a)(18). Nothing in this chapter
or in Cal. Code of Regulations, Title 14, Division 7, Chapter 12 requires or
authorizes the recovery of edible food that does not meet the food safety
requirements of the Cal. Retail Food Code.
   ENFORCEMENT ACTION. An action of the city to address non-compliance with
this chapter, including, but not limited to, issuing administrative citations,
fines, penalties or using other remedies.
   ENFORCEMENT OFFICIAL. The City Manager or his or her designee, except as
otherwise provided herein, shall administer, implement and enforce the
provisions of this chapter.
   EXCLUDED WASTE. Hazardous substance, hazardous waste, infectious waste,
designated waste, volatile, corrosive, medical waste, infectious, regulated
radioactive waste and toxic substances or material that facility operator(s),
which receive materials from the city and its generators, reasonably believe(s)
would, as a result of or upon acceptance, transfer, processing or disposal, be
a violation of local, state or federal law, regulation or ordinance, including
land use restrictions or conditions, waste that cannot be disposed of in Class
III landfills or accepted at the facility by permit conditions, waste that in
the city’s or its designee’s reasonable opinion would present a significant
risk to human health or the environment, cause a nuisance or otherwise create
or expose the city or its designee to potential liability; but not including de
minimis volumes or concentrations of waste of a type and amount normally found
in single-family or multi-family solid waste after implementation of programs
for the safe collection, processing, recycling, treatment and disposal of
batteries and paint in compliance with Cal. Public Resources Code §§ 41500 and
41802. EXCLUDED WASTE does not include used motor oil and filters, household
batteries, universal wastes and/or latex paint when such materials are defined
as allowable materials for collection through the city’s collection programs
and the generator or customer has properly placed the materials for collection
pursuant to instructions provided by the city or its designee for collection
services.
   FACILITY. Something that is installed or established to serve a particular
purpose.
   FOOD DISTRIBUTOR. A company that distributes food to entities including, but
not limited to, supermarkets and grocery stores, or as otherwise defined in
Cal. Code of Regulations Title 14, § 18982(a)(22).
   FOOD FACILITY. Holds the same meaning as in Cal. Health and Safety Code §
113789.
   FOOD RECOVERY. Actions to collect and distribute food for human consumption
that otherwise would be disposed, or as otherwise defined in Cal. Code of
Regulations Title 14, § 18982(a)(24).
   FOOD RECOVERY ORGANIZATION. 
      1.   An entity that engages in the collection or receipt of edible food
from commercial edible food generators and distributes that edible food to the
public for food recovery either directly or through other entities or as
otherwise defined in Cal. Code of Regulations Title 14, § 18982(a)(25),
including, but not limited to:
         (a)   A food bank as defined in Cal. Health and Safety Code § 113783;
         (b)   A nonprofit charitable organization as defined in Cal. Health
and Safety Code § 113841; and
         (c)   A nonprofit charitable temporary food facility as defined in
Cal. Health and Safety Code § 113842.
      2.   A food recovery organization is not a commercial edible food
generator for the purposes of this chapter and implementation of Cal. Code of
Regulations, Title 14, Division 7, Chapter 12 pursuant to Cal. Code of
Regulations Title 14, § 18982(a)(7).
   FOOD RECOVERY SERVICE. A person or entity that collects and transports
edible food from a commercial edible food generator to a food recovery
organization or other entities for food recovery, or as otherwise defined in
Cal. Code of Regulations Title 14, § 18982(a)(26). A FOOD RECOVERY SERVICE is
not a commercial edible food generator for the purposes of this chapter and
implementation of Cal. Code of Regulations Title 14, Division 7, Chapter 12
pursuant to Cal. Code of Regulations Title 14, § 18982(a)(7).
   FOOD SCRAPS. All food such as, but not limited to, fruits, vegetables, meat,
poultry, seafood, shellfish, bones, rice, beans, pasta, bread, cheese and
eggshells. FOOD SCRAPS excludes fats, oils and grease when such materials are
source separated from other FOOD SCRAPS.
   FOOD SERVICE PROVIDER. An entity primarily engaged in providing food
services to institutional, governmental, commercial, or industrial locations of
others based on contractual arrangements with these types of organizations, or
as otherwise defined in Cal. Code of Regulations Title 14, § 18982(a)(27).
   FOOD SOILED PAPER. Compostable paper material that has come in contact with
food or liquid, such as, but not limited to, compostable paper plates, paper
coffee cups, napkins and pizza boxes.
   FOOD WASTE. Food scraps, food-soiled paper and compostable plastics.
   GREEN CONTAINER. Any bin, can receptacle or cart that has the same meaning
as in Cal. Code of Regulations Title 14, § 18982.2(a)(29), or an existing
onsite container labeled as “organics”, and shall be used for the purpose of
storage and collection of source separated green container organic waste.
   GREEN WASTE. Cut shrubbery, trees, shrubbery trimmings, dead flowers, grass
cuttings, dead plants, grass clippings, weeds, vines, brush, leaves, dead trees
or branches thereof, chips, shavings, sawdust, straw, and other similar organic
material which may be effectively composted.
   GREEN WASTE COLLECTION PROGRAM. The program by which the city collects green
waste from residential, commercial, industrial, institutional and governmental
customers of garbage collection services. The collection of green waste shall
be by a service schedule which may be separate from those for the pick up of
garbage and recyclable materials.
   GROCERY STORE. A store primarily engaged in the retail sale of canned food;
dry goods; fresh fruits and vegetables; fresh meats, fish, and poultry; and any
area that is not separately owned within the store where the food is prepared
and served, including a bakery, deli, and meat and seafood departments, or as
otherwise defined in Cal. Code of Regulations Title 14, § 18982(a)(30).
   HANDLING. The transporting, transferring, pumping, processing, storing, or
packaging of waste referred to in this chapter.
   HAULER ROUTE. The designated itinerary or sequence of stops for each segment
of the city’s collection service area, or as otherwise defined in Cal. Code of
Regulations Title 14, § 18982(a)(31.5).
   HAZARDOUS MATERIAL. Any material that, because of its quantity,
concentration or physical or chemical characteristics, poses a significant
present or potential hazard to human health and safety or to the environment if
released into the workplace or the environment. HAZARDOUS MATERIALS include,
but are not limited to, hazardous substances, hazardous waste, and any material
that a handler or the administering agency has a reasonable basis for believing
that it would be injurious to the health and safety of persons or harmful to
the environment if released into the workplace or the environment.
   HAZARDOUS SUBSTANCE. Includes, but is not limited to, any HAZARDOUS
SUBSTANCE as that term is defined under Cal. Health and Safety Code §§ 25281
(h), 25501(n), and pursuant to 42 U.S.C. § 9601(14); any HAZARDOUS WASTE as
that term is defined under 42 U.S.C. § 6903(5), and under Cal. Health and
Safety Code § 25501(n); any HAZARDOUS MATERIAL, as that term is defined under
Cal. Health and Safety Code § 25501(n); any chemical which the Governor of
California has identified as a chemical known to cause cancer or reproductive
toxicity, pursuant to Cal. Health and Safety Code § 25249.8; and any crude oil
or refined or unrefined petroleum product, or any fraction or derivative
thereof, and any asbestos or asbestos containing material. The term HAZARDOUS
SUBSTANCE includes any amendments to the above referenced statutes and
regulations.
   HAZARDOUS WASTE.
      1.   Any substance which has been determined to be a hazardous substance
such that it cannot be disposed of in the county’s landfill and is required by
county ordinance, state law, federal law or by county, state or federal
regulations to be transported to a specialized disposal facility set aside for
hazardous waste. HAZARDOUS WASTES include, but are not limited to, household
hazardous wastes;
      2.   A waste, or combination of wastes, which because of its quality,
concentration, or physical, chemical, or infectious characteristics may do
either of the following:
         (a)   Cause, or significantly contribute to, an increase in mortality
or an increase in serious irreversible, or incapacitating reversible, illness;
or
         (b)   Pose a substantial present or potential hazard to human health
or environment when improperly treated, stored, transported or disposed of, or
otherwise managed.
      3.   All waste defined or characterized as hazardous waste by the federal
law in Cal. Health and Safety Code § 25117, as amended, and all future
amendments thereto, or regulations promulgated hereunder; or
      4.   All waste defined by agencies of the state (including, without
limitation, the Department of Health Services and the California Waste
Management Board) having jurisdiction over hazardous waste generated by
facilities within such state, provided that the term HAZARDOUS WASTE:
         (a)   Is intended to mean and include those substances that are not
normally expected to be disposed of by generally accepted sanitary landfill
disposal methods;
         (b)   Shall include radioactive wastes; and
         (c)   Shall be construed to have the broader, more encompassing
definition where there exists a conflict in the definitions employed by two or
more governmental agencies having concurrent or overlapping jurisdiction over
hazardous waste.
      5.   All infectious waste as defined in this chapter. All infectious
waste shall also be considered HAZARDOUS WASTE and subject to all federal,
state, county and city hazardous waste and infectious waste laws and
regulations.
   HIGH DIVERSION ORGANIC WASTE PROCESSING FACILITY. A facility that is in
compliance with the reporting requirements of Cal. Code of Regulations Title
14, § 18815.5(d) and meets or exceeds an annual average mixed waste organic
content recovery rate of 50% between January 1, 2022, and December 31, 2024,
and 75% after January 1, 2025, as calculated pursuant to Cal. Code of
Regulations Title 14, § 18815.5(e) for organic waste received from the mixed
waste organic collection stream as defined in Cal. Code of Regulations Title
14, § 17402(a)(11.5); or, as otherwise defined in Cal. Code of Regulations
Title 14, § 18982(a)(33).
   HOUSEHOLD HAZARDOUS WASTE. Any waste produced by a household that contains
an ingredient listed in the 40 C.F.R. parts 261.33(e) or 261.33(f), or that
exhibits characteristics of ignitability, corrodibility, reactivity (e.g., an
oxidizer) toxicity, or infectiousness. Empty containers retaining residues of
HOUSEHOLD HAZARDOUS WASTE include, but are not limited to, each of the
following: household cleaners; pesticides; batteries; wood preservatives;
automobile polish; furniture polish; fertilizers; automotive products;
adhesives and sealants; paints and coatings; photographic chemicals; swimming
pool chemicals; and used oils.
   INDUSTRIAL LIQUID WASTE. Any and all liquid or waterborne waste from an
industrial or commercial process.
   INDUSTRIAL UNITS. Any business establishment engaged in processing,
manufacturing, slaughtering, warehousing, construction and/or demolition or
other similar activity.
   INFECTIOUS WASTE. Solid waste capable of producing an infection or
pertaining to or characterized by the presence of pathogens or medical waste
regulated by the Cal. Health and Safety Code §§ 117600 et seq. It includes, but
is not limited to, certain wastes generated from dead animals or by medical
practitioners, hospitals, nursing homes, medical testing labs, mortuaries,
taxidermists, veterinarians, veterinary hospitals, medical testing labs,
slaughterhouses, rendering plants, receiving plants, protein reduction plants,
tallow plants, and any waste that includes animal wastes, feathers, hides,
fats, grease, bone, bone meal, flesh, blood, feces, manure, night soil, meat,
flesh, hair, animal byproducts or body parts from animal processing plants,
slaughterhouses, rendering plants, receiving plants, tallow plants, protein
reduction facilities or other similar facilities. All INFECTIOUS WASTE shall
also be considered HAZARDOUS WASTE and subject to all federal, state, county
and city hazardous waste laws and regulations.
   INSPECTION. A site visit where the city reviews records, containers and an
entity’s collection, handling, recycling or landfill disposal of organic waste
or edible food handling to determine if the entity is complying with
requirements set forth in this chapter, or as otherwise defined in Cal. Code of
Regulations Title 14, § 18982(a)(35).
   INTERMEDIATE STORAGE TANK. Any stationary tank used for the temporary
storage of hazardous and nonhazardous substances which will be transported off
site to a disposal site for subsequent treatment or disposal.
   LARGE EVENT. An event, including, but not limited to, a sporting event or a
flea market, that charges an admission price, or is operated by a local agency,
and serves an average of more than 2,000 individuals per day of operation of
the event, at a location that includes, but is not limited to, a public,
nonprofit, or privately owned park, parking lot, golf course, street system or
other open space when being used for an event, as defined in Cal. Code of
Regulations Title 14, § 18982(a)(38).
   LARGE VENUE. A permanent venue facility that annually seats or serves an
average of more than 2,000 individuals within the grounds of the facility per
day of operation of the venue facility. For purposes of this chapter and
implementation of Cal. Code of Regulations Title 14, Division 7, Chapter 12, a
venue facility includes, but is not limited to, a public, nonprofit or
privately owned or operated stadium, hall, conference or civic center, airport,
performing arts center, museum, theater or other public attraction facility.
For purposes of this chapter and implementation of Cal. Code of Regulations
Title 14, Division 7, Chapter 12, a site under common ownership or control that
includes more than one LARGE VENUE that is contiguous with other LARGE VENUES
in the site, is a single LARGE VENUE, as defined in Cal. Code of Regulations
Title 14, § 18982(a)(39).
   LOCAL EDUCATION AGENCY. A school district, charter school or county office
of education that is not subject to the control of city or county regulations
related to solid waste, or as otherwise defined in Cal. Code of Regulations
Title 14, § 18982(a)(40).
   MULTI-FAMILY RESIDENTIAL DWELLING UNITS. A permanent building containing two
or more dwelling units including, but not limited to, apartments, condominiums
and mobilehome parks.
   MWELO. The Model Water Efficient Landscape Ordinance (MWELO), Cal. Code of
Regulations Title 23, Division 2, Chapter 2.7.
   NON-COMPOSTABLE PAPER. Includes, but is not limited to, paper that is coated
in a plastic and/or metallic material that will not breakdown in the composting
process, or as otherwise defined in Cal. Code of Regulations Title 14, § 18982
(a)(41).
   NON-LOCAL ENTITY. The following entities are not subject to the city’s
enforcement authority, or as otherwise defined in Cal. Code of Regulations
Title 14, § 18982(a)(42):
      1.   Special district(s) located within the boundaries of the city,
including Livingston Union School District; and
      2.   State agencies located within the boundaries of the city, including
Caltrans, Cal Fire or Merced County facilities.
   NON-ORGANIC RECYCLABLES. Non-putrescible and non-hazardous recyclable wastes
including but not limited to bottles, cans, metals, plastics and glass, or as
otherwise defined in Cal. Code of Regulations Title 14, §18982(a)(43).
   NOTICE OF VIOLATION (NOV). A notice that a violation has occurred that
includes a compliance date to avoid an action to seek penalties, or as
otherwise defined in Cal. Code of Regulations Title 14, § 18982(a)(45) or
further explained in Cal. Code of Regulations Title 14, § 18995.4.
   OFFAL. The waste or byproduct of a process.
   ORGANIC WASTE. Solid wastes containing material originated from living
organisms and their metabolic waste products, including, but not limited to,
food, green material, landscape and pruning waste, organic textiles and
carpets, lumber, wood, paper products, printing and writing paper, manure,
biosolids, digestate and sludges or as otherwise defined in Cal. Code of
Regulations Title 14, § 18982(a)(46). Biosolids and digestate are as defined by
Cal. Code of Regulations Title 14, § 18982(a).
   ORGANIC WASTE GENERATOR. A person or entity that is responsible for the
initial creation of organic waste, or as otherwise defined in Cal. Code of
Regulations Title 14, § 18982(a)(48).
   PAPER PRODUCTS. Includes, but is not limited to, paper janitorial supplies,
cartons, wrapping, packaging, file folders, hanging files, corrugated boxes,
tissue and toweling, or as otherwise defined in Cal. Code of Regulations Title
14, § 18982(a)(51).
   PERMITTEE, LICENSEE or FRANCHISEE. Any person or solid waste enterprise who
accumulates, collects, transports, stores or disposes of any form of garbage,
refuse, rubbish, hazardous waste, household hazardous waste, infectious waste,
liquid industrial waste, construction rubbish, recyclable materials, green
waste or any other solid waste, for compensation pursuant to a City Council
granted permit, license, contract or franchise issued under this chapter.
   PERSON. Individuals, companies, firms, corporations, partnerships, trusts,
associations or combinations thereof.
   PREMISES. Any single-family residential, multi-family residential,
industrial, commercial, retail, institutional or governmental properties of any
kind, or any other dwelling, building or vacant property where solid waste is
generated or accumulates for disposal.
   PRINTING AND WRITING PAPERS. As defined in Cal. Code of Regulations Title
14, § 18982(a)(54).
   PROHIBITED CONTAINER CONTAMINANTS. Includes the following:
      1.   Discarded materials placed in the green container that are not
identified as acceptable source separated green container organic waste for the
city’s green container; and
      2.   Excluded waste placed in any container.
   PUBLIC HIGHWAY. Any public street, alley, road, walkway, public place or
highway open to and used by the traveling public and not used as a private
right-of-way.
   RECEIVING PLANT. A premises to which dead animals are delivered for the
purpose of obtaining animal wastes, feathers, hides, fats, grease, bone, bone
meal, flesh, blood, feces, manure, night soil, meat, flesh, hair, animal
byproducts or other animal body parts or for the purpose of selling or
delivering the dead animals or parts thereof to a rendering plant, tallow plant
or protein reduction facility.
   RECOVERABLE MATERIAL. Material which is capable of being retrieved or
diverted from disposal or transformation for the purpose of recycling, reuse
and composting. RECOVERABLE MATERIAL does not include those materials generated
from and reused on site for manufacturing purposes.
   RECYCLABLE MATERIAL. Solid waste material such as newspapers, printed matter
paper products, aluminum cans, other cans, glass, beverage containers, bottles,
plastic containers, pasteboard, corrugated cardboard and other items that
through a process of collecting, sorting, cleansing, treating and
reconstituting is returned to the economic mainstream in the form of raw
material for new, reused, remanufactured, reprocessed or reconstituted products
which meet the quality standards necessary to be used in the marketplace.
   RECOVERED ORGANIC WASTE PRODUCTS. Products made from California, landfill-
diverted recovered organic waste processed in a permitted or otherwise
authorized facility, or as otherwise defined in Cal. Code of Regulations Title
14, § 18982(a)(60).
   RECOVERY. Any activity or process described in Cal. Code of Regulations
Title 14, §18983.1(b), or as otherwise defined in Cal. Code of Regulations
Title 14, § 18982(a)(49).
   RECYCLABLE MATERIAL. Solid waste material such as newspapers, printed-matter
paper products, aluminum cans, other cans, glass, beverage containers, bottles,
plastic containers, pasteboard, corrugated cardboard and other items that
through a process of collecting, sorting, cleansing, treating and
reconstituting is returned to the economic mainstream in the form of raw
material for new, reused, remanufactured, reprocessed or reconstituted products
which meet the quality standards necessary to be used in the marketplace.
   RECYCLED CONTENT PAPER. Paper products and printing and writing paper that
consists of at least 30%, by fiber weight, postconsumer fiber or as otherwise
defined in Cal. Code of Regulations Title 14, § 18982(a)(61).
   RECYCLING. The process of collecting, sorting, treating, and reconstituting
materials that would otherwise become solid waste, and returning them to the
economic mainstream as defined in the Cal. Public Resources Code § 40180.
   RECYCLING PROGRAM. The program by which the city collects recyclable
materials from residential, commercial, industrial, institutional and
governmental customers of garbage, refuse, rubbish or green waste collection
services. The collection of recyclable materials shall be by a service schedule
that may be separate from those for the pick up of garbage, refuse, rubbish and
green waste.
   RECYCLING STATION. Any property and/or facility that is used or designated
to be used at any time for the recycling of any or all recyclable materials
including green waste materials.
   REFUSE. All solid waste, including, but not limited to, all “rubbish”,
“construction rubbish”, “recyclable material”, “garbage”, “green waste”, and
“household hazardous waste” as defined in this chapter or as defined in Cal.
Public Resources Code §§ 40191 and 49503.
   RENDERING PLANT, TALLOW PLANT, PROTEIN REDUCTION FACILITY OR SIMILAR
FACILITY. A premises at which dead animals are processed into hides, meat, bone
meal, meat meal or inedible fats. All animal byproducts from rendering plants,
tallow plants, protein reduction facilities are considered to be “infectious
waste” and “hazardous waste”.
   REGIONAL AGENCY. As defined in Cal. Public Resources Code § 40181.
   REMOTE MONITORING. The use of the internet of things (IoT) and/or wireless
electronic devices to visualize and providing photo documentation of the
contents of containers, for purposes of identifying the quantity of materials
in containers (level of fill) and/or presence of prohibited container
contaminants.
   RESIDENTIAL CUSTOMER. The owner and/or occupant of a one-family dwelling
unit and/or multi-family dwelling units.
   RESIDENTIAL UNITS. All dwelling units including one-family residential
dwelling units, multi-family residential units, apartments, condominiums,
planned unit developments or any other dwelling units occupied or used by
people for living, sleeping and other domestic activities.
   RESTAURANT. An establishment primarily engaged in the retail sale of food
and drinks for on-premises or immediate consumption, or as otherwise defined in
Cal. Code of Regulations Title 14, § 18982(a)(64).
   ROUTE REVIEW. A visual inspection of containers along a hauler route for the
purpose of determining container contamination and may include mechanical
inspection methods such as the use of cameras, or as otherwise defined in Cal.
Code of Regulations Title 14, § 18982(a)(65).
   RUBBISH. All solid waste material, both combustible and noncombustible,
consisting of waste wood, wood products, mattresses, rubber, plastics,
clothing, rags, shoes, boots, carpets, linoleum, oil cloth, waste pulp, glass,
crockery, bottles, shelves, cans, wire, products used for packaging or
wrapping, building and yard sweepings, old metals, mineral or metallic
substances, earth, rock, ashes, cinders, water heaters, furnaces, furniture,
washers, dryers, refrigerators, televisions, radios, or other waste material or
other discarded, abandoned or useless matter which by its presence or
accumulation may injuriously affect the health, comfort, safety or convenience
of any portion of the community by increasing the danger of disease, injury or
damage to person or property, or hazard by fire; and shall include all other
organic or inorganic matter rejected, abandoned or discarded by the owners or
producers thereof as useless or offensive. RUBBISH does not include wastes and
other materials, including, but not limited to, objects not easily moved by one
man, such as discarded automobile bodies, other bulky or heavy objects, manure
or offal or waste from animal yards.
   SB 1383. Senate Bill 1383 of 2016, approved by the Governor on September 19,
2016, which added §§ 39730.5, 39730.6, 39730.7 and 39730.8 to the Cal. Health
and Safety Code, and added Chapter 13.1 (commencing with § 42652) to Part 3 of
Division 30 of the Cal. Public Resources Code, establishing methane emissions
reduction targets in a statewide effort to reduce emissions of short-lived
climate pollutants as amended, supplemented, superseded, and replaced from time
to time.
   SB 1383 REGULATIONS. The short-lived climate pollutants; organic waste
reduction regulations developed by CalRecycle and adopted in 2020 that created
Cal. Code of Regulations Title 14, Division 7, Chapter 12 and amended portions
of regulations of Cal. Code of Regulations Title 14 and Cal. Code of
Regulations Title 27.
   SCAVENGE. The unauthorized removal of any recyclable materials or solid
waste without a permit under this chapter.
   SELF-HAULER. A person who hauls solid waste, organic waste or recyclable
material he or she has generated to a collection site or facility. SELF-HAULER
also includes a person who back-hauls waste, or as otherwise defined in Cal.
Code of Regulations Title 14, § 18982(a)(66). “Back-haul” means generating and
transporting organic waste to a destination owned and operated by the generator
using the generator’s own employees and equipment, or as otherwise defined in
Cal. Code of Regulations Title 14, § 18982(a)(66)(A).
   SINGLE-FAMILY. Of, from or pertaining to any residential premises with fewer
than five units.
   SLAUGHTER. Slaughter for the purpose of processing for human consumption.
   SOLID WASTE. As defined in Cal. Public Resources Code § 40191, which defines
SOLID WASTE as all putrescible and nonputrescible solid, semisolid and liquid
wastes, including garbage, trash, refuse, paper, rubbish, ashes, industrial
wastes, demolition and construction wastes, abandoned vehicles and parts
thereof, discarded home and industrial appliances, dewatered, treated or
chemically fixed sewage sludge which is not hazardous waste, manure, vegetable
or animal solid and semi-solid wastes, and other discarded solid and semisolid
wastes, with the exception that SOLID WASTE does not include any of the
following wastes:
      1.   Hazardous waste, as defined in the Cal. Public Resources Code §
40141;
      2.   Radioactive waste regulated pursuant to the State Radiation Control
Law (Chapter 8 (commencing with § 114960) of Part 9 of Division 104 of the Cal.
Health and Safety Code); or
      3.   Medical waste regulated pursuant to the State Medical Waste
Management Act (Part 14 (commencing with § 117600) of Division 104 of the Cal.
Health and Safety Code). Untreated medical waste shall not be disposed of in a
solid waste landfill, as defined in Cal. Public Resources Code § 40195.1.
Medical waste that has been treated and deemed to be SOLID WASTE shall be
regulated pursuant to Division 30 of the Cal. Public Resources Code.
   SOURCE REDUCTION. Efforts taken to minimize the quantity of waste generated
and entering the waste stream.
   SOURCE REDUCTION/RECYCLING PLAN. A written policy approved by the city
describing how waste reduction and recycling is to be accomplished within a
residential, commercial, industrial, institutional, governmental development or
facility.
   SOURCE SEPARATED. Materials, including commingled recyclable materials, that
have been separated or kept separate from the solid waste stream, at the point
of generation, for the purpose of additional sorting or processing those
materials for recycling or reuse in order to return them to the economic
mainstream in the form of raw material for new, reused or reconstituted
products, which meet the quality standards necessary to be used in the
marketplace, or as otherwise defined in Cal. Code of Regulations Title 14, §
17402.5(b)(4). For the purposes of the chapter, SOURCE SEPARATED shall include
separation of materials by the generator, property owner, property owner’s
employee, property manager or property manager’s employee into different
containers for the purpose of collection such that SOURCE SEPARATED materials
are separated from black container waste or other solid waste for the purposes
of collection and processing.
   SOURCE SEPARATED GREEN CONTAINER ORGANIC WASTE. Source separated organic
waste that can be placed in a green container that is specifically intended for
the separate collection of organic waste by the generator, excluding pet waste,
carpets, non-compostable paper and textiles.
   SOURCE SEPARATED RECYCLABLE MATERIALS. Source separated non-organic
recyclables.
   STATE. The State of California.
   SUPERMARKET. A full-line, self-service retail store with gross annual sales
of $2,000,000 or more, and which sells a line of dry grocery, canned goods or
non-food items and some perishable items, or as otherwise defined in Cal. Code
of Regulations Title 14, § 18982(a)(71).
   TIER ONE COMMERCIAL EDIBLE FOOD GENERATOR. A commercial edible food
generator that is either a supermarket, grocery store with a total facility
size equal to or greater than 10,000 square feet, food service provider, food
distributor or wholesale food vendor, or as otherwise defined in Cal. Code of
Regulations Title 14, § 18982(a)(73).
   TIER TWO EDIBLE FOOD GENERATOR. As defined in Cal. Code of Regulations Title
14, § 18982(a)(74), a commercial edible food generator that is either a
restaurant with 250 or more seats, or a total facility size equal to or greater
than 5,000 square feet, hotel with an on-site food facility and 200 or more
rooms, health facility with an on-site food facility and 100 or more beds,
large venue, large event, a state agency with a cafeteria with 250 or more
seats or total cafeteria facility size equal to or greater than 5,000 square
feet or a local education agency facility with an on-site food facility.
   WHOLESALE FOOD VENDOR. A business or establishment engaged in the merchant
wholesale distribution of food, where food (including fruits and vegetables) is
received, shipped, stored, prepared for distribution to a retailer, warehouse,
distributor, or other destination or as otherwise defined in Cal. Code of
Regulations Title 14, § 189852(a)(76).
(Ord. 648, passed 4-19-2022)
§ 8-2-2 PURPOSE.
   The purpose of this chapter is to:
   (A)   Establish rules, regulations, policies and procedures for the
accumulation, collection, handling, transportation, storage and disposal of
from private property and public highways, streets, alleys and property, offal,
debris, garbage, refuse, rubbish, construction rubbish, hazardous waste,
household hazardous waste, infectious waste, liquid industrial waste, recycling
materials, green waste and all other solid wastes generated within the
corporate limits of the city;
   (B)   Protect the public health, safety and welfare of the residents and
visitors to the city;
   (C)   Reduce the danger of fire and conflagration;
   (D)   Limit the sources of noise and control vermin and vectors;
   (E)   Prevent disease that may endanger the public health; mitigate or
eliminate environmental impacts including the prevention of air pollution,
prevention of water pollution, protection of the public water supply and
protection of the groundwater aquifer; and
   (F)   To promote economies and efficiencies in the delivery of municipal
services in the city.
(Ord. 648, passed 4-19-2022)
§ 8-2-3 PROVISIONS OF CHAPTER DEEMED INCORPORATED INTO SOLID WASTE SERVICE
AGREEMENTS.
   All provisions of this chapter shall be deemed to be incorporated into every
solid waste service agreement, contract, franchise, license and permit issued
by the city or between the city and its solid waste service customer. Each
person, customer, consumer, firm, business, company, corporation, partnership,
trust, association or combinations thereof shall be charged with knowledge of
the provisions of this chapter and, by applying for and accepting solid waste
collection, handling, transportation, storage and disposal service from the
city or within the city, to have assented to the provisions of this chapter.
(Ord. 648, passed 4-19-2022)
§ 8-2-4 AUTHORITY TO ESTABLISH ADMINISTRATIVE PROCEDURES AND SUPPLEMENTARY
RULES AND REGULATIONS.
   The City Manager or his or her designees shall enforce the provisions of
this chapter, and shall have the power to establish administrative policies and
procedures and supplemental rules and regulations consistent within the
provisions of this chapter governing the accumulation, collection, handling,
transportation, storage and disposal of garbage, refuse, rubbish, construction
rubbish, hazardous waste, household hazardous waste, infectious waste, liquid
industrial waste, recyclable materials, green waste and all other solid wastes
including, but not limited to, swill, slops, animal wastes, animal byproducts,
feathers, hides, fats, grease, bone, bone meal, flesh, blood, feces, night
soil, manure, meat, flesh or hair.
(Ord. 648, passed 4-19-2022)
§ 8-2-5 RIGHT OF FURTHER REGULATION RESERVED.
   (A)   Hazardous and nonhazardous substances and materials. The city reserves
the right to apply the provisions and standards contained in this chapter to
other hazardous and nonhazardous substances and materials which, by their
nature and/or composition, in the opinion of the city, require special handling
procedures, policies or regulations consistent with those applied to items
specifically designated herein to adequately manage the waste stream of the
city and to avoid the creation of a health hazard or nuisance and to protect
the health, safety and welfare of the residents and visitors to the city.
   (B)   Bonds and insurance. The city reserves the right to require a permit
bond, license bond, franchise bond, pollution bond, or other bond or other
insurance.
   (C)   Certifications. The city reserves the right, at the expense of the
contract agent, franchisee, licensee or permittee, to require independent
certification of the integrity of any tank, vessel or vehicle used for the
collection, transportation and disposing of wastes.
(Ord. 648, passed 4-19-2022)
§ 8-2-6 RIGHT TO REFUSE TO PROVIDE SOLID WASTE SERVICE.
   The city reserves the right to refuse solid waste service, limit the extent
of solid waste services for any function, or to refuse to provide solid waste
accumulation, collection, handling, transportation, storage and disposal for a
particular function of a person, applicant, consumer or customer at its sole
discretion.
(Ord. 648, passed 4-19-2022)
§ 8-2-7 PUBLIC WORKS DEPARTMENT RESPONSIBLE FOR SOLID WASTE SERVICES AND
OVERSEES IMPLEMENTATION OF THIS CHAPTER.
   (A)   The Public Works Department shall have the authority and
responsibility for solid waste services and to oversee the accumulation,
collection, handling, transportation, storage and disposal of all garbage,
refuse, rubbish, construction rubbish, hazardous waste, household hazardous
waste, infectious waste, liquid industrial waste, recyclable materials, green
waste and all other solid waste including, any swill, night soil, slops, bone,
blood, feces, feathers, offal, flesh or hair.
   (B)   To accomplish these purposes, the Public Works Department is empowered
to employ persons, acquire equipment and perform all other acts necessary or
incidental to the accomplishing of the above described purposes, subject to all
applicable ordinances, resolutions, rules, regulations, policies and directions
of the City Manager and the City Council.
(Ord. 648, passed 4-19-2022)
§ 8-2-8 PUBLIC WORKS DIRECTOR DUTIES.
   The Public Works Director shall administer and enforce this chapter under
the direction of the City Manager and manage the city’s solid waste management
system pursuant to the provisions of this chapter and pursuant to the
resolutions, rules, regulations and directives issued by the City Manager or
adopted by the City Council prescribing their powers and duties.
(Ord. 648, passed 4-19-2022)
§ 8-2-9 GENERAL SANITARY CONDITION REQUIRED.
   All buildings, lots, places and premises in the city shall continuously be
kept, by the owners, managers or occupants thereof, in a clean and sanitary
condition.
(Ord. 648, passed 4-19-2022)
§ 8-2-10 USE OF BUILDINGS, LOTS AND PREMISES AS DUMPING GROUNDS.
   It is hereby declared to be a nuisance and it shall be unlawful for any
owner or person to dump, use, suffer or permit to be used any building, lot or
premises owned, occupied, or controlled by him or her in the city, for the
throwing, dumping or depositing of garbage, refuse, rubbish, hazardous waste,
household hazardous waste, construction rubbish, infectious waste, industrial
liquid waste, green waste including depositing of table refuse, offal, swill,
night soil, slops, animal byproducts, animal body parts, accumulation of
animal, vegetable or other matter that is:
   (A)   Liable to become putrid; or
   (B)   Attends the preparation, consumption, decay, dealing in or storage of
meats, fish, fowl, fruits, vegetables, animals, offal, ashes or cans.
(Ord. 648, passed 4-19-2022)
§ 8-2-11 DEPOSITING ANIMAL CARCASSES AND ANIMAL BYPRODUCTS.
   It is hereby declared to be a nuisance and it shall be unlawful for any
person to cause, suffer or permit the carcass of any dead animal to remain upon
any lot, premises, building or place owned, controlled, managed or occupied by
him or her in the city, for a period of 24 hours, or to cause or suffer any
animal, animal body part or animal byproduct liable to become putrid, to
collect or be deposited upon any lot, building, premises owned, controlled,
managed or occupied by him or her.
(Ord. 648, passed 4-19-2022)
§ 8-2-12 ACCUMULATION, COLLECTION, TRANSPORTATION, STORAGE OR DEPOSITING ON
PRIVATE OR PUBLIC PROPERTY.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to accumulate, collect, handle,
transport, store or place, throw, deposit, or dump any paper, cans, bottles,
broken glass, ash, tree accumulations, offal, debris, refuse, trash, garbage,
rubbish, construction rubbish, hazardous waste, household hazardous waste,
infectious waste, liquid industrial wastes, green waste or any other solid
waste on public highways, streets, alleys or public property or upon any public
or private property, alley, street or public grounds within the city or cause
the same to be so done; except by an authorized contract agent, licensee,
franchisee or permittee in accordance with this code.
(Ord. 648, passed 4-19-2022)
§ 8-2-13 USE OF PUBLIC REFUSE RECEPTACLES OR PUBLIC COLLECTION CONTAINERS.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to place or cause to be placed in any
refuse receptacle or public collection container owned by the city and located
upon any public street or public place any waste matter originating within or
upon any private property. However, pedestrians or other persons using the said
street or public place shall be permitted to deposit in said receptacle or
container miscellaneous small articles of waste matter carried by them.
(Ord. 648, passed 4-19-2022)
§ 8-2-14 LITTERING PROHIBITED.
   (A)   Littering. No person shall throw, deposit, leave, keep or permit to be
thrown, deposited, placed, left or maintain any refuse, rubbish, garbage or
other discarded or abandoned objects, articles or other litter in or upon any
street, alley, sidewalk, storm drain system or business place, or upon any
public or private plot of land in the city so that the same might become a
pollutant, except in containers or in lawfully established solid waste
facilities. The occupant or tenant or, in the absence of occupant or tenant,
the owner or proprietor of any real property in the city in front of which,
there is a paved sidewalk shall maintain said sidewalk free of dirt or litter
to the maximum extent practicable. Sweepings from the sidewalk shall not be
swept or otherwise made or allowed to go into the gutter or roadway, but shall
be disposed of in receptacles maintained as required for the disposal of solid
waste.
   (B)   Depositing litter in water body. No person shall throw or deposit
litter in any fountain, pool, lake, stream, river or any other body of water in
a park or elsewhere within the corporate limits of the city.
   (C)   Property owner responsible. Every person occupying or having charge
and control of property on which a prohibited disposal of waste material occurs
shall cause the proper collection and disposal of the same.
   (D)   Public danger. No person shall dispose of a solid waste material that
creates a danger to public health, safety and welfare and otherwise threatens
the environment, surface waters and groundwater; therefore, any owner or
occupant of property who fails to remove waste material within a reasonable
time may be charged with creating a nuisance upon the property.
(Ord. 648, passed 4-19-2022)
§ 8-2-15 SCAVENGING PROHIBITED.
   It shall be unlawful for a person to scavenge or permit to scavenge any
refuse, rubbish, construction rubbish, garbage, hazardous waste, household
hazardous waste, infectious waste, industrial liquid waste, recyclable
materials, green waste or any other solid waste in the city.
(Ord. 648, passed 4-19-2022)
§ 8-2-16 BURYING OR BURNING PROHIBITED; EXCEPTION.
   Except for permitted burns in those areas zoned for agriculture, it shall be
unlawful for any person to bury or burn any debris, refuse, rubbish, garbage,
hazardous waste, household hazardous waste, infectious waste, liquid industrial
waste, recyclable materials, green waste or any other solid waste including any
swill, slop, feathers, offal, fats, grease, bone, bone meal, flesh, blood,
feces, night soil, manure, meat, flesh, hair, animal body parts or animal
byproducts or other substances or materials without obtaining a permit from the
city. It is hereby declared to be a nuisance and it shall be unlawful for any
person to burn or suffer or permit to be buried or burned, upon any premises
owned, occupied or controlled by him or her in the city, any debris, refuse,
rubbish, garbage, hazardous waste, household hazardous waste, infectious waste,
liquid industrial waste, recyclable materials, green waste or any other solid
waste including any swill, slop, feathers, offal, fats, grease, bone, bone
meal, flesh, blood, feces, night soil, manure, meat, flesh, hair, animal body
parts or animal byproducts or other substances or materials in such a manner as
to cause odors or gas therefrom to taint the air and render it obnoxious,
unwholesome or injurious to the health, or offensive to the senses of the
inhabitants of the city.
(Ord. 648, passed 4-19-2022)
§ 8-2-17 SPECIAL ARRANGEMENTS AND PERMITS FOR DISPOSAL OF CERTAIN ITEMS
REQUIRED.
   Special arrangements must be made and special permits must be issued by the
county, state or federal agencies for the disposal of any of the following
items: ammunition; explosives; industrial waste; chemicals; infectious waste;
hazardous waste; radioactive waste; acids; drugs; medicines; human feces;
unwrapped animal feces; and items which are too large for the collection
equipment or which may damage the collection machinery such as large pieces of
metal and machine parts.
(Ord. 648, passed 4-19-2022)
§ 8-2-18 RIGHT OF THE CITY TO MANAGE AND CONTROL.
   (A)   Exclusive right of the city to manage and control wastes.
      1.   The accumulation, collection, removal, transportation, storage and
disposal of offal, swill, garbage, rubbish, refuse, hazardous wastes, household
hazardous wastes, infectious wastes, industrial liquid wastes, construction
rubbish, recycling materials, green wastes and all other solid wastes as well
as public street sweeping services, shall be managed and controlled by the city
for the:
         (a)   Protection of the public health, safety and welfare of the
residents and visitors to the city;
         (b)   Reduction of the danger of fire and conflagration;
         (c)   Limit the sources of noise and control vermin and vectors;
         (d)   Prevent disease that may endanger the public health; mitigate
environmental impacts including the reduction of air pollution, prevention of
water pollution, protection of the public water supply and protection of the
groundwater aquifer; and
         (e)   To promote economies and efficiencies in the delivery of
municipal services in the city.
      2.   The City Council finds that, a comprehensive city operated,
regulated, managed and controlled system for the periodic accumulation,
collection, removal, storage, transportation and disposal of all offal, swill,
debris, garbage, rubbish, refuse, hazardous waste, household hazardous waste,
infectious waste, industrial liquid waste, construction rubbish, recyclable
materials, green waste and all other solid waste from all private and public
property in the city is essential and benefits all occupants and owners of all
premises in the city. The city reserves to itself the exclusive right to
accumulate, collect, remove, transport, store and dispose of, or cause to be
accumulated, collected, removed, transported, stored and disposed of, all
offal, swill, debris, refuse, garbage, rubbish, hazardous waste, household
hazardous waste, infectious waste, industrial liquid waste, construction
rubbish, recyclable materials, green waste and all other solid waste produced
or found within the corporate limits of the city. It is hereby declared to be
unlawful for any person, except as provided by the City Council under a city
granted contract, permit, license or franchise to accumulate, collect, remove,
transport, store or dispose of offal, refuse, debris, garbage, rubbish,
construction rubbish, hazardous waste, household hazardous waste, infectious
waste, industrial liquid wastes, recycling materials, green waste or any other
solid waste produced or found within the city limits.
   (B)   Disposal sites. The city reserves the right to manage and control the
city’s waste stream, including the right to direct deliveries to designated
landfills, transfer stations, processing facilities, wastewater treatment
facilities or other disposal sites within and outside the city.
   (C)   Collection categories. The City Council or City Manager may determine
solid waste management collection categories, whether single-family
residential, multi-family residential, industrial, institutional, governmental
and may make or impose regulations and requirements in connection with the
issuance of any city contract, permit, license or franchise.
(Ord. 648, passed 4-19-2022)
§ 8-2-19 IMPORTATION OF WASTE TO THE CITY PROHIBITED.
   No person, company, corporation, firm, partnership, trust, association or
organization may import or transport from sources outside the city limits any
garbage, refuse, rubbish, construction rubbish, hazardous waste, household
hazardous waste, infectious waste, liquid industrial waste, recyclable
materials or green waste or any other solid waste for commercial or industrial
processing, rendering, disposing, recycling, storing, packaging or other use.
(Ord. 648, passed 4-19-2022)
§ 8-2-20 INTERMEDIATE STORAGE TANK USE PROHIBITED.
   No person shall provide or use an intermediate storage tank in conjunction
with the handling of liquid waste without prior written approval from the city.
(Ord. 648, passed 4-19-2022)
§ 8-2-21 CONTRACTS, PERMITS, FRANCHISES, AND LICENSES FOR COLLECTION AND
DISPOSAL.
   The City Council may grant contracts, permits, franchises and licenses for
the accumulation, removal, collection, handling, transportation, storage and
disposal of garbage, refuse, rubbish, hazardous waste, household hazardous
waste, infectious waste, liquid industrial waste, construction rubbish,
recyclable materials, green waste and other solid waste within the city limits
upon such terms and conditions as the City Council may from time to time
determine to be in the best interest of the city, and consistent with state and
federal law. No person shall accumulate, collect, handle, transport and dispose
of any garbage, refuse, rubbish, hazardous waste, household hazardous waste,
infectious waste, liquid industrial waste, rubbish, construction rubbish,
recyclable materials, green waste or any other solid waste within the city
limits without applying for and receiving all permits required by the city,
state or federal governments.
(Ord. 648, passed 4-19-2022)
§ 8-2-22 APPLICATION FOR CONTRACT, PERMIT, FRANCHISE OR LICENSE.
   (A)   Application. Any person desiring to obtain a contract, permit,
franchise or license for the accumulation, removal, collection, handling,
transportation, storage or disposal of garbage, refuse, rubbish, hazardous
waste, household hazardous waste, infectious waste, liquid industrial waste,
construction rubbish, recyclable materials, green waste or any other solid
waste within the city shall sign and file an application with the city and pay
a permit application fee established by resolution by the City Council.
   (B)   Information. Each application shall be filed with city and shall
include, but not be limited to, the following information:
      1.   The name and address of the applicant;
      2.   The type and approximate tonnage of garbage, refuse, rubbish,
hazardous waste, household hazardous waste, infectious waste, liquid industrial
waste, construction rubbish, recyclable materials, green waste or any other
solid waste to be collected in each of the applicable areas: single-family
residential, multi-family residential, industrial, commercial, institutional
and governmental units;
      3.   Written certification that no garbage, refuse, rubbish, construction
rubbish, hazardous waste, household hazardous waste, infectious waste, liquid
industrial waste, recyclable materials, green waste or any other solid waste
generated outside the city is going to be imported into the city for commercial
or industrial processing, rendering, recycling, storing, packaging or other
use;
      4.   Written agreement that it will pay a franchise fee of 15% or other
franchise fee amount established by the City Council;
      5.   Written proof that the person has obtained insurance coverage as
required by the City Manager or City Attorney;
      6.   Necessary permits from the county, state and federal agencies for
the accumulation, removal, collection, transportation or disposal of such
waste;
      7.   A source reduction and recycling plan with details and time frame
for implementation on how the city contract agent, licensee, franchisee or
permittee will provide the programs to its customers as required by the city
and state and includes a plan to achieve the reduction or diversion of solid
waste to achieve a 50% diversion rate through source reduction, recycling and
composting;
      8.   Technical, instructional, promotional and educational programs to
achieve the diversion rates required by the city and state;
      9.   Special solid waste programs;
      10.   Other information or additional financial information required by
the city from the applicant, including, but not limited to, the right to audit
financial records, or require a performance bond, or other suitable evidence of
financial responsibility; and
      11.   Certified copy of the applicant’s last fiscal year financial
report, audited by a certified public accountant.
(Ord. 648, passed 4-19-2022)
§ 8-2-23 BUSINESS LICENSE REQUIRED.
   (A)   Any person owning, managing or operating a business to accumulate,
collect, remove, handle, transport, store or dispose of offal, slop, swill,
debris, refuse, garbage, rubbish, construction rubbish, hazardous waste,
household hazardous waste, infectious wastes, industrial liquid waste,
recycling materials, green wastes or any other solid waste imported, produced
or found within the city limits must obtain a business license from the city.
   (B)   This section also applies to any broker or collector doing business in
the city or accumulating, collecting, handling, transporting or disposing of
offal, slop, swill, debris refuse, garbage, rubbish, construction rubbish,
hazardous waste, household hazardous waste, infectious waste, industrial liquid
waste, recyclable materials, green waste or any other solid waste within the
city limits with a place of business outside the city limits.
   (C)   It also includes any person or broker engaged in the business of
buying meat obtained from a dead animal and reselling such meat in an uncooked
form or any person or any collector engaged in the business of collecting dead
animals in the city whether or not their place of business is located within
the city limits.
(Ord. 648, passed 4-19-2022)
§ 8-2-24 UNLAWFUL TO EXCEED DESIGNATED CHARGES AND PRICES.
   It shall be unlawful for any city contract agent, licensee, franchisee,
permittee or any person engaged in or carrying on the business of accumulating,
collecting, removing, handling, transporting, storing and disposing of garbage,
refuse, rubbish, offal, construction rubbish, recyclable materials, household
hazardous wastes, hazardous wastes, infectious wastes, liquid industrial
wastes, green wastes to charge any person any sum of money in excess of the
prices set forth by the City Council by resolution.
(Ord. 648, passed 4-19-2022)
§ 8-2-25 DUTIES OF CITY CONTRACT AGENTS, LICENSEES, FRANCHISEES AND PERMITTEES.
   (A)   Compliance with laws and regulations. Any person with whom the city
contracts, licenses, franchises or permits to accumulate, collect, remove,
handle, transport, store or dispose of garbage, refuse, rubbish, household
hazardous waste, hazardous waste, infectious waste, liquid industrial waste,
rubbish, construction rubbish, recyclable materials, green waste materials or
any other solid waste shall accumulate, collect, handle, transport, store and
dispose of all such material in strict compliance with all applicable federal,
state, county, and city health and environmental laws, ordinances, rules and
regulations, and under the supervision and to the satisfaction of the City
Manager and City Council.
   (B)   Vehicle and equipment requirements for all vehicles. Vehicles used by
the city contract agents, licensees, franchisees or permittees for solid waste
collection shall be in safe and operable condition.
      1.   Vehicles shall be painted with the firm name, address and phone
number on each side of the cab. The letters shall be a minimum of three inches
in height and fully visible and legible at all times. The words “city” and
“Livingston” shall not be used in any manner upon the identification placed on
the vehicles, except as provided, nor shall an official City of Livingston
telephone number or address be used.
      2.   No materials shall leak, fall or be spilled or discharged from any
such vehicle or container attached thereto. Vehicles and conveyances must be so
constructed as to be absolutely dustproof, and so arranged as not to permit
dust or other matter to shift through or fall upon the streets and alleys. The
contents of such conveyances must be further protected so as to prevent the
same from being blown upon the streets, alleys and adjacent properties.
Transport of all wet solid waste shall be in watertight containers with proper
covers, so that the solid waste shall not be offensive and every such container
shall be kept clean and the solid waste so loaded that none of it shall fall,
drop or spill to or on the ground, sidewalk or pavement. Vehicles shall carry
at least five gallons of water and be equipped with shovels, and brooms to
clean up spillage. Equipment bodies shall be metal and watertight. Any
discharge or spillage at a location other than an approved disposal site or
processing facility shall be cleaned and appropriately disinfected prior to the
vehicle driver’s departure from the site.
      3.   Vehicles must pass city approved inspections and meet applicable air
quality and vehicle emissions standards. Truck bodies shall be closed when used
to transport waste.
      4.   The outside of each vehicle shall be cleaned at least once a week.
All vehicles shall be kept clean of splashings and waste accumulation. All
vehicles shall be kept in good repair, and not leak oil or other fluids onto
the surface of the ground.
      5.   Vehicles shall be operated in such a manner as to minimize their
exterior noise levels in the city.
   (C)   Vehicle permits. Each vehicle required to have a permit pursuant to
this chapter must pass a California Highway Patrol biannual inspection for each
vehicle or other inspection approved by the Public Works Director. Proof of
inspection is required to be submitted to the city twice per year. Failure to
pass the vehicle inspection may result in denial or revocation of a contract,
permit, license or franchise.
   (D)   Container maintenance. All city contract agents, licensees,
franchisees and permittees shall maintain their containers to present a well
kept appearance and ensure that the container area is left clean of debris and
refuse after pick up or delivery. The user shall be responsible for the
cleanliness of the containers and sanitary conditions of the surrounding area
between services.
   (E)   Source reduction and recycling requirements. All city contract agents,
licensees, franchisees and permittees shall comply with the solid waste source
reduction and recycling provisions of this chapter and shall submit monthly
reports to the city from a state or county certified weighing facility
documenting the gross tonnage collected and net tonnage diverted. The city
reserves the right to randomly select trucks to have weighed by a state
certified facility to ensure compliance. All costs for random weight
measurements will be borne by the contract agent, licensee, franchisee or
permittee.
(Ord. 648, passed 4-19-2022)
§ 8-2-26 CITY COLLECTION AND DISPOSAL SERVICE REQUIRED.
   Every person owning, occupying or managing a building, lot, premises or
developed parcel shall subscribe to the garbage, refuse, rubbish, recyclable
materials, green waste collection or other solid waste service from the city
whether the owner or occupant uses the collection services or not. All such
occupants are made liable for the garbage, refuse, recycling collection
charges; recycling program charges; green waste collection program charges and
any other charges, penalties and fines established by the City Council by
resolution. Each person, owner, manager or occupant shall pay at least the
minimum rate established for such services.
(Ord. 648, passed 4-19-2022)
§ 8-2-27 UNLAWFUL TO INTERFERE OR HINDER.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to hinder, threaten, impede, obstruct in
any manner or to interfere with the accumulation, collection, removal,
handling, transportation, storage or disposition of refuse, rubbish, garbage,
household hazardous wastes, hazardous wastes, infectious wastes, rubbish,
construction rubbish, recyclable materials, green wastes or any other solid
wastes by the city or any person authorized by license, contract, permit or
franchise to accumulate, collect, remove, handle, transport, store and dispose
of the same.
(Ord. 648, passed 4-19-2022)
§ 8-2-28 SINGLE-FAMILY RESIDENTIAL COLLECTION SERVICES.
   (A)   Street collection service. For those parts of the city in which alley
collection service is not applicable, street collection service is required for
all single-family residential units:
      1.   Customers shall be responsible for placing garbage, refuse, rubbish,
recyclable materials and green waste containers at the curb line by 5:00 a.m.
on collection days at the location determined by the city. No collections at
schools, churches or those portions of commercial or industrial districts
adjacent to residential neighborhoods shall be made prior to 5:00 a.m. or after
6:00 p.m. Collections may be made at different hours subject to prior approval
of the City Manager or City Council;
      2.   In all cases of dispute and complaints arising as to the place where
the garbage, refuse, rubbish, recyclable materials and green waste containers
shall be placed awaiting removal thereof, the Public Works Director shall
forthwith designate the place for the same. The decision of the Public Works
Director may be appealed to the City Manager whose decision shall be final; and
      3.   The lids of all containers shall be completely closed to prevent the
spillage of contents during collection.
   (B)   Alley collection service. For those parts of the city where alley
collection service is applicable, for single-family residential units:
      1.   Customers shall be responsible for placing garbage, refuse, rubbish,
recyclable materials and green waste containers in the alley by 5:00 a.m. on
collection days at the location determined by the city. No collections at
schools, churches, or those portions of commercial or industrial districts
adjacent to residential neighborhoods shall be made prior to 5:00 a.m. or after
6:00 p.m. Collections may be made at different hours subject to prior approval
of the City Manager or City Council;
      2.   In all cases of dispute and complaints arising as to the place where
the garbage, refuse, rubbish, recyclable materials and green waste containers
shall be placed awaiting removal thereof, the Public Works Director shall
forthwith designate the place for the same. The decision of the Public Works
Director may be appealed to the City Manager whose decision shall be final; and
      3.   The lids of all containers shall be completely closed to prevent the
spillage of contents during collection.
   (C)   Container contents city property. From the time of the placement of
garbage, refuse, rubbish, recyclable materials or green waste at the curbside,
property line or other designated collection locations, or in any container
used for recycling materials, green waste or other solid waste provided by the
city, contract agent, licensee, franchisee or permittee, said recyclable
materials or other solid waste shall be and become property of the city or city
authorized agent.
   (D)   Disabled customer.
      1.   The city or its contract agent shall, upon request, transport
garbage containers, recyclable materials containers or green waste containers
from the front of the dwelling unit to the curb or alley site described above,
for individuals who qualify as being disabled customers. Disability will be
determined based on an application made to the city, not by a contract agent,
if any.
      2.   The city will provide the contract agent, if any, with an updated
list of people who have been determined by the city to be disabled customers.
   (E)   Collection interference. No person, other than city employees, or city
contract agents shall interfere in any manner with any container, or the
contents thereof, nor move any such container or remove the contents thereof,
from the location where the container is placed.
   (F)   Single-family organic waste generators. Single-family organic waste
generators shall comply with the following requirements.
      1.   Single-family organic waste generators shall automatically subscribe
to the city’s two-container collection system, as described below. The city
shall have the right to review the number and size of a generator’s containers
to evaluate adequacy of capacity provided for each type of collection service
for proper separation of materials and containment of materials; and single-
family generators shall adjust its service level for its collection services as
requested by the city. Generators may additionally manage their organic waste
by preventing or reducing their organic waste, pursuant to Cal. Code of
Regulations Title 14, § 18984.9(c).
      2.   Single-family organic waste generators shall participate in the
city’s organic waste collection service(s) by placing designated materials in
designated containers, and shall not place prohibited container contaminants in
collection containers. A designated container shall include a two-container
collection service (green container and black container).
      3.   The generator shall place source separated green container organic
waste, including food waste, cardboard and paper, in the green container; and
black container waste in the black container. Generators shall not place
materials designated for the black container into the green container, and
shall not place materials designated for the green container into the black
container.
(Ord. 648, passed 4-19-2022)
§ 8-2-29 SINGLE-FAMILY RESIDENTIAL DWELLING UNIT COLLECTION SERVICE FREQUENCY.
   (A)   Collection frequency. The City Council shall determine the frequency
of single-family residential collection service. The city or its contract
agent, franchisee, licensee or permittee shall collect from residential
customers at least once each calendar week, on a Monday through Friday basis.
   (B)   Collection times. All customers shall place the collection containers
at their city designated location not later than 5:00 a.m. on the collection
day, but not before 4:30 p.m. the preceding day.
   (C)   Empty collection containers. No empty solid waste collection container
shall be allowed to remain at the curb after 8:00 p.m. on the collection day.
(Ord. 648, passed 4-19-2022)
§ 8-2-30 SINGLE-FAMILY RESIDENTIAL DWELLING UNIT COLLECTION CONTAINERS.
   (A)   Collection containers. For all residential dwelling unit customers
receiving collection, the city shall provide 90-gallon containers or 300-gallon
containers at its discretion. It shall be the duty of every person in
possession, charge or control of any single-family dwelling unit to obtain
authorized refuse containers in sufficient number to contain all refuse
accumulated during the intervals between scheduled collections.
   (B)   Collection container lids. The lids of all containers shall be
completely closed to prevent the spillage of contents during collection. Such
cans shall be kept in a sanitary condition by the owners thereof and shall at
all times be secure against access of flies to the contents thereof.
   (C)   Collection container regulations. The following regulations shall
apply to collections containers.
      1.   No live or hot coals, ashes or other things, which can cause a fire
in a collection vehicle shall be placed in or with any solid waste or
recyclable material container set out for collection. Cold ashes and coals
placed for collection shall be contained in such manner as to retard their
blowing and flying or being emptied into the collection vehicle.
      2.   No human or animal excrement shall be placed for collection by the
city, except that solid animal excrement may be placed in a solid waste
container if securely wrapped in paper or nonporous wrapper, or contained in a
closed bottle or can.
   (D)   Additional containers. No additional automated cans for nonrecyclable
solid waste will be permitted or allowed to be provided to the customer without
prior approval from the Public Works Director.
   (E)   Replacement container. A customer will be provided a replacement
automated container if the original container becomes unserviceable through no
fault of the customer. If the automated container has been damaged by the
customer, the city will provide a container upon payment by the customer.
   (F)   Container location disputes. In all cases of dispute and complaints
arising as to the place where the garbage, refuse, rubbish, green waste
containers or recycling containers shall be placed awaiting removal thereof,
the Public Works Director shall forthwith designate the place for the same. The
decision of the Public Works Director may be appealed to the City Manager whose
decision shall be final.
   (G)   Container storage. No garbage, refuse, rubbish containers or
designated recyclable material or green waste containers shall be stored in the
front yard or side yard on a street, unless the containers are screened from
public view. No containers containing garbage, refuse, rubbish, green waste,
other solid waste or recyclable material shall be stored or placed for
collection within a public highway, walkway, roadway or any other traveled way,
except that alleys may be used for these purposes if such use does not
interfere with the alley use by vehicles.
(Ord. 648, passed 4-19-2022)
§ 8-2-31 MULTI-FAMILY RESIDENTIAL, COMMERCIAL, INDUSTRIAL, INSTITUTIONAL AND
GOVERNMENTAL COLLECTION SERVICES.
   (A)   Collection service. For those premises receiving residential,
commercial, industrial, institutional and governmental collection services, the
following regulations are applicable.
      1.   Customers shall be responsible for placing garbage, refuse, rubbish,
recyclable materials and green waste containers at the curb line by 5:00 a.m.
on collection days at the location determined by the city. No collections at
schools, churches or those portions of commercial or industrial districts
adjacent to residential neighborhoods shall be made prior to 5:00 a.m. or after
6:00 p.m. Collections may be made at different hours subject to prior approval
of the City Manager or City Council.
      2.   In all cases of dispute and complaints arising as to the place where
the garbage, refuse, rubbish, recyclable materials and green waste bins or
containers shall be placed awaiting removal thereof, the Public Works Director
shall forthwith designate the place for the same. The decision of the Public
Works Director may be appealed to the City Manager whose decision shall be
final.
      3.   The lids of all containers shall be completely closed to prevent the
spillage of contents during collection.
   (B)   Container contents city property. From the time of the placement of
garbage, refuse, rubbish, recyclable materials or green waste at the curbside,
property line or other designated collection locations, or in any container
used for recycling materials, green waste or other solid waste provided by the
city, contract agent, licensee, franchisee or permittee, said recyclable
materials or other solid waste shall be and become property of the city or city
authorized agent.
   (C)   Collection interference. No person, other than city employees, or city
contract agents shall interfere in any manner with any container, or the
contents thereof, nor move any such container or remove the contents thereof,
from the location where the container is placed.
   (D)   Commercial businesses.
      1.   Commercial business, which includes multi-family residential
dwellings, shall:
         (a)   Except commercial businesses that meet the self-hauler
requirements in §
8-2-38 or which meet waiver requirements listed in §
8-2-34, be automatically enrolled in the city’s two-container organic waste
collection services with a source separated green container organic waste
service level in addition to the existing solid waste container. The commercial
business’ source separated green container organic waste service level must be
sufficient for the amount of source separated green container organic waste
generated by the commercial business. The city shall have the right to review
the number, size and location of a generator’s containers and frequency of
collection to evaluate adequacy of capacity provided for each type of
collection service for proper separation of materials and containment of
materials; and commercial business shall adjust its service level as requested
by the city;
         (b)   Except commercial businesses that meet the self-hauler
requirements in §
8-2-38 of this chapter or which meet waiver requirements listed in §
8-2-34, participate in and comply with the city two-container (green container
and black container) collection service by placing designated materials in
designated containers as described. The generator shall place source separated
green container organic waste, including food waste, cardboard and paper, in
the green container (or one labeled as for organics); and black container waste
in the black container (or container labeled as such, or the container
currently designated as the solid waste container). Generators shall not place
materials designated for the black container into the green container, and
shall not place materials designated for the green organics container into the
black container;
         (c)    Supply and allow access to adequate number, size and location
of collection containers with sufficient labels or colors (conforming with §
8-2-31, subdivision (D)(4)(a) and (b) below), for employees, contractors,
tenants and customers, consistent with city’s green container and black
container collection service;
         (d)   Excluding multi-family residential dwellings, where food and
beverages are generated by the business and consumed onsite, provide containers
to customers and employees for the collection of source separated green
container organic waste, and source separated recyclable materials in all
indoor and outdoor areas, if such materials are generated by the business or
customers and employees. Pursuant to Cal. Code of Regulations Title 14, §
18984.9(b), the containers provided by the business shall have either:
            (1)   A body or lid that conforms with the container colors
provided through the collection service provided by the city and pursuant to
Cal. Code of Regulations Title 14, § 18984.7 for any new containers. A
commercial business is not required to replace existing, functional containers,
including containers purchased prior to January 1, 2022, or prior to January 1,
2036; or
            (2)   Container labels on any new containers purchased on or after
January 1, 2022, that include language and/or graphic images indicating the
primary material accepted and the primary materials prohibited in that
container, pursuant to Cal. Code of Regulations Title 14, § 18984.8.
         (e)    Excluding multi-family residential dwellings, prohibit
employees from placing materials in a container not designated for those
materials to the extent practical through education, training, Inspection, and/
or other measures to keep contaminants out of those containers pursuant to Cal.
Code of Regulations Title 14, § 18984.9(b)(3);
         (f)   Annually provide information to employees, contractors, tenants
and customers about organic waste recovery requirements and about proper
sorting of source separated green container organic waste and source separated
recyclable materials;
         (g)   Provide education information in a tenant’s lease or within 14
days of occupation of the premises to new tenants that describes requirements
to keep source separated green container organic waste and source separated
recyclable materials separate from black container waste (when applicable) and
the location of containers and the rules governing their use at each property;
         (h)   Provide or arrange access for the city or its agent to their
properties during all inspections conducted in accordance with §
8-2-72 to confirm compliance with the requirements of this chapter;
         (i)   Accommodate and cooperate with city’s or service provider’s
remote monitoring for inspection of the contents of containers for prohibited
container contaminants, which may be implemented at a later date, to evaluate
generator’s compliance with §
8-2-5. Remote monitoring shall involve the use of cameras on top of the service
provider’s trucks; or
         (j)   If a commercial business wants to self-haul, meet the self-
hauler requirements in §
8-2-38.
       2.   Nothing in this section prohibits a generator from preventing or
reducing waste generation, managing organic waste on site, or using a community
composting site pursuant to Cal. Code of Regulations Title 14, § 18984.9(c).
      3.   Commercial businesses that are tier one or tier two commercial
edible food generators shall comply with food recovery requirements, pursuant
to §
8-2-35.
(Ord. 648, passed 4-19-2022)
§ 8-2-32 MULTI-FAMILY RESIDENTIAL, COMMERCIAL, INDUSTRIAL, INSTITUTIONAL AND
GOVERNMENTAL COLLECTION FREQUENCY.
   (A)   Collection frequency. The collection of garbage, refuse, rubbish,
recyclable materials, green waste or other solid wastes shall be made as many
times per week as the City Manager, Public Works Director or their designees
may order from all multi-family residential units, industrial units, commercial
units, institutional units and governmental units.
   (B)   Collection times. All customers shall place the collection containers
at their city designated location not later than 5:00 a.m. on the collection
day, but not before 4:30 p.m. the preceding day.
   (C)   Empty collection containers. No empty solid waste collection container
shall be allowed to remain at the curb after 8:00 p.m. on the collection day.
(Ord. 648, passed 4-19-2022)
§ 8-2-33 MULTI-FAMILY RESIDENTIAL, COMMERCIAL, INDUSTRIAL, INSTITUTIONAL AND
GOVERNMENTAL COLLECTION CONTAINERS.
   (A)   Collection containers. The city shall provide an automated can,
dumpster, bin or other container (ranging in size from two cubic yards to six
cubic yards) approved by the Public Works Director for all multi-family
residential dwelling units, industrial units, commercial units, institutional
units and governmental units. It shall be the duty of every person in
possession, charge or control of any multi-family residential, commercial,
industrial, institutional and governmental unit to obtain authorized refuse
containers in sufficient number to contain all refuse accumulated during the
intervals between scheduled collections.
   (B)   Collection container lids. The lids of all containers shall be
completely closed to prevent the spillage of contents during collection. Such
cans shall be kept in a sanitary condition by the owners thereof and shall at
all times be secure against access of flies to the contents thereof.
   (C)   Collection container regulations. The following regulations shall
apply to collections containers.
      1.   No live or hot coals, ashes or other things, which can cause a fire
in a collection vehicle shall be placed in or with any solid waste or
recyclable material container set out for collection. Cold ashes and coals
placed for collection shall be contained in such a manner as to retard their
blowing and flying or being emptied into the collection vehicle.
      2.   No human or animal excrement shall be placed for collection by the
city, except that solid animal excrement may be placed in a solid waste
container if securely wrapped in paper or nonporous wrapper, or contained in a
closed bottle or can.
   (D)   Container location disputes. In all cases of dispute and complaints
arising as to the place where the garbage, refuse, rubbish, green waste
containers or recycling containers shall be placed awaiting removal thereof,
the Public Works Director shall forthwith designate the place for the same. The
decision of the Public Works Director may be appealed to the City Manager whose
decision shall be final.
   (E)   Replacement container. A customer will be provided a replacement
automated container if the original container becomes unserviceable through no
fault of the customer. If the automated container has been damaged by the
customer, the city will provide a container upon payment by the customer.
   (F)   Container storage. No garbage, refuse, rubbish containers or
designated recyclable material or green waste containers shall be stored in the
front yard or side yard on a street, unless the containers are screened from
public view. No containers containing garbage, refuse, rubbish, green waste,
other solid waste or recyclable material shall be stored or placed for
collection within a public highway, walkway, roadway or any other traveled way,
except that alleys may be used for these purposes if such use does not
interfere with the alley use by vehicles.
(Ord. 648, passed 4-19-2022)
§ 8-2-34 WAIVERS FOR GENERATORS.
   (A)   De minimis waivers.
      1.   The city may waive a commercial business’ obligation (including
multi-family residential dwellings) to comply with some or all of the organic
waste requirements of this chapter if the commercial business provides
documentation that the business generates below a certain amount of organic
waste material as described in §
8-2-34(A)(2) below.
      2.   Commercial businesses requesting a de minimis waiver shall:
         (a)   Submit the SB 1383 compliance form specifying the services that
they are requesting a waiver from and provide documentation as noted in §
8-2-34(A)2. below;
          (b)   Provide documentation that either:
            (1)   The commercial business’ total solid waste collection service
is two cubic yards or more per week and organic waste subject to collection in
a green container comprises less than 20 gallons per week per applicable
container of the business’ total waste; or
            (2)   The commercial business’ total solid waste collection service
is less than two cubic yards per week and organic waste subject to collection
in a green container comprises less than ten gallons per week per applicable
container of the business’ total waste.
         (c)   Notify the city if circumstances change such that commercial
business’s organic waste exceeds the threshold required for waiver, in which
case waiver will be rescinded; and
         (d)   Provide written verification of eligibility for de minimis
waiver every five years, if the city has approved de minimis waiver.
   (B)   Physical space waivers.
      1.   The city may waive a commercial business’ or property owner’s
obligations (including multi-family residential dwellings) to comply with some
or all of the organic waste collection service requirements if the city has
evidence from its own staff, a hauler, licensed architect or licensed engineer
demonstrating that the premises lacks adequate space for the collection
containers required for compliance with the organic waste collection
requirements of §
8-2-31.
      2.   A commercial business or property owner may request a physical space
waiver through the following process:
         (a)   Submit the SB 1383 compliance form specifying they are
requesting an organics compliance waiver;
         (b)   Provide documentation that the premises lacks adequate space for
green containers including documentation from its hauler, licensed architect,
licensed engineer or by verification after a site visit from a city enforcement
official; and
         (c)   Provide written verification to the city that it is still
eligible for physical space waiver every five years, if the city has approved
application for a physical space waiver.
   (C)   City Manager. Review and approval of waivers shall be made by the City
Manager or his or her designee.
(Ord. 648, passed 4-19-2022)
§ 8-2-35 REQUIREMENTS FOR COMMERCIAL EDIBLE FOOD GENERATORS.
   (A)   Tier one commercial edible food generators must comply with the
requirements of this section commencing January 1, 2022, and tier two
commercial edible food generators must comply commencing January 1, 2024,
pursuant to Cal. Code of Regulations Title 14, § 18991.3.
   (B)   Large venue or large event operators not providing food services, but
allowing for food to be provided by others, shall require food facilities
operating at the large venue or large event to comply with the requirements of
this section, commencing January 1, 2024.
   (C)   Commercial edible food generators shall comply with requirements
pursuant to Cal. Code of Regulations Title 14, §§ 18991.3 and 18991.4,
including:
      1.   Keep records that include the following information, or as otherwise
specified in Cal. Code of Regulations Title 14, § 18991.4:
         (a)   A list of each food recovery service or organization that
collects or receives its edible food pursuant to a contract or written
agreement established under Cal. Code of Regulations Title 14, § 18991.3(b);
         (b)   A copy of all contracts or written agreements established under
Cal. Code of Regulations Title 14, § 18991.3(b); and
         (c)   A record of the following information for each of those food
recovery services or food recovery organizations:
            (1)   The name, address and contact information of the food
recovery service or food recovery organization;
            (2)   The types of food that will be collected by or self-hauled to
the food recovery service or food recovery organization;
            (4)   The established frequency that food will be collected or
self-hauled; and
            (5)   The quantity of food, measured in pounds recovered per month,
collected or self-hauled to a food recovery service or food recovery
organization for food recovery.
      2.   No later than April of each year commencing no later than April 2023
for tier one commercial edible food generators, and April 2025 for tier two
commercial edible food generators, provide an annual food recovery report to
the city that includes the information §
8-2-35(C).
   (D)   Nothing in this chapter shall be construed to limit or conflict with
the protections provided by the state Good Samaritan Food Donation Act of 2017,
the federal Good Samaritan Act or share table and school food donation guidance
pursuant to Senate Bill 557 of 2017 (approved by the Governor of the State on
September 25, 2017, which added Article 13 (commencing with §49580) to Chapter
9 of Part 27 of Division 4 of Title 2 of the Cal. Education Code, and to amend
§ 114079 of the Health and Safety Code, relating to food safety, as amended,
supplemented, superseded and replaced from time to time).
(Ord. 648, passed 4-19-2022)
§ 8-2-36 REQUIREMENTS FOR FOOD RECOVERY ORGANIZATIONS, SERVICES AND REGIONAL
AGENCIES.
   (A)   Food recovery services collecting or receiving edible food directly
from commercial edible food generators, via a contract or written agreement
established under Cal. Code of Regulations Title 14, § 18991.3(b), shall
maintain records specified by Cal. Code of Regulations Title 14, §§ 18991.5(a)
(1) and 18991.5(a)(2).
   (B)   Food recovery organizations and food recovery services shall inform
generators about state and federal Good Samaritan Food Donation Act protection
in written communications, such as in their contract or agreement established
under Cal. Code of Regulations Title 14, § 18991.3(b).
   (C)   Food recovery organizations and food recovery services that have their
primary address physically located within the city and contract with or have
written agreements with one or more commercial edible food generators pursuant
to Cal. Code of Regulations Title 14, § 18991.3(b) shall report to the city the
total pounds of edible food recovered in the previous calendar year from the
tier one and tier two commercial edible food generators they have established a
contract or written agreement with pursuant to Cal. Code of Regulations Title
14, § 18991.3(b) no later than April of each year.
   (D)   Food recovery services and food recovery organizations shall provide
information and consultation to the city, upon request, regarding existing or
proposed, new or expanded, food recovery capacity that could be accessed by the
city and its commercial edible food generators. A food recovery service or food
recovery organization contacted by the city shall respond to such request for
information within 60 days, unless a shorter timeframe is otherwise specified
by the city.
(Ord. 648, passed 4-19-2022)
§ 8-2-37 REQUIREMENTS FOR HAULERS AND FACILITY OPERATORS.
   (A)   Requirements for haulers.
      1.   Exclusive franchise hauler, non-exclusive franchised haulers,
permitted haulers and licensed haulers providing residential, commercial, or
industrial organic waste collection services to generators within the city’s
boundaries shall meet the following requirements and standards as a condition
of approval of a contract, agreement or other authorization with the city to
collect organic waste:
         (a)   Identify the facilities to which they will transport organic
waste including facilities for source separated recyclable materials, and
source separated green container organic waste;
         (b)   Transport source separated recyclable materials, and source
separated green container organic waste to a facility, operation, activity, or
property that recovers organic waste as defined in Cal. Code of Regulations
Title 14, Division 7, Chapter 12, Article 2; and
         (c)   Obtain approval from the city to haul organic waste, unless it
is transporting source separated organic waste to a community composting site
or lawfully transporting construction and demolition debris in a manner that
complies with Cal. Code of Regulations Title 14, § 18989.1, and this code of
ordinances.
      2.   Exclusive franchise hauler, non-exclusive franchised haulers,
permitted haulers and licensed haulers authorization to collect organic waste
shall comply with education, equipment, signage, container labeling, container
color, contamination monitoring, reporting and other requirements contained
within its franchise agreement, permit, license or other agreement entered into
with the city.
   (B)   Requirements for facility operators and community composting
operations.
      1.   Owners of facilities, operations and activities that recover organic
waste, including, but not limited to, compost facilities, in-vessel digestion
facilities and publicly-owned treatment works shall, upon the city’s request,
provide information regarding available and potential new or expanded capacity
at their facilities, operations and activities, including information about
throughput and permitted capacity necessary for planning purposes. Entities
contacted by the city shall respond within 60 days.
      2.   Community composting operators, upon the city’s request, shall
provide information to the city to support organic waste capacity planning,
including, but not limited to, an estimate of the amount of organic waste
anticipated to be handled at the community composting operation. Entities
contacted by the city shall respond within 60 days.
(Ord. 648, passed 4-19-2022)
§ 8-2-38 SELF-HAULER REQUIREMENTS.
   (A)   Self-haulers shall source separate all recyclable materials and
organic waste (materials that the city otherwise requires generators to
separate for collection in the city’s organics and recycling collection
program) generated on-site from solid waste in a manner consistent with Cal.
Code of Regulations Title 14, §§ 18984.1 and 18984.2, or shall haul organic
waste to a high diversion organic waste processing facility as specified in
Cal. Code of Regulations Title 14, § 18984.3.
   (B)   Self-haulers that are commercial businesses (including multi-family
residential dwellings) shall keep a record of the amount of organic waste
delivered to each solid waste facility, operation, activity or property that
processes or recovers organic waste, pursuant to Cal. Code of Regulations Title
14, § 18988.3; this record shall be subject to inspection by the city’s
enforcement official.
   (C)   A residential organic waste generator that self-hauls organic waste is
not required to record or report information.
(Ord. 648, passed 4-19-2022)
§ 8-2-39 CONTAINERS FOR NEW CONSTRUCTION.
   The following regulations shall apply to all new single-family, multi-family
residential, commercial, industrial, institutional and governmental new
construction.
   (A)   Builders required to provide containers. Every contractor or builder
engaged in the erection of a building or a structure shall provide sufficient
containers at or near such building or structure so being erected or repaired,
within which construction materials shall be deposited to be removed by persons
engaged in such work of erection or repair.
   (B)   Container cost. On all developed parcels for multi-family residential
uses, commercial uses, industrial uses, institutional uses and governmental
uses not currently having solid waste collection service, the applicant for a
building permit shall pay to the city the cost of providing the appropriate
containers and bins.
(Ord. 648, passed 4-19-2022)
§ 8-2-40 SOLID WASTE TRANSPORTATION AND CLEANUP RESPONSIBILITY.
   Until solid wastes are collected, the owner, occupant or other person in
charge of the day to day operation of each premises in the city shall be
responsible for the immediate cleanup of any solid waste that is spilled,
leaked, emptied, discarded or disposed of into the environment or which has
otherwise come to be located outside the container. This responsibility applies
as follows.
   (A)   Occupants. The owner, occupant or other person in charge of the day to
day operation of each premises, shall immediately undertake to clean up at the
point in time when a spill or release has occurred due to any circumstances,
whether by human or animal interference with the container, wind or other
natural forces, or residual solid waste remaining following collection or
removal.
   (B)   Transporters. Any person accumulating, collecting or transporting
solid wastes (including city crews) shall undertake immediate cleanup at the
point in time when a spill or release has occurred due to the removal or
transport of solid waste.
   (C)   City cleanup expenses. Any and all costs and expenses incurred by the
city or on the city’s behalf in investigating and cleaning a spill or a release
of solid waste not properly or timely cleaned up under this chapter by the
owner, occupant or transporter or other responsible party, may be assessed
against such responsible persons, including all administrative expenses and
legal fees and costs incurred by the city in investigating and cleaning the
spill or release.
(Ord. 648, passed 4-19-2022)
§ 8-2-41 UNAUTHORIZED USE OF COLLECTION CONTAINERS; TEMPORARY COLLECTION
SERVICE LOCATIONS.
   (A)   Unauthorized use of containers and service locations.
      1.   No person shall deposit garbage, refuse, rubbish, construction
rubbish, hazardous waste, household hazardous waste, infectious waste, liquid
industrial waste, recyclable materials, green waste or other solid waste in the
container of another person, or set out solid waste for collection at another
person’s service location, premises, building or lot.
      2.   No customer shall permit or consent to another person depositing
garbage, refuse, rubbish, construction rubbish, hazardous waste, household
hazardous waste, infectious waste, liquid industrial waste, recyclable
material, green waste or other solid waste in his or her container or setting
out the above items in this section for collection at his or her service
location, premises, building or lot.
   (B)   Temporary service locations. The city may establish temporary
collection service locations where the city has knowledge of construction,
demolition or other temporary obstacles that prevent the use or access to
permanent service locations.
(Ord. 648, passed 4-19-2022)
§ 8-2-42 DISPOSAL BY TREE SURGEONS, PROFESSIONAL TREE TRIMMERS, AND LANDSCAPING
SERVICE PROVIDERS.
   Tree surgeons, professional tree trimmers and lawn and landscaping service
providers shall haul away and dispose of all tree trimmings and other green
waste accumulated by them to the city designated green waste recycling
facility.
(Ord. 648, passed 4-19-2022)
§ 8-2-43 RIGHT TO ENTER PRIVATE PROPERTY FOR THE PURPOSE OF COLLECTION.
   The city, contract agent, franchisee, licensee or permittee shall have the
right to enter private courts or places or other private property of single-
family dwellings, multi-family dwellings or commercial, industrial,
institutional or governmental units to make collections authorized under this
chapter.
(Ord. 648, passed 4-19-2022)
§ 8-2-44 MISREPRESENTATION IN APPLICATION OR SERVICE AGREEMENT.
   It shall be unlawful to misrepresent a material fact in applying for solid
waste services or in a service agreement. Material facts shall include the
identity of the applicant as the owner of the property to be connected, and the
purpose for which the solid waste service provided will be used.
(Ord. 648, passed 4-19-2022)
§ 8-2-45 CUSTOMER RESPONSIBILITY.
   Customers are responsible for furnishing the city with their correct
address. Failure to receive bills will not be considered a reason for
nonpayment, nor permit an extension of the date at which time the account will
be considered delinquent.
(Ord. 648, passed 4-19-2022)
§ 8-2-46 FORWARDING UNPAID SERVICE BALANCES.
   Should a customer have an unpaid balance from a previous location, a
forwarding balance will be added to the customer’s present account.
(Ord. 648, passed 4-19-2022)
§ 8-2-47 DISCONTINUANCE OF SERVICE BY CUSTOMER.
   Any user desiring to discontinue solid waste collection service shall notify
the Finance Department. Any credit balance in favor of the user, as a result of
a deposit or advance payment, shall be refunded promptly after receipt of the
notice of discontinuance, except that an amount to be set by the City Council
by resolution shall be retained by the Finance Department as a fee for turning
off water service.
(Ord. 648, passed 4-19-2022)
§ 8-2-48 SERVICE CHARGES.
   (A)   Charges set by resolution. Monthly customer collection charges for
single-family units, multi-family units, commercial units, industrial units,
institutional units and governmental units shall be set by resolution of the
City Council. The City Council shall by resolution set the amount of charges,
fees and assessments that include, but are not limited to, the following:
      1.   Base rate or fixed component service charge;
      2.   Service charges other than the base rate;
      3.   Late fees;
      4.   Return check fees;
      5.   Franchise fee; and
      6.   Penalty fee for unauthorized use of city accumulation, collection,
transportation, storage and disposal services.
   (B)   Separate billings for collocated customers. Multi-family units,
commercial units, industrial units, institutional units and governmental units
occupying the same space in a building shall each be subject to the same
established charges as if at separate locations as adopted by the City Council
by resolution.
   (C)   Billing duration or period. The City Manager shall determine the
duration of the billing period and may change the duration of the billing
period from time to time. If the due date is a Saturday, Sunday or legal
holiday, charges shall become delinquent at the close of business on the next
business day after said Saturday, Sunday or legal holiday. Postmarks will not
be accepted as the date the payment was received.
   (D)   Unified billing. Services for the accumulation, collection, handling,
transporting, storage and disposal of garbage, refuse, rubbish, construction
rubbish, hazardous waste, household hazardous waste, infectious waste, liquid
industrial waste, recyclable materials, green waste or any other solid waste
shall be billed under a unified bill which includes water and sewer collection
charges and other charges as the City Council designates. Where the customer
does not have a city utility bill, a separate bill for garbage, refuse,
rubbish, construction rubbish, hazardous waste, household hazardous waste,
infectious waste, liquid industrial waste, recyclable materials, green waste or
any other solid waste shall be sent.
   (E)   Unpaid bills are liens. All unpaid accounts for the collection of
garbage, refuse, rubbish, construction rubbish, hazardous waste, household
hazardous waste, infectious waste, liquid industrial waste, recyclable
materials, green waste or any other solid waste shall be a lien against the
property.
   (F)   Penalties and late fees. If payment is not received within the billing
period that the charge is made, the Finance Department may charge late fees and
penalties as determined by resolution of the City Council. A dishonored check
shall not be considered payment received.
(Ord. 648, passed 4-19-2022)
§ 8-2-49 FREE SERVICE PROHIBITED.
   There shall be no free service rendered by the city and, if any local, state
or federal government, or any department, agency or instrumentality thereof, or
any other public body shall desire service to be rendered by the city, it shall
apply for and receive such service pursuant to the city’s ordinances,
resolutions, policies, rules and regulations and shall pay for the same as
established by resolution of the City Council.
(Ord. 648, passed 4-19-2022)
§ 8-2-50 APPLICATION OF UTILITY BILL PAYMENTS.
   Any payments received by the city for the payment of utility bills shall be
applied to the outstanding balances of services charges in the following order:
   (A)   Fines, penalties or assessments;
   (B)   Charges for the accumulation, collection, transporting, storage and
disposal of garbage, refuse, rubbish, construction rubbish, hazardous waste,
household hazardous waste, infectious waste, liquid industrial waste,
recyclable materials, green waste or any other solid waste;
   (C)   Sewer charges; and
   (D)   Water charges.
(Ord. 648, passed 4-19-2022)
§ 8-2-51 MANDATORY SOLID WASTE SOURCE REDUCTION, DIVERSION AND RECYCLING.
   (A)   Recycling required under state law. The city must by law be in
compliance with Assembly Bill 939 (California Integrated Waste Management Act
of 1989) as outlined in the Cal. Public Resources Code §§ 40000 et seq.
(“Act”). This law requires all cities and counties to reduce the amount of
waste going to the landfill by 25% by 1995 and 50% by the year 2000. Fines of
up to $10,000 per day may be levied by the state against the city for failure
to meet these state mandated recycling goals. To comply with the law and reduce
waste going to the landfill, it is necessary that all existing and future
residential, multi-family, industrial, commercial, institutional and
governmental units and facilities implement plans to reduce and recycle all
solid wastes.
   (B)   Mandatory source reduction and recycling policies. The city has
adopted mandatory source reduction and mandatory recycling policies as
contained in this chapter and other policies, procedures, rules and regulations
that may from time to time be issued or amended by the City Council or the City
Manager.
(Ord. 648, passed 4-19-2022)
§ 8-2-52 MANDATORY RECYCLING FOR SINGLE-FAMILY DWELLING UNITS.
   (A)   Mandatory recycling. All owners and occupants of single-family
residential dwelling units are required to separate garbage, recyclable
materials and green waste materials and place them in appropriate city approved
containers as required under this chapter so that the city can meet its state
mandate of 50% solid waste diversion under Assembly Bill 939 (California
Integrated Waste Management Act of 1989) as outlined in the Cal. Public
Resources Code §§ 40000 et seq.
   (B)   Collection subscription. The owners and occupants of all single-family
dwelling units shall subscribe to the city curbside refuse, garbage, rubbish
and recycling collection programs within seven days of occupying their
residential dwelling unit.
   (C)   Commingling of recyclable materials prohibited. Commingling recyclable
materials in the same container as garbage, refuse, rubbish, construction
rubbish, hazardous waste, household hazardous waste, infectious waste, liquid
industrial waste or any other nonrecyclable solid waste shall be an infraction
punishable by a fine or penalty set by resolution of the City Council.
   (D)   Source reduction and recycling education. The city will work with the
owners and occupants of single-family residential units to encourage solid
waste source reduction, diversion and recycling. Such city activities may
include sending out notices, advertising in local publications, conducting
workshops, obtaining formal commitments from residential owners, policing
diversion rates, establishing penalties and taking enforcement actions for
failing to comply with the solid waste reduction, diversion and recycling
programs of the city.
   (E)   Fines and penalties. The City Council may establish fines and
penalties by resolution for failure to engage in recycling or placing garbage,
refuse, rubbish, construction rubbish, hazardous waste, household hazardous
waste, infectious waste, liquid industrial waste, recyclable materials or green
waste in the same container.
(Ord. 648, passed 4-19-2022)
§ 8-2-53 MANDATORY RECYCLING FOR MULTI-FAMILY, COMMERCIAL, INDUSTRIAL,
INSTITUTIONAL AND GOVERNMENTAL UNITS.
   (A)   Mandatory recycling. All owners, managers and occupants of multi-
family, commercial, industrial, institutional and governmental units and
facilities are required to separate garbage, recyclable materials and green
waste materials and place them in appropriate city approved containers as
required under this chapter so that the city can meet its state mandate of 50%
solid waste diversion under Assembly Bill 939 (California Integrated Waste
Management Act of 1989) as outlined in the Cal. Public Resources Code §§ 40000
et seq.
   (B)   Collection subscription. All owners or managers of multi-family,
commercial, industrial, institutional and governmental units and facilities
must subscribe to the city’s garbage and recycling collection program within
seven days of occupancy of their units.
   (C)   Container location. All owners or managers of multi-family,
industrial, commercial, institutional and governmental units and facilities
shall provide a location for the placement of recycling containers that are
convenient for tenants and approved by the city. Containers must be on a
concrete pad so that container wheels will roll and in a location that will
allow collection trucks to pick up the container contents without having a city
employee roll out the container from the storage area.
   (D)   Container contamination. It is unlawful for the owner or manager of a
multi-family, industrial, commercial, institutional or governmental unit or
facility, to have unrecyclable material present in any recyclable materials
container or green waste container serving their complex, business,
institution, organization or unit.
   (E)   Source reduction and recycling education. The city will work with the
owners, managers of multi-family, commercial, industrial, institutional and
governmental units and facilities to encourage solid waste source reduction,
diversion and recycling. Such city activities may include sending out notices,
advertising in local publications, conducting workshops, obtaining formal
commitments from businesses and institutions to recycle, policing diversion
rates, establishing fines and penalties, identifying multi-family, commercial,
industrial, institutional and governmental units that fail to comply with the
solid waste reduction, diversion and recycling programs of the city and taking
enforcement actions.
   (F)   Fines and penalties. The City Council may establish fines and
penalties by resolution for failure to engage in recycling or placing garbage
or recyclable materials in the same container.
(Ord. 648, passed 4-19-2022)
§ 8-2-54 SOURCE REDUCTION AND RECYCLING PLANS REQUIRED.
   (A)   Source reduction and recycling. By a date designated by the city, all
existing multi-family, commercial, industrial, institutional and governmental
units and facilities as well as other developments over 5,000 square feet shall
design and implement city approved source reduction/recycling plans for white
paper, computer paper, glass, cans, cardboard, paper products, animal
carcasses, animal byproducts and other recoverable materials as determined by
the city, state or federal government.
   (B)   New development. All new development, new multi-family, commercial,
industrial, institutional and governmental units and facility occupancies
requiring city approval, and physical expansions of buildings or uses exceeding
5,000 square feet shall submit to the city a source reduction/recycling plan
addressing white paper, computer paper, glass, cans, cardboard, paper products
and other recoverable materials as determined by the city, state or federal
government. The proposed source reduction/recycling plan shall be submitted for
approval to the city at the time of filing a development application.
   (C)   Multi-family development common areas. Multi-family residential
development of any size shall include a plan for recycling of recyclable
materials and green waste in the design of common areas.
   (D)   Source reduction and reporting. Any licensee, franchisee, permittee or
contract agent acting pursuant to this chapter or contract with the city shall
provide and implement a source reduction/recycling plan for its customers to
comply with state law and the programs specified in the city for source
reduction and recycling plans, and submit monthly (or as otherwise determined
by the city) reports to the city summarizing its progress in diverting solid
waste generated by its customers in the city as required by the Cal. Public
Resources Code §§ 41780 and 41821. The reports must identify the tonnage
collected, tonnage recycled, tonnage composted, percent of waste recycled and/
or composted, materials recycled, and the progress and programs implemented
during the reporting period.
   (E)   Fees. The City Council may establish fees by resolution to review and
approve source reduction/recycling plans.
(Ord. 648, passed 4-19-2022)
§ 8-2-55 MANDATORY RECYCLING OF CONSTRUCTION AND DEMOLITION WASTE.
   (A)   Threshold for covered projects. The threshold for mandatory recycling
of construction and demolition waste is as follows.
      1.   All construction and renovation projects within the city, the
valuation of which are, or are projected to be, greater than or equal to
$20,000 shall comply with this chapter. The cost of the project shall be the
valuation ascribed to the project by the city’s building official or the city’s
Public Works Director. In addition, all demolition projects having a total
square footage of more than 1,000 shall be a covered project. Failure to comply
with any of the terms of this chapter shall subject the project applicant to
the full range of enforcement mechanisms as set forth in this chapter.
      2.   All city sponsored construction and renovation projects within the
city, the costs of which are, or are projected to be, greater than or equal to
$20,000 shall comply with this chapter. The cost of the project shall be the
valuation ascribed to the project by the city’s building official or the city’s
Public Works Director. In addition, all city sponsored demolition projects
having a total square footage of more than 1,000 shall be a covered project.
These city sponsored covered projects shall submit a recycling plan to the
designated compliance official prior to beginning any construction activities
and shall be subject to all applicable provisions of this chapter with the
exception of enforcement mechanisms and penalties as set forth in this chapter.
      3.   Applicants for construction, demolition and renovation projects
within the city whose total costs are valued at less than $20,000 shall be
encouraged to divert at least 50% of all project related construction and
demolition debris.
      4.   Compliance with the provisions of this chapter shall be listed as a
condition of approval on any building or demolition permit issued for a covered
project.
   (B)   Recycling plan application forms. Applicants for building or
demolition permits involving any covered project shall complete and submit a
recycling plan on a recycling plan form approved by the city for this purpose
as part of the application for the building demolition permit. The completed
recycling plan shall indicate all of the following:
      1.   The estimated volume or weight of such materials that can feasibly
be diverted via reuse or recycling;
      2.   The maximum weight of such materials that can feasibly be diverted
via reuse or recycling;
      3.   The vendor or facility that the applicant proposes to use to collect
or receive that material; and
      4.   The estimated volume or weight of construction and demolition debris
that will be landfilled. In estimating the volume or weight of materials
identified in the recycling plan, the applicant shall use the standardized
conversion rates approved by the city for this purpose.
   (C)   Recycling plan review.
      1.   Notwithstanding any other provision of this code, no building or
demolition permit shall be issued for any covered project unless and until the
city has approved the recycling plan. Approval shall not be required, however,
where an emergency demolition is required to protect public health or safety as
determined by the city.
      2.   If the city determines that the recycling plan is incomplete or
fails to indicate that at least 50% by weight of all construction and
demolition debris is generated by the project, the recycling plan shall be
returned to the applicant and marked “denied” or “further explanation
required”.
   (D)   Compliance with recycling plan. Prior to receiving a certificate of
occupancy or final inspection for the project, the applicant shall submit to
the city documentation that the diversion requirement for the project has been
met. The diversion requirement shall be that the applicant has diverted at
least 50% of the total construction or demolition debris generated by the
project via reuse or recycling, unless the applicant has been granted an
infeasible exemption pursuant to this chapter, in which case the diversion
requirement shall be the maximum feasible diversion rate established by the
city for the project. This documentation shall include all of the following:
      1.   Receipts from the vendor or facility which collected or received
each material showing the actual weight or volume of that material;
      2.   A copy of the previously approved recycling plan for the project
adding the actual volume or weight of each material diverted and landfilled;
and
      3.   Any additional information that the applicant believes is relevant
to determining its efforts to comply in good faith with this chapter.
   (E)   Weighing of wastes. Applicants shall make reasonable efforts to ensure
that all construction and demolition debris diverted or landfilled are measured
and recorded using the most accurate method of measurement available. To the
extent practical, all construction and demolition debris shall be weighed by
measurement on scales. Such scales shall be in compliance with all regulatory
requirements for accuracy and maintenance. For construction and demolition
debris for which weighing is not practical due to the small size or other
considerations, a volumetric measurement shall be used. For conversion of
volumetric measurements to weight, the applicant shall use the standardized
conversion rates approved by the city for this purpose.
   (F)   Determination of compliance. The city shall review the information
submitted under the provisions of this chapter and determine whether the
applicant has complied with the diversion requirement, as follows.
      1.   Full compliance. If the city determines that the applicant has fully
complied with the diversion requirements applicable to the project, the city
shall approve the recycling plan and inform the building official that a
certificate of occupancy or final inspection can be issued.
      2.   Substantial compliance. If the city determines that the diversion
requirement has not been achieved, or the city has determined on a case by case
basis whether the applicant has made a good faith effort to comply with this
chapter. In making this determination, the city shall consider the availability
of markets for the construction and demolition debris landfilled, the size of
the project, and the documented efforts of the applicant to divert construction
and demolition debris. If the city determines that the applicant has made a
good faith effort to comply with this chapter, the city shall approve the
recycling plan and inform the building official that a certificate of occupancy
or final inspection can be issued.
      3.   Noncompliance. If the city determines that the applicant has not
made a good faith effort to comply with this chapter, or if the applicant fails
to submit the documentation required by this chapter within the required time
period, then the applicant shall pay a penalty in the amount calculated as 2%
of the total project valuation. After payment of the penalty, the city shall
inform the building official that a certificate of occupancy or final
inspection can be issued.
   (G)   Falsification of records. If the applicant deliberately provides false
or misleading data to the city in violation of this chapter, the applicant may
be subject to penalties in addition to those specified in this chapter. In any
civil enforcement action, administrative or judicial, the city shall be
entitled to recover its attorney fees and costs from an applicant who is
determined by a court of competent jurisdiction to have violated this chapter.
   (H)   Infeasible exemption. The following procedures will be used in
applying for an infeasible exemption under this section.
      1.   If an applicant for a covered project experiences unique
circumstances that the applicant believes make it infeasible to comply with the
diversion requirement, the applicant may apply for an exemption at the time he
or she submits the recycling plan required under subsection (B) of this
section. The applicant shall indicate on the recycling plan the maximum rate of
diversion he or she believes is feasible for each material and the specific
circumstances that he or she believes make it infeasible to comply with the
diversion requirement.
      2.   The city shall review the information supplied by the applicant and
may meet with the applicant to discuss possible ways to meet the diversion
requirement. The city may request that staff from appropriate county, state and
federal agencies assist in providing information and in the review process.
      3.   If the city determines that it is infeasible for the applicant to
meet the diversion requirement due to unique circumstances, he or she shall
determine the maximum feasible diversion rate for each material and shall
indicate this rate on the recycling plan submitted by the applicant. The city
shall return a copy of the recycling plan to the applicant marked “Approved For
Infeasible Exemption” and shall notify the building official and the Public
Works Director that the recycling plan has been approved.
      4.   If the city determines that it is possible for the applicant to meet
the diversion requirement, he or she shall so inform the applicant in writing.
The applicant shall have 30 days to resubmit a recycling plan form in full
compliance with subsection (B) of this section. If the applicant fails to
resubmit the recycling plan, or if the resubmitted recycling plan does not
comply with subsection (B) of this section, the city shall deny the recycling
plan in accordance with the chapter.
   (I)   Appeals. An appeal to the decision made by a city staff member may be
made to the City Manager not longer than ten calendar days after the city staff
member’s decision. The decision of the City Manager shall be final. The
applicant must specifically state in notice of appeal the following:
      1.   The name and address of the appellant and the appellant’s interest
in the decision;
      2.   The nature of the decision appealed and/or the conditions appealed;
      3.   A clear and complete statement of the reasons why, in the opinion of
the appellant, the decision or the conditions imposed are unjustified or
inappropriate; and
      4.   Specific facts of the matter in sufficient detail to notify the
city. The appeal shall not be stated in generalities.
   (J)   Civil penalties and enforcement. If the city staff member, or upon
appeal, the City Manager determines that the applicant is in noncompliance as
described in this chapter, the applicant shall pay a civil penalty in the
amount calculated at 2% of the total project valuation. Until the civil penalty
is paid, a certificate of occupancy may be withheld by the building official.
The City Attorney is authorized to bring a civil action in any court of
competent jurisdiction to recover such civil penalties for the city.
(Ord. 648, passed 4-19-2022)
§ 8-2-56 COLLECTION OF RECYCLABLE MATERIALS BY CONTRACT, LICENSE, FRANCHISE OR
PERMIT ALLOWED.
   (A)   City Council agreements to collect recyclable materials. The City
Council may grant contracts, licenses, franchises, permits or enter into
agreements with any person, firm or corporation for the collection, processing
and marketing of recyclable materials from designated collection locations
within the city limits upon such terms and conditions as the City Council may
from time to time determine to be in the best interest of the city, and
consistent with the provisions of state and federal law. In such event it shall
be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation other than the licensed,
franchised or permitted contractor to collect, process or market recyclable
materials. Such contract, license, franchise, permit or agreement may be
revoked at any time by the City Council at its sole discretion.
   (B)   Disposal of recyclable materials. Nothing in the chapter shall limit
the right of an individual to donate, sell or otherwise dispose of his or her
recyclable materials from his or her residential dwelling unit or shall limit
the right of community nonprofit organizations (e.g., schools, churches, youth
groups) to collect such donations.
(Ord. 648, passed 4-19-2022)
§ 8-2-57 EMERGENCY REMOVAL OF SOLID WASTES.
   Nothing in this chapter shall be deemed to prohibit the removal and hauling
by an unlicensed person of materials considered by the city to constitute a
health menace of such nature as necessary to be promptly removed. Such removal
shall be reported in writing to the City Manager and Public Works Director by
the contract agent, franchisee, licensee, permittee within 24 hours of the
incident.
(Ord. 648, passed 4-19-2022)
§ 8-2-58 COMMERCIAL AND INDUSTRIAL MATERIAL RECOVERY FACILITIES AND RECYCLING
STATIONS.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to commence, expand or engage in the
business of owning, operating, managing or maintaining a commercial or
industrial material recovery facility or recycling station within the city
unless such person has received a contract, license, franchise or permit from
the City Council and complies with the provisions of this section and all other
laws and regulations of the federal government, state government and city.
   (A)   Contract, license, franchise or permit duration. Any contract,
license, franchise or permit issued by the City Council shall be for a period
of no longer than one year. The City Council in its sole and unconditional
discretion may renew, renew with conditions or decide not to renew the permit,
license, franchise or permit each year.
   (B)   Licenses required. All brokers, collectors and all other persons and
firms doing business with commercial and industrial recovery facilities and
recycling stations must have licenses from the city.
   (C)   Diversion and recycling reports. Once each month or other time
designated by the city and on a day to be designated by the city, every
material recovery facility and recycling station located within the city shall
report to the City Manager or his or her designee, the volume in tons of each
of the following categories of materials which have been received by that
material recovery facility or recycling station since the last report, from any
source within the city:
      1.   Metal (including aluminum cans, other cans and scrap metals);
      2.   Glass (including both colored glass and clear glass);
      3.   Paper products (including, but not necessarily limited to,
newspaper, cardboard and other paper products); and
      4.   Plastics (including California redemption value (CRV) plastics and
non-California redemption value (CRV) plastics).
   (D)   Other reports. Once each month or other time designated by the city,
and on a day to be designated by the city, every material recovery facility and
recycling station within the city limits shall report to the City Manager or
his or her designee, the amount in tons of the recyclable materials which, the
material recovery facility or recycling station has sent out of the city to the
following destinations:
      1.   Any landfill;
      2.   Any secondary recycling location (recycled scrap metal dealer, metal
fabricator, paper mill and the like); and
      3.   Other locations including, but not limited to, any facility that has
the intention of burning the recyclable materials.
   (E)   Transportation and cleanup. Any person engaged in such a business
shall comply with the provisions of this chapter in regard to the
transportation and cleanup of recyclable materials on city streets.
   (F)   Importation of materials or waste prohibited. Any person that
commences, expands or engages in the business of owning, operating, managing or
maintaining a commercial or industrial material recovery facility or recycling
station shall not import to their facility for processing any materials or
waste from outside the city limits.
   (G)   Franchise fee. The City Council hereby establishes a franchise fee of
15% of gross revenues for any person that commences, expands or engages in the
business of owning, operating, managing or maintaining a commercial or
industrial material recovery facility or recycling station within the city.
   (H)   Late fees and penalties. The City Council may establish late fees and
other penalties by resolution for failure to submit the proper reports on time
or the failure to submit complete reports.
   (I)   Legal compliance. Any person owning, operating, managing or
maintaining a material recovery facility or recycling station within the city
shall only operate the material recovery facility or recycling station on a
parcel that has received site plan approval from the city and shall comply with
all zoning, other applicable ordinances and land use regulations of the city.
(Ord. 648, passed 4-19-2022)
§ 8-2-59 COMMERCIAL AND INDUSTRIAL CONSTRUCTION RUBBISH FACILITIES.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to commence, expand or engage in the
business of owning, operating, managing or maintaining any commercial or
industrial facility which has a purpose engaging in any business which
accumulates, collects, transports, stores or disposes of construction rubbish
within the city unless such person has received a contract, license, franchise
or permit from the City Council, and complies with the provisions of this
section and all other laws, regulations of the federal government, state
government and city.
   (A)   Contract, license, franchise or permit duration. Any contract,
license, franchise or permit issued by the City Council shall be for a period
of no longer than one year. The City Council in its sole and unconditional
discretion may renew, renew with conditions or decide not to renew the permit,
license, franchise or permit each year.
   (B)   Licenses required. All brokers, collectors and all other persons and
firms doing business with commercial and industrial construction rubbish
facilities must have licenses from the city.
   (C)   Reports. Once each month or other time designated by the city and on a
day designated by the city, each such business that is located within the city
shall report the construction rubbish that the business has collected within
the city limits and which it has then disposed of in each of the following
manners:
      1.   Deposited in any landfill;
      2.   Buried in any location other than a landfill or incinerated; and
      3.   Deposited at any location which has the intention of recycling the
construction rubbish, including, but not limited to, any concrete plant,
asphalt plant or any location which intends to reuse directly any of the
materials within the construction rubbish.
   (D)   Transportation and cleanup. Any person engaged in such a business
shall comply with the provisions of this chapter in regard to the
transportation and cleanup of construction rubbish on city streets.
   (E)   Importation of construction rubbish prohibited. Any person that
commences, expands or engages in the business of owning, operating, managing or
maintaining a commercial or industrial construction rubbish waste facility
shall not import to their facility for processing any construction rubbish from
outside the city limits.
   (F)   Franchise fee. The City Council hereby establishes a franchise fee of
15% of gross revenues for any person that commences, expands or engages in the
business of owning, operating, managing or maintaining a commercial or
industrial construction rubbish facility within the city.
   (G)   Late fees and penalties. The City Council may establish late fees and
other penalties by resolution for failure to submit the proper reports on time
or the failure to submit complete reports.
   (H)   Legal compliance. Any person owning, operating, managing or
maintaining a commercial facility for the purpose of accumulating, collecting,
transporting or disposing of construction rubbish within the city shall only
operate the facility on a parcel that has received site plan approval from the
city and shall comply with all zoning, other applicable ordinances and land use
regulations of the city.
(Ord. 648, passed 4-19-2022)
§ 8-2-60 COMMERCIAL AND INDUSTRIAL HOUSEHOLD HAZARDOUS WASTE FACILITIES.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to commence, expand or engage in the
business of owning, operating, managing or maintaining any commercial or
industrial facility which has as a purpose engaging in any business which
accumulates, collects, removes, transports, stores or disposes of household
hazardous waste within the city unless such person has received a contract,
license, franchise or permit from the City Council, and complies with the
provisions of this section and all other laws and regulations of the federal
government, state government and the city.
   (A)   Contract, license, franchise or permit duration.
      1.   Any contract, license, franchise or permit issued by the City
Council shall be for a period of no longer than one year.
      2.   The City Council in its sole discretion may renew, renew with
conditions or decide not to renew the permit, license, franchise or permit each
year.
   (B)   Licenses required. All brokers, collectors and all other persons and
firms doing business with commercial and industrial household hazardous waste
facilities must have licenses from the city.
   (C)   Reports. Once each month, or other time designated by the city and on
a day to be designated by the city, each such business which is located within
the city shall report to the City Manager or his or her designee, the volume,
in tons, of the household hazardous waste which the business has collected
within the city limits and which it has then disposed of in each of the
following manners:
      1.   Deposited at any landfill;
      2.   Buried in any location other than a landfill or incinerated; and
      3.   Deposited at any location which has the intention of recycling the
household hazardous waste.
   (D)   Transportation and cleanup. Any person engaged in such a business
shall comply with the provisions of this chapter in regard to the
transportation and cleanup of household hazardous waste on city streets.
   (E)   Importation of household hazardous waste prohibited. Any person that
commences, expands or engages in the business of owning, operating, managing or
maintaining a commercial or industrial household hazardous waste facility shall
not import to their facility for processing any household hazardous waste from
outside the city limits.
   (F)   Franchise fee. The City Council hereby establishes a franchise fee of
15% of gross revenues for any person that commences, expands or engages in the
business of owning, operating, managing or maintaining a commercial or
industrial household hazardous waste facility within the city.
   (G)   Late fees and penalties. The City Council may establish late fees and
other penalties by resolution for failure to submit the proper reports on time
or the failure to submit complete reports.
   (H)   Legal compliance. Any person owning, operating, managing or
maintaining a commercial facility for the purpose of accumulating, collecting,
transporting or disposing of household hazardous waste within the city shall
only operate the facility on a parcel that has received site plan approval from
the city and shall comply with all zoning, other applicable ordinances and land
use regulations of the city.
(Ord. 648, passed 4-19-2022)
§ 8-2-61 COMMERCIAL AND INDUSTRIAL HAZARDOUS WASTE FACILITIES.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to commence, expand and engage in the
business of owning, operating, managing or maintaining any commercial or
industrial facility which has as a purpose engaging in any business which
accumulates, collects, transports, stores or disposes of hazardous waste within
the city unless such person has received a contract, license, franchise or
permit from the City Council and complies with the provisions of this section
and all other laws and regulations of the federal government, state government
and city.
   (A)   Contract, license, franchise or permit duration. Any contract,
license, franchise or permit issued by the City Council shall be for a period
of no longer than one year. The City Council in its sole and unconditional
discretion may renew, renew with conditions or decide not to renew the permit,
license, franchise or permit each year.
   (B)   Licenses required. All brokers, collectors and all other persons and
firms doing business with commercial and industrial hazardous waste facilities
must have licenses from the city.
   (C)   Reports. Once each month or other time designated by the city, and on
a day to be designated by the city, each such business which is located within
the city shall report to the City Manager or his or her designee, the volume,
in tons, of the hazardous wastes which the business has collected within the
city limits and which it has then disposed of in each of the following manners:
      1.   Deposited at any landfill;
      2.   Buried in any location other than a landfill or incinerated; and
      3.   Deposited at any location which has the intention of processing or
recycling the hazardous waste, including, but not limited to, any recycling of
motor oil, insecticides or other agricultural chemicals.
   (D)   Transportation and cleanup. Any person engaged in such a business
shall comply with the provisions of this chapter in regard to the
transportation and cleanup of hazardous waste on city streets.
   (E)   Importation of commercial and industrial hazardous waste prohibited.
Any person that commences, expands or engages in the business of owning,
operating, managing or maintaining a commercial or industrial hazardous waste
facility shall not import to their facility for processing any hazardous waste
from outside the city limits.
   (F)   Franchise fee. The City Council hereby establishes a franchise fee of
15% of gross revenues for any person that commences, expands or engages in the
business of owning, operating, managing or maintaining a commercial or
industrial hazardous waste facility within the city.
   (G)   Late fees and penalties. The City Council may establish late fees and
other penalties by resolution for failure to submit the proper reports on time
or the failure to submit complete reports.
   (H)   Legal compliance. Any person owning, operating, managing or
maintaining a commercial facility for the purpose of accumulating, collecting,
transporting or disposing of hazardous waste within the city shall only operate
the facility on a parcel that has received site plan approval from the city and
shall comply with all zoning, other applicable ordinances and land use
regulations of the city.
(Ord. 648, passed 4-19-2022)
§ 8-2-62 COMMERCIAL AND INDUSTRIAL INFECTIOUS WASTE AND LIQUID INDUSTRIAL WASTE
FACILITIES.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to commence, expand or engage in the
business of owning, operating, managing or maintaining any commercial or
industrial facility which has as a purpose engaging in any business which
accumulates, collects, transports, stores or disposes of infectious wastes or
liquid industrial wastes within the city unless such person has received a
contract, license, franchise or permit from the City Council and complies with
the provisions of this section and all other laws and regulations of the
federal government, state government and the city.
   (A)   Contract, license, franchise or permit duration. Any contract,
license, franchise or permit issued by the City Council shall be for a period
of no longer than one year. The City Council in its sole and unconditional
discretion may renew, renew with conditions or decide not to renew the permit,
license, franchise or permit each year.
   (B)   Licenses required. All brokers, collectors and all other persons and
firms doing business with commercial and industrial infectious waste and liquid
industrial waste facilities must have licenses from the city.
   (C)   Reports. Once each month or other time designated by the city, on a
day to be designated by the city, each such business which is located within
the city shall report to the City Manager or his or her designee, the volume,
in tons, of the infectious wastes or liquid industrial wastes which the
business has collected within the city limits and which it has then disposed of
in each of the following manners:
      1.   Deposited at any landfill;
      2.   Buried in any location other than a landfill or incinerated; and
      3.   Deposited at any location which has the intention of recycling the
infectious waste or liquid industrial waste, including, but not limited to, any
processing or recycling of animal carcasses or animal byproducts.
   (D)   Records. Any person accumulating, collecting, transporting, storing
and disposing of animal carcasses, animal byproducts or animal parts shall keep
the following records and submit them monthly to the City Manager or his or her
designee:
      1.   Source of all animal carcasses, animal byproducts or animal body
parts;
      2.   Name, address and phone number of the person, firm, business or
organization from which the animal carcasses, animal byproducts or animal body
parts originated;
      3.   Name, address and phone number of the person, firm, business or
organization accumulating, collecting and transporting animal carcasses, animal
byproducts or animal body parts;
      4.   Destination of all animal carcasses, animal byproducts or animal
body parts;
      5.   Name, address and phone number of the person, firm, business or
organization to which the animal carcasses, animal byproducts or animal body
parts were sent; and
      6.   Other information requested by the city.
   (E)   Transportation and cleanup. Any person engaged in such a business
shall comply with the provisions of this chapter in regard to the
transportation and cleanup of infectious waste and liquid industrial waste on
city streets. Vehicles used shall meet the following specifications in addition
to the vehicle specifications in other parts of this chapter.
      1.   All vehicles used for the collection and transportation of waste in
a liquid form shall be equipped with a reliable tank content indicator, shall
be watertight and have watertight covers on the manholes and fittings.
      2.   All discharge valves or gates shall be operated from the valves and
gates themselves and not by controls within the cab or truck. Contents shall be
discharged through a closed line without spilling or splashing and all valves
shall shut tightly without difficulty. The discharge line shall be equipped
with a leakproof cap which shall be fitted over the outlet pipe at all times,
except when the contents of the tank are being discharged. The cap shall be
securely attached to the vehicle by a chain or similar device approved by the
city.
      3.   All pumps shall be leakproof and all lines used for pumping and
cleaning of the waste disposal system shall be furnished by the contract agent,
licensee, franchisee or permittee.
   (F)   Importation of infectious waste and liquid industrial waste
prohibited. Any person that commences, expands or engages in the business of
owning, operating, managing or maintaining a commercial or industrial
infectious waste or liquid industrial waste facility shall not import to their
facility for processing any infectious waste or liquid industrial waste from
outside the city limits.
   (G)   Slaughtering prohibited. No person shall slaughter an animal at a
rendering plant, receiving plant, tallow plant, protein reduction plant or
similar facility.
   (H)   Processing, selling, or storing meats for human consumption. No person
shall give, sell, offer for sale, process, transport or deliver to any person
for human consumption meat obtained from a dead animal.
   (I)   Franchise fee. The City Council hereby establishes a franchise fee of
15% of gross revenues for any person that commences, expands or engages in the
business of owning, operating, managing or maintaining commercial or industrial
infectious waste or liquid industrial waste facilities within the city.
   (J)   Late fees and penalties. The City Council may establish late fees and
other penalties by resolution for failure to submit the proper reports on time
or the failure to submit complete reports.
   (K)   Legal compliance. Any person owning, operating, managing or
maintaining a commercial facility for the purpose of accumulating, collecting,
transporting or disposing of infectious waste or liquid industrial waste within
the city shall only operate the facility on a parcel that has received site
plan approval from the city and shall comply with all zoning, other applicable
ordinances and land use regulations of the city.
(Ord. 648, passed 4-19-2022)
§ 8-2-63 COMMERCIAL AND INDUSTRIAL GREEN WASTE FACILITIES.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to commence, expand or engage in the
business of owning, operating, managing or maintaining any commercial or
industrial facility which has as a purpose engaging in any business which
accumulates, collects, transports, stores or disposes of green waste within the
city unless such person has received a contract, license, franchise, or permit
from the City Council and complies with the provisions of this section and all
other laws and regulations of the federal government, state government and the
city.
   (A)   Contract, license, franchise or permit duration. Any contract,
license, franchise or permit issued by the City Council shall be for a period
of no longer than one year. The City Council in its sole discretion may renew,
renew with conditions or decide not to renew the permit, license, franchise or
permit each year.
   (B)   Reports. Once each month or other time designated by the city, and on
a day designated by the city, each such business which is located within the
city shall report to the city, the volume, in tons, of the green waste which
the business has collected within the city limits and which it has then
disposed of in each of the following manners:
      1.   Deposited in any landfill;
      2.   Deposited at any location which has the intention of burning the
green wastes, including, but not limited to, any cogeneration plant; and
      3.   Deposited in other locations, including, but not limited to, any
facility which had the intention of recycling the material for reuse
(including, but not limited to, reuse by any form of composting or co-
composting or as fertilizer or as soil amendments).
   (C)   Transportation and cleanup. Any person engaged in such a business
shall comply with the provisions of this chapter in regard to the
transportation and cleanup of green waste on city streets.
   (D)   Importation of green waste prohibited. Any person that commences,
expands or engages in the business of owning, operating, managing or
maintaining a commercial or industrial green waste facility shall not import to
their facility for processing any green waste from outside the city limits.
   (E)   Franchise fee. The City Council hereby establishes a franchise fee of
15% of gross revenues for any person that commences, expands or engages in the
business of owning, operating, managing or maintaining a commercial or
industrial green waste facility within the city.
   (F)   Late fees and penalties. The City Council may establish late fees and
other penalties by resolution for failure to submit the proper reports on time
or the failure to submit complete reports.
   (G)   Legal compliance. Any person owning, operating, managing or
maintaining a commercial facility for the purpose of accumulating, collecting,
transporting or disposing of green waste within the city shall only operate the
facility on a parcel that has received site plan approval from the city and
shall comply with all zoning, other and applicable ordinances and land use
regulations of the city.
(Ord. 648, passed 4-19-2022)
§ 8-2-64 INDEMNIFICATION, INSURANCE AND BONDS.
   (A)   Indemnification. All city contract agents, licensees, franchisees and
permittees shall indemnify and hold harmless the city and its elected
officials, appointed officials, officers, employees and volunteers from any
claims, suits, actions, demands, damages, losses, asserted against the city
caused by the willful or negligent act or omissions, on account of the
operations of the city contract agent, licensee, franchisee or permittee.
   (B)   Insurance.
      1.   The contract agent, licensee, franchisee or permittee shall provide
and maintain in effect, general liability bodily injury, property damage and
environmental liability insurance with limits in an amount approved by the City
Manager and the City Attorney and as set forth in the city contract, license,
franchise or permit granted by the City Council.
      2.   The city contract agent, licensee, franchisee or permittee shall
have the city, its elected officials, appointed officials, officers, employees
and volunteers named as additional insured under each of the aforementioned
policies, and such policies shall be endorsed by the insurance carrier to
require 30 days’ written notice to the city prior to any cancellation thereof.
      3.   The city contract agent, licensee, franchisee or permittee shall
furnish to the city policy endorsements evidencing that the insurance required
hereunder is in effect and such policy endorsements shall be in a form approved
by the City Attorney.
   (C)   Performance bond. A person engaged in performing such collection
services shall file a performance bond in favor of the city in the sum and form
approved by the City Manager and City Attorney to guarantee the faithful
performance and compliance with the terms and conditions of city ordinances and
the contract between the business and the city.
(Ord. 648, passed 4-19-2022)
§ 8-2-65 INDEPENDENT CONTRACTOR.
   (A)   All contract agents, franchisees, licensees and permittees shall, at
all times, act as an independent contractor, and neither the contract agent,
franchisee, licensee or permittee, his or her agents or employees, shall be
considered agents or employees of the city.
   (B)   Further, the contract agent, franchisee, licensee or permittee shall
have no authority to bind the city, in any manner or on any matter, whatsoever.
(Ord. 648, passed 4-19-2022)
§ 8-2-66 CONTRACTS, FRANCHISES, LICENSES OR PERMITS NOT ASSIGNABLE.
   (A)   Any city contract, franchise, license or permit issued pursuant to
this chapter shall not be assignable to any person whomsoever except by the
written consent of the City Council.
   (B)   Upon a discontinuance of business by the person to whom such contract,
license, franchise or permit is awarded, such license, franchise or permit
shall be immediately taken up by the Public Works Director or his or her
designee.
(Ord. 648, passed 4-19-2022)
§ 8-2-67 REVOCATION OF CITY CONTRACT, FRANCHISE, LICENSE OR PERMIT.
   (A)   Grounds for revocation. A city contract, franchise, license or permit
to accumulate, collect, transport, store or dispose of garbage, refuse,
rubbish, hazardous waste, household hazardous waste, construction rubbish,
infectious waste, liquid industrial waste, recyclable materials, green waste
materials or any other solid waste materials under the provisions of this
chapter may be revoked for the following reasons:
      1.   Violations of the provisions or the conditions of the city contract,
franchise, license or permit issued by the city;
      2.   Violations of federal law, state law, city ordinances (including the
city’s business license ordinance and zoning ordinance), federal regulations or
state regulations;
      3.   Improper or unsanitary accumulation, collection, transportation,
storage and disposal of solid waste;
      4.   Failure to control odors and violations of environmental
regulations;
      5.   Failure to meet the solid waste diversion requirements of Assembly
Bill 939 (California Integrated Waste Management Act of 1989) as outlined in
the Cal. Public Resources Code §§ 40000 et seq.; and
      6.   Failure to report on time or to submit complete, accurate reports
required by the city or state.
   (B)   Revocation procedures.
      1.   The Public Works Director may revoke a contract, franchise, license
or permit by issuing a written order to the contract agent, franchisee,
licensee or permittee. The order shall state the grounds for such revocation,
and that if proof of compliance is not provided to the Public Works Director
within 14 calendar days from the date of the written order, the contract,
franchise, license or permit will be revoked 30 days from the date the written
order was mailed.
      2.   The order shall be mailed by certified mail to the contract agent,
franchisee, licensee or permittee. The written order shall be subject to appeal
to the City Manager if the appeal is made within 14 days from the date of the
written order.
      3.   Upon revocation of a permit, the contract agent, franchisee,
licensee or permittee shall cease all services subject to the permit within 30
calendar days from the date the order is mailed by the City Manager. The City
Manager may adopt regulations to implement the provisions of this section.
(Ord. 648, passed 4-19-2022)
§ 8-2-68 FEES, FRANCHISES, PERMITS AND LICENSES.
   (A)   Fees.
      1.   In accordance with the Cal. Public Resources Code Division 30, Part
1, Chapter 1, §§ 40000 et seq., and other applicable law, the City Council by
resolution may levy fees within the city for solid waste collection and
management purposes, including, but not limited to, implementation of an
integrated waste management plan; inspection, auditing, review and planning for
solid waste, hazardous waste, household hazardous waste, infectious waste,
liquid industrial waste, recyclable materials, green waste, and all other solid
waste releases and spills.
      2.   Such fees may include, but not be limited to, fees for the costs of
preparing and implementing source reduction and recycling elements; household
hazardous waste elements, nondisposal facility elements and integrated waste
management plans.
   (B)   Fee waiver. The City Council may, at its discretion, waive any
franchise, permit or license fees, including, but not limited to, collectors of
green waste. The City Council may exempt nonprofit charities registered with
the Attorney General of the state from contract, franchise, license and permit
requirements.
(Ord. 648, passed 4-19-2022)
§ 8-2-69 COMPLIANCE WITH CALGREEN RECYCLING REQUIREMENTS.
   (A)   Persons applying for a permit from the city for new construction and
building additions and alternations shall comply with required components of
the state Green Building Standards Code, Cal. Code of Regulations Title 24,
Part 11, known as CalGreen, as amended, if its project is covered by the scope
of CalGreen or more stringent requirements of the city. Project applicants
shall refer to the latest addition of the CalGreen Building Code requirements
or other city local municipal code requirements.
   (B)   For projects covered by CalGreen or more stringent requirements of the
city, the applicants must, as a condition of the city’s permit approval, comply
with the following:
      1.   Where five or more multi-family dwelling units are constructed on a
building site, provide readily accessible areas that serve occupants of all
buildings on the site and are identified for the storage and collection of
green container materials, consistent with the two-container collection program
offered by the city, or comply with provision of adequate space for multi-
family and commercial premises pursuant to §§ 4.408.1, 4.410.2, 5.408.1, and
5.410.1 of the state Green Building Standards Code, Cal. Code of Regulations
Title 24, Part 11 as amended provided amended requirements are more stringent
than the CalGreen requirements for adequate recycling space effective January
1, 2020;
      2.   New commercial construction or additions resulting in more than 30%
of the floor area shall provide readily accessible areas identified for the
storage and collection of green container materials, consistent with the two-
container collection program offered by the city, for multi-family and
commercial premises pursuant to §§ 4.408.1, 4.410.2, 5.408.1, and 5.410.1 of
the state Green Building Standards Code, Cal. Code of Regulations Title 24,
Part 11 as amended provided amended, requirements are more stringent than the
CalGreen requirements for adequate container space effective January 1, 2020;
and
      3.   Comply with CalGreen requirements and applicable law related to
management of construction and demolition debris, including diversion of
organic waste in construction and demolition debris from disposal.
      4.   Comply with the city’s construction and demolition debris ordinance,
and all written and published city policies and/or administrative guidelines
regarding the collection, recycling, diversion, tracking and/or reporting of
construction and demolition debris.
(Ord. 648, passed 4-19-2022)
§ 8-2-70 WATER EFFICIENT LANDSCAPE AND IRRIGATION ORDINANCE REQUIREMENTS.
   (A)   Property owners or their building or landscape designers, including
anyone requiring a building or planning permit, plan check or landscape design
review from the city, who are constructing a new (single-family, multi-family,
public, institutional or commercial) project with a landscape area greater than
500 square feet, or rehabilitating an existing landscape with a total landscape
area greater than 2,500 square feet, shall comply with §§ 492.6(a)(3)(B) (C),
(D) and (G) of the MWELO, including sections related to use of compost and
mulch as delineated in this section.
   (B)   1.   The following compost and mulch use requirements that are part of
the MWELO are now also included as requirements of this chapter.
      2.   Other requirements of the MWELO are in effect and can be found in
Cal. Code of Regulations Title 23, Division 2, Chapter 2.7.
   (C)   Property owners or their building or landscape designers that meet the
threshold for MWELO compliance outlined in § 8-2-70(A) above shall:
      1.   Comply with §§ 492.6 (a)(3)(B)(C), (D) and (G) of the MWELO, which
requires the submittal of a landscape design plan with a soil preparation,
mulch and amendments section to include the following:
         (a)   For landscape installations, compost at a rate of a minimum of
four cubic yards per 1,000 square feet of permeable area shall be incorporated
to a depth of six inches into the soil. Soils with greater than 6% organic
matter in the top six inches of soil are exempt from adding compost and
tilling;
         (b)   For landscape installations, a minimum three-inch layer of mulch
shall be applied on all exposed soil surfaces of planting areas except in turf
areas, creeping or rooting groundcovers, or direct seeding applications where
mulch is contraindicated. To provide habitat for beneficial insects and other
wildlife up to 5% of the landscape area may be left without mulch. The
designated insect habitat must be included in the landscape design plan as
such; and
         (c)   Organic mulch materials made from recycled or post-consumer
materials shall take precedence over inorganic materials or virgin forest
products unless the recycled post-consumer organic products are not locally
available. Organic mulches are not required where prohibited by local fuel
modification plan guidelines or other applicable local ordinances.
      2.   The MWELO compliance items listed in this section are not an
inclusive list of MWELO requirements; therefore, property owners or their
building or landscape designers that meet the threshold for MWELO compliance
outlined in § 8-2-70-(A) shall consult the full MWELO for all requirements.
   (D)   If, after the adoption of this chapter, the state Department of Water
Resources, or its successor agency, amends Cal. Code of Regulations Title 23,
Division 2, Chapter 2.7, §§ 492.6(a)(3)(B) (C), (D), and (G) of the MWWELO
September 15, 2015 requirements in a manner that requires city to incorporate
the requirements of an updated MWELO in a local ordinance, and the amended
requirements include provisions more stringent than those required in this
section, the revised requirements of Cal. Code of Regulations Title 23,
Division 2, Chapter 2.7, shall be enforced.
(Ord. 648, passed 4-19-2022)
§ 8-2-71 PROCUREMENT REQUIREMENTS FOR JURISDICTION DEPARTMENTS, DIRECT SERVICE
PROVIDERS, AND VENDORS.
   City departments, and direct service providers to the city, as applicable,
must comply with the city’s recovered organic waste product procurement policy
and recycled-content paper procurement policy.
(Ord. 648, passed 4-19-2022)
§ 8-2-72 RIGHT OF ENTRY FOR INSPECTION AND RECORDS EXAMINATION.
   (A)   City representatives and/or its designated entity, including designees
are authorized to conduct inspections and investigations, at random or
otherwise, of any collection container, collection vehicle loads or transfer,
processing or disposal facility for materials collected from generators, or
source separated materials to confirm compliance with this chapter. This
section does not allow the city to enter the interior of a private residential
property for inspection.
   (B)   Regulated entity shall provide or arrange for access during all
inspections (with the exception of residential property interiors) and shall
cooperate with the city’s employee or its designated entity/designee during
such inspections and investigations. Such inspections and investigations may
include confirmation of proper placement of materials in containers, edible
food recovery activities, records or any other requirement of this chapter
described herein. Failure to provide or arrange for:
      1.   Access to an entity’s premises; or
      2.   Access to records for any inspection or investigation is a violation
of this chapter and may result in penalties described.
   (C)   Any records obtained by the city during its inspections, and other
reviews shall be subject to the requirements and applicable disclosure
exemptions of the Public Records Act as set forth in Cal. Gov’t Code § 6250 et
seq.
   (D)   City representatives, its designated entity and/or designee are
authorized to conduct any inspections, or other investigations as reasonably
necessary to further the goals of this chapter, subject to applicable laws.
   (E)   The city shall receive written complaints from persons regarding an
entity that may be potentially non-compliant with SB 1383 regulations,
including receipt of anonymous complaints.
(Ord. 648, passed 4-19-2022)
§ 8-2-73 VIOLATIONS AND ENFORCEMENT.
   (A)   Violation of any provision of this chapter shall constitute grounds
for issuance of a notice of violation and assessment of a fine by a city
enforcement official or representative. Enforcement actions under this chapter
are issuance of an administrative citation and assessment of a fine pursuant to
Chapter 18 of Title 1 of this code of ordinances. The city’s procedures on
imposition of administrative fines pursuant to Chapter 18 of Title 1 of this
code of ordinances shall govern the imposition, enforcement, collection and
review of administrative citations issued to enforce this chapter and any rule
or regulation adopted pursuant to this chapter, except as otherwise indicated
in this chapter.
   (B)   Other remedies allowed by law may be used, including civil action or
prosecution as misdemeanor or infraction. The city may pursue civil actions in
the state courts to seek recovery of unpaid administrative citations. The city
may choose to delay court action until such time as a sufficiently large number
of violations, or cumulative size of violations exist such that court action is
a reasonable use of city staff and resources.
   (C)   Enforcement pursuant to this chapter may be undertaken by the city’s
enforcement official, which may be the City Manager or his or her designee,
legal counsel or combination thereof.
    (D)   Process for enforcement shall be as follows.
      1.   A city enforcement official will monitor compliance with this
chapter randomly and through compliance reviews, route reviews, investigation
of complaints and an inspection program. Section
8-2-72 establishes city’s right to conduct inspections and investigations.
      2.   The city may issue an official notification to notify regulated
entities of its obligations under the chapter.
      3.   For incidences of prohibited container contaminants found in
containers, the city or its designee will issue a notice of violation to any
generator found to have prohibited container contaminants in a container. Such
notice will be provided via a cart tag or other communication immediately upon
identification of the prohibited container contaminants or within three days
after determining that a violation has occurred. If the city observes
prohibited container contaminants in a generator’s containers on more than two
consecutive occasion(s), the city may assess contamination processing fees or
contamination penalties on the generator.
      4.   With the exception of violations of generator contamination of
container contents addressed under § 8-2-73(D)(3) the city shall issue a notice
of violation requiring compliance within 60 days of issuance of the notice.
      5.   Absent compliance by the respondent within the deadline set forth in
the notice of violation, the city shall commence an action to impose penalties,
via an administrative citation and fine pursuant to Chapter 18 of Title 1 of
this code of ordinances. Notices shall be sent to the owner at the official
address of the owner maintained by the tax collector for the city or if no such
address is available, to the owner at the address of the dwelling or commercial
property or to the party responsible for paying for the collection services,
depending upon available information.
   (E)   The following factors shall be used to determine the amount of the
penalty for each violation, further described in §
8-2-75, within the appropriate penalty amount range:
      1.   The nature, circumstances and severity of the violation(s);
      2.   The violator’s ability to pay;
      3.   The willfulness of the violator’s misconduct;
      4.   Whether the violator took measures to avoid or mitigate violations
of this chapter;
      5.   Evidence of any economic benefit resulting from the violation(s);
      6.   The deterrent effect of the penalty on the violator; and
      7.    Whether the violation(s) were due to conditions outside the control
of the violator.
   (F)   The city may extend the compliance deadlines set forth in a notice of
violation issued in accordance with this section if it finds that there are
extenuating circumstances beyond the control of the respondent that make
compliance within the deadlines impracticable, including the following:
      1.   Acts of God, such as earthquakes, wildfires, flooding and other
emergencies or natural disasters;
      2.    Delays in obtaining discretionary permits or other government
agency approvals; or
      3.   Deficiencies in organic waste recycling infrastructure or edible
food recovery capacity and the city is under a corrective action plan with
CALRecycle pursuant to Cal. Code of Regulations Title 14, § 18996.2, due to
those deficiencies.
   (G)   Persons receiving an administrative citation containing a penalty for
an uncorrected violation may request a hearing to appeal the citation. A
hearing will be held only if it is requested within the time prescribed and
consistent with city’s procedures in the city’s codes for appeals pursuant to
Chapter 18 of Title 1 of this code of ordinances. Evidence may be presented at
the hearing. The city will appoint a hearing officer who shall conduct the
hearing and issue a final written order.
   (H)   Beginning January 1, 2022 and through December 31, 2023, the city will
conduct inspections, route reviews or waste evaluations and compliance reviews,
depending upon the type of regulated entity, to determine compliance, and if
the city determines that organic waste generator, self-hauler, hauler, tier one
commercial edible food generator, food recovery organization, food recovery
service or other entity is not in compliance, it shall provide educational
materials to the entity describing its obligations under this chapter and a
notice that compliance is required by January 1, 2022, and that violations may
be subject to administrative civil penalties starting on January 1, 2024.
   (I)   Beginning January 1, 2024, if the city determines that an organic
waste generator, self-hauler, hauler, tier one or tier two commercial edible
food generator, food recovery organization, food recovery service or other
entity is not in compliance with this chapter, it shall document the
noncompliance or violation, issue a notice of violation, and take enforcement
action pursuant to this section as needed.
(Ord. 648, passed 4-19-2022)
§ 8-2-74 SEVERABILITY.
   (A)   If any section, subsection, sentence, clause, phrase or word of this
chapter, or any application thereof to any person or circumstance, is held to
be invalid or unconstitutional by a decision of a court of competent
jurisdiction, such decision shall not affect the validity of the remaining
portions or applications of this chapter.
   (B)   The City Council hereby declares that it would have passed this
chapter and each and every section, subsection, sentence, clause, phrase and
word not declared invalid or unconstitutional without regard to whether any
other portion of this chapter or application thereof would be subsequently
declared invalid or unconstitutional.
(Ord. 648, passed 4-19-2022)
§ 8-2-75 PENALTY.
   The penalty levels for violation of this chapter, pursuant to §
8-2-73, are as follows.
   (A)   For a first violation, the amount of the base penalty shall be $100
per violation.
   (B)   For a second violation, the amount of the base penalty shall be $200
per violation.
   (C)   For a third or subsequent violation, the amount of the base penalty
shall be $500 per violation.
(Ord. 648, passed 4-19-2022)
CHAPTER 3: WEEDS, RUBBISH AND MISTLETOE
Section
8-3-1 Definitions
8-3-2 Removal or destruction of weeds, rubbish and mistletoe
8-3-3 Disposal of weeds, rubbish and mistletoe
8-3-4 Notice to remove or destroy
8-3-5 Form of notice
8-3-6 Entry to abate
8-3-7 Lien against property
8-3-8 Collection of assessment
§ 8-3-1 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   MISTLETOE. Viscum album.
   OWNER. The legal owner or owner of record of real property fronting on any
street and as used in this chapter, the singular shall include the plural, and
shall include an individual, a firm, an association, a corporation, a
partnership and the lessees, trustees, agents, employees, servants and
representatives of any such owner.
   PUBLIC STREET OR STREETS. All roads, streets, avenues, boulevards, alleys,
parkways and public rights-of-way, or any portions thereof, of the city.
   RUBBISH. All putrescible and nonputrescible, combustible and noncombustible
solid wastes, including garbage, refuse, ashes, street cleanings, dead animals,
abandoned or no longer used automobiles, junk, worthless and useless articles,
which are in such a state or in such quantity as to be unsightly, against
general welfare, unhealthful, dangerous to persons or property, or so as to
interfere with the abatement of weeds. Also includes all tree trimmings and
prunings of any kind.
   WEEDS. Includes any of the following:
      1.   Weeds which bear or may bear seeds of a downy or wingy nature;
      2.   Weeds and indigenous grasses which may attain such large growth as
to become, when dry, a fire menace;
      3.   Weeds which are otherwise noxious or dangerous;
      4.   Weeds which are a public nuisance of a seasonal or recurring nature;
      5.   Poison oak and poison ivy when the conditions of growth are such as
to constitute a menace to the public health;
      6.   Mistletoe or other parasitic growths;
      7.   Sandburs and puncture vines; and
      8.   Any grass or weed which exceeds three inches in height.
(Ord. 318, passed 4-7-1987)
§ 8-3-2 REMOVAL OR DESTRUCTION OF WEEDS, RUBBISH AND MISTLETOE.
   (A)   Each real property owner in the city shall destroy or remove all
weeds, rubbish and mistletoe from the following areas:
      1.   His or her private property, including the area between the property
line of his or her property to the curb line of the street or streets upon
which the property abuts (including all abutting sidewalk areas); and
      2.   The abutting half of the alley.
   (B)   The above areas shall include between the sidelines of the property as
extended.
   (C)   Every real property owner in the city shall destroy or remove all
weeds, rubbish and mistletoe periodically throughout the year so that at no
time during the year will the weeds, rubbish and mistletoe constitute a
nuisance or a hazard.
(Ord. 318, passed 4-7-1987)
§ 8-3-3 DISPOSAL OF WEEDS, RUBBISH AND MISTLETOE.
   Upon removal, said weeds, rubbish and mistletoe shall not be placed,
deposited or dumped in the public streets, or placed, deposited or dumped
between the property line and the curb line.
(Ord. 318, passed 4-7-1987)
§ 8-3-4 NOTICE TO REMOVE OR DESTROY.
   (A)   1.   Upon failure of a real property owner or lessee to destroy or
remove such weeds, rubbish, or mistletoe as required by §
8-3-2 of this chapter, the owner shall be given notice by the Director of
Public Works or his or her designee to remove or destroy said weeds, rubbish or
mistletoe within a period of ten days.
      2.   Such notice shall be (as described in §
8-3-5 of this chapter) posted on the property in question and a certified
letter sent to the property owner and any lessee of record (if known)
containing the same information as described in §
8-3-5 of this chapter.
      3.   The property owner or lessee will have ten days to file an appeal
with the Director of Public Works or his or her designee on the appropriate
appeals form.
   (B)   If at the end of the ten-day period mentioned in said notice the
property owner or lessee has failed to comply with the notice and to file an
appeal, the Director of Public Works or his or her designee will cause said
weeds, rubbish or mistletoe to be destroyed and/or removed from said property
and shall charge the expense of such work plus appropriate administrative fees
to the owner of the real property. A failure to file a written appeal within
the time stated in the notice shall be deemed a waiver of all objections to the
proposed abatement. If the property owner or lessee has filed an appeal in
writing on the appropriate form and within the time period described in the
notice and is not satisfied with the decision of the Director of Public Works
or his or her designee, the owner then has the right to file an appeal in
writing within five days of said decision and on the appropriate form with the
City Clerk which will be heard by the City Council.
(Ord. 318, passed 4-7-1987)
§ 8-3-5 FORM OF NOTICE.
   The heading of the notice to be given by the Director of Public Works or his
designee shall be “NOTICE TO DESTROY OR REMOVE WEEDS, AND REMOVE RUBBISH AND
MISTLETOE” in letters not less than one inch in height and the notice shall be
substantially in the following form:
 
NOTICE TO DESTROY OR REMOVE
WEEDS AND REMOVE RUBBISH
AND MISTLETOE
   Notice is hereby given that the weeds, rubbish or mistletoe on this property,
including area between the property line to the curb line of the street or streets
upon which this property abuts including all sidewalk areas, and on the abutting
half of the alley, constitute a public nuisance which must be abated within ten
calendar days of the date stated below by the destruction or removal of those
weeds, rubbish or mistletoe. Otherwise they will be destroyed or removed and the
nuisance abated by the city and the cost of removal assessed, upon this land, and
will constitute a lien upon this land, described below, until paid.
   If you have any objection to this proposed destruction and removal of weeds,
rubbish and mistletoe, you are hereby notified to file with the Director of Public
Works or his designee within ten days of the date hereof a written appeal setting
forth the legal and factual reasons upon which the objection is based.
   A brief official or city assessment description of the premises is as follows:
   (Description)
   Dated: _______________________________________________________________
   Director of Public Works or Designee ______________________________________
 
(Ord. 318, passed 4-7-1987)
§ 8-3-6 ENTRY TO ABATE.
   The Director of Public Works or his or her designee, his or her assistant
and deputies, city employees or other public official designated by the City
Manager may enter upon private property to perform the duties imposed by this
chapter.
(Ord. 318, passed 4-7-1987)
§ 8-3-7 LIEN AGAINST PROPERTY.
   (A)   Upon completion of the work of destruction or removal of said weeds,
rubbish and mistletoe, the Director of Public Works or his or her designee
shall notify the Director of Finance that said work has been completed and of
the cost of performing the same, and the Director of Finance shall in turn
notify the owner of the real property in writing of the cost of such work.
   (B)   If the said owner fails or refuses to pay to the city the amount of
cost of such work within a period of 30 days from the date of such notice,
then, at the city’s option, the Director of Finance shall file for a small
claims judgment or cause said to be recorded in a book to be kept for that
purpose the name of the property, a description of the property sufficient for
identification, and the amount of the charges against said real property for
doing the work, removal or destruction of weeds, rubbish or mistletoe from said
property.
   (C)   From and after the date that the entry is made, the amount charged
against the real property shall constitute a special assessment against the
real property, which has been described in the notice, and shall be a lien
against the real property, and the amount of such special assessment shall be
added to the next regular bill for taxes levied against the real property.
(Ord. 318, passed 4-7-1987)
§ 8-3-8 COLLECTION OF ASSESSMENT.
   The amount of the assessment shall be collected at the time and in the
manner ordinary municipal taxes are collected. If delinquent, the amount is
subject to the same penalties and the same procedure of foreclosure and sale
provided for in ordinary municipal taxes.
(Ord. 318, passed 4-7-1987)
CHAPTER 4: WATER WELLS
Section
8-4-1 Water wells, health hazard
8-4-2 New wells, restrictions
8-4-3 Existing wells, restrictions
8-4-4 Penalty
§ 8-4-1 WATER WELLS, HEALTH HAZARD.
   The City Council hereby finds and determines that a public water supply
system with ample clean and potable water is required for the health, safety
and well being and fire protection of the inhabitants of the city; and water
wells owned and operated by any person other than the city may have an adverse
effect upon the city’s public water system by diminishing the amount of
underground water available for the city’s water supply system and by
increasing the possibility of contamination of underground water and thereby
becoming a health hazard.
(Ord. 160, passed 5-8-1972)
§ 8-4-2 NEW WELLS, RESTRICTIONS.
   No person may drill, dig or install a water well within the city for any
purpose whatsoever, save and except for the City Water Department.
(Ord. 160, passed 5-8-1972)
§ 8-4-3 EXISTING WELLS, RESTRICTIONS.
   No person owning or operating a water well within the city that was in
existence at the effective date hereof may:
   (A)   Furnish water whether by sale or gift to any other person;
   (B)   Deepen, enlarge or increase the pump horsepower of any such water
well; and
   (C)   Operate or maintain said well in such a manner as may result in the
contamination of the underground water supply.
(Ord. 160, passed 5-8-1972)
§ 8-4-4 PENALTY.
   Any person violating any provision of this chapter shall be deemed guilty of
a misdemeanor, and upon conviction thereof, shall be punishable as provided in
§
1-4-1 of this code. A separate offense shall be deemed committed for every day
that any violation of this chapter shall continue or occur.
(Ord. 160, passed 5-8-1972)
CHAPTER 5: HAZARDOUS MATERIALS
Section
8-5-1 Purpose
8-5-2 Definitions
8-5-3 Hazardous acts and notification requirements
8-5-4 Display of signs
8-5-5 Storage, warehousing, distribution, offering for sale and utilization
reporting
8-5-6 Enforcement
8-5-7 Penalties
§ 8-5-1 PURPOSE.
   (A)   In order to mitigate and/or control the effects of hazardous materials
incidents and spills, and to plan for such incidents the city has developed a
contingency plan.
   (B)   This chapter requires the reporting of accidents involving hazardous
or toxic materials to the Public Safety Department in order to allow
implementation of said emergency plan.
   (C)   Also the reporting of storage, offering for sale, distribution or the
use of said materials to the Public Safety Department of the city.
   (D)   Also the posting of signs shall be required at industrial and
commercial sites where hazardous or toxic materials are present in order to
inform persons at such sites of the requirements for notification of hazardous
or toxic material spills to the city’s Fire Department.
(Ord. 237, passed 9-9-1982)
§ 8-5-2 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   HAZARDOUS MATERIAL. For the purpose of this chapter, shall mean a substance
or combination of substances which, taking into account quantity,
concentration, physical, chemical, or infectious characteristics, would
reasonably be recognized to:
      1.   Cause, or significantly contribute to an increase in mortality or an
increase in serious irreversible, or incapacitating reversible illness; or
      2.   Pose a substantial present or potential hazard to humans or the
environment.
   INDUSTRIAL. Shall include, but not be limited to, industrial plants,
commercial outlets, retail stores, storage and warehouse facilities,
agricultural supply facilities, agricultural spraying companies and
agricultural processing plants.
(Ord. 237, passed 9-9-1982)
§ 8-5-3 HAZARDOUS ACTS AND NOTIFICATION REQUIREMENTS.
   All persons, corporations or others engaged in industrial activities or
activities in which hazardous or toxic materials are being utilized, handled or
otherwise present, shall immediately report any accident, fire or incident that
presents a danger to persons, property or the environment involving a hazardous
material to the city’s Fire Department.
(Ord. 237, passed 9-9-1982)
§ 8-5-4 DISPLAY OF SIGNS.
   (A)   All persons, corporations or others engaged in the storage or
activities wherein a hazardous material is utilized, handled or otherwise
present, shall display signs that shall substantially read as follows:
If you know or suspect that a hazardous material is involved in an accident,
spill or fire that presents a danger to persons, property or the environment,
immediately call Livingston Fire Department at 394-7511 and report the incident
or what you know or suspect.
   (B)   Signs shall be a minimum of 19 inches by 25 inches and the lettering
in the sign must be legible from a distance of 30 feet.
   (C)   Signs shall be adequately maintained.
   (D)   Signs shall be conspicuously placed at each location where hazardous
materials are utilized or otherwise present.
   (E)   The number of signs required to be placed at each location shall be
the minimum needed to adequately warn people of the presence of the hazardous
material. Signs shall be placed at all entrances to areas in which hazardous
materials are located. The number of signs required at each location may be
prescribed by the Director of Public Safety.
   (F)   One or more signs shall be placed by the nearest telephone to the
hazardous materials on the premises. These signs shall be three inches by seven
inches.
(Ord. 237, passed 9-9-1982)
§ 8-5-5 STORAGE, WAREHOUSING, DISTRIBUTION, OFFERING FOR SALE AND UTILIZATION
REPORTING.
   All persons, corporations or others who regularly store, warehouse,
distribute, offer for sale or use hazardous materials shall give the Public
Safety Department of the city the following information with respect to any
hazardous material in excess of five gallons of liquid or five pounds of dry
material (said measurement to be the combination of all materials involved):
   (A)   Address and location of facility;
   (B)   Property lines of facility and distance of facility from property
lines;
   (C)   Distance from facility to adjacent buildings located both on the
facilities property and adjacent property;
   (D)   The location of storm drains and fire hydrants near said facility;
   (E)   Loading service areas;
   (F)   On a separate plan, the interior of the proposed facility and location
of any and all materials to be stored and the quantity and type of material.
The quantity and type of material stored may be furnished on a separate list;
and
   (G)   On the plan (subsection (F) of this section) or a separate plan, shall
also be displayed the location of all entrances and exits, gas meters, electric
meters, heating and cooling appliance locations and “shutoffs” as well as
particularities and if any, safety features of the facility.
(Ord. 237, passed 9-9-1982)
§ 8-5-6 ENFORCEMENT.
   The Public Safety Department of the city is authorized to inspect all
facilities and sites covered by this chapter within the confines of the city
for the adequacy of warning signs, storage facilities or sites and the handling
or use of hazardous materials, as and when deemed necessary by the Director of
Public Safety or at the request of the owner or manager of the facility or
site.
(Ord. 237, passed 9-9-1982)
§ 8-5-7 PENALTIES.
   (A)   Any facility or site or operation covered by this chapter or the
handling or use of hazardous materials, which in the judgment of the Director
of Public Safety is unsafe to the health and safety of any person, property or
the environment, may be denied the right to store or use hazardous materials by
order of the Director of Public Safety until such time as the problem or hazard
no longer exists and is approved by the Director of Public Safety.
   (B)   Any person violating any requirement of this chapter shall be deemed
guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction thereof shall be punished by a fine
not to exceed $500 for any one offense, or by imprisonment in the county jail
for a period of not more than six months, or by both such fine and
imprisonment.
(Ord. 237, passed 9-9-1982)
CHAPTER 6: SMOKING REGULATED OR PROHIBITED
Section
8-6-1 Purposes and definitions
8-6-1-1 Legislative purpose
8-6-1-2 Definitions
8-6-2 Regulation of smoking in city facilities
8-6-2-1 Smoking prohibited
8-6-2-2 Signs
8-6-2-3 Disciplinary actions
8-6-3 Prohibition of smoking in certain places open to public
8-6-3-1 Smoking prohibited
8-6-3-2 Signs
8-6-4 Regulation of smoking in private places of employment
8-6-4-1 Smoke free areas
8-6-4-2 Written policies
8-6-4-3 Nonsmoking areas
8-6-4-4 Compliance
8-6-4-5 Retaliation
8-6-4-6 Enforcement policy
8-6-4-7 Signs
8-6-5 General provisions
8-6-5-1 Exempted areas
8-6-5-2 Exemptions
8-6-5-3 Certification
8-6-5-4 Complaints
8-6-5-5 Enforcement officer
8-6-5-6 Violations
8-6-5-7 Severability
§ 8-6-1 PURPOSES AND DEFINITIONS.
§ 8-6-1-1 LEGISLATIVE PURPOSE.
   The City Council finds that the smoking of tobacco, or any other weed or
plant, is a positive danger to health and a material annoyance, inconvenience,
discomfort and a health hazard to those who are present in confined spaces, and
in order to serve public health, safety and welfare, the declared purpose of
this chapter is to prohibit the smoking of tobacco, or any weed or plant, in
public places and places of employment, as stated and required in this chapter.
(Ord. 439, passed 1-17-1995)
§ 8-6-1-2 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   BAR. Any area which is devoted to the serving of alcoholic beverages for
consumption by guests on the premises and in which the serving of food is only
incidental to the consumption of such beverages. Although a restaurant may
contain a BAR, the term BAR shall not include the restaurant dining area.
   BUSINESS. Any sole proprietorship, partnership, joint venture, corporation
or other business entity formed for profitmaking purposes, including retail
establishments where goods or services are sold as well as professional
corporations and other entities under which legal, medical, dental,
engineering, architectural or other professional services are delivered.
   CITY OF LIVINGSTON. Includes all entities of which the City Council of the
City of Livingston is the governing body.
   DINING AREA. Any enclosed area containing a counter or tables upon which
meals are served.
   EMPLOYEE. Any person who is employed by any employer in consideration for
direct or indirect monetary wages or profit.
   EMPLOYER. Any person who employs the services of an individual person.
   NONPROFIT ENTITY. Any corporation, unincorporated association or other
entity created for charitable, philanthropic, educational, character building,
political, social or other similar purposes, the net proceeds from the
operations of which are committed to the promotion of the objects or purposes
of the organization and not to private financial gain. A public agency is not a
NONPROFIT ENTITY within the meaning of this definition.
   PERSON. Any natural person, partnership, corporation, unincorporated
association, joint venture, business trust, joint stock company, club or other
organization of any kind except the City of Livingston or any other public
agency.
   PLACE OF EMPLOYMENT. Any enclosed area under the control of an employer
which employees normally frequent during the course of employment, including,
but not limited to:
      1.   Work areas;
      2.   Conference rooms and classrooms;
      3.   Employee cafeterias;
      4.   Employee lounges and restrooms; and
      5.   Hallways.
   PUBLIC PLACE. Any enclosed area, not a private residence, to which the
public is invited or in which the public is permitted, including, but not
limited to:
      1.   Banks;
      2.   Childcare facilities;
      3.   Educational facilities;
      4.   Healthcare facilities;
      5.   Public transportation facilities;
      6.   Recreation areas;
      7.   Restaurants;
      8.   Retail stores;
      9.   Retail service establishments;
      10.   Retail food production and marketing establishments; and
      11.   Waiting rooms.
   RESTAURANT. Any restaurant, cafeteria, luncheonette, tavern, cocktail
lounge, sandwich stand, soda fountain, private school cafeteria, public school
cafeteria when used for nonschool functions, dining area, service line or
eating establishment, any other eating establishment, organization, club,
including veterans’ club, boarding house or guesthouse, which gives or offers
for sale food to the public, guests, patrons or employees, as well as kitchens
in which food is prepared on the premises for serving elsewhere including
catering functions except that the term RESTAURANT shall not include a cocktail
lounge or tavern if said cocktail lounge or tavern is a “bar” as defined in
this section.
   SERVICE LINE. Any indoor line at which one or more persons are waiting for
or receiving service of any kind whether or not such service involves the
exchange of money.
   SMOKING. Lighting, inhaling, exhaling or burning any pipe, cigar, cigarette,
weed or plant, or carrying any lighted pipe, lighted cigar, lighted cigarette,
lighted weed, lighted plant or other ignited combustible substance in any
manner or in any form.
   TOBACCO STORE. Any retail store utilized primarily for the sale of tobacco
products and accessories and in which the sale of other products is merely
incidental.
   WORK AREA or WORKPLACE. Any area of a place of employment enclosed by floor
to ceiling walls in which two or more employees are assigned to perform work
for an employer.
(Ord. 439, passed 1-17-1995)
§ 8-6-2 REGULATION OF SMOKING IN CITY FACILITIES.
§ 8-6-2-1 SMOKING PROHIBITED.
   Smoking is hereby prohibited in buildings or portions of buildings owned or
leased and occupied by the city.
(Ord. 439, passed 1-17-1995)
§ 8-6-2-2 SIGNS.
   Signs designating smoking or no smoking areas shall be conspicuously posted
in every room, building or other place covered by this section. The manner of
such posting, including the wording, size, color, design and place of posting,
whether on the walls, doors, tables, counter stands or elsewhere shall be
determined by the City Manager in consultation with the affected department
head.
(Ord. 439, passed 1-17-1995)
§ 8-6-2-3 DISCIPLINARY ACTIONS.
   A violation of this section by any city employee or officer by smoking in a
posted no smoking area, or by failing to post or cause to be posted a no
smoking sign required by this section or by otherwise violating any provision
of this section shall, in addition to the penalties described in section 8-6-
5 of this chapter, also be a cause for disciplining of such employee.
(Ord. 439, passed 1-17-1995)
§ 8-6-3 PROHIBITION OF SMOKING IN CERTAIN PLACES OPEN TO PUBLIC.
§ 8-6-3-1 SMOKING PROHIBITED.
   Smoking is prohibited in the following public areas within the incorporated
area of the city or which are otherwise subject to the jurisdiction or control
of the city:
   (A)   Elevators open to and in use by the public;
   (B)   Public restrooms;
   (C)   Waiting rooms, public hallways and patient’s rooms of every private or
public healthcare facility including, but not limited to, hospitals except
rooms limited to a single patient and not open to the general public;
   (D)   Within every room, chamber, place of meeting or public assembly during
such time as a meeting required by law to be open to the general public is in
progress;
   (E)   Within any building or room not open to the sky when that building or
room is open to the public for the purpose of exhibiting any motion picture,
stage drama, lecture, musical recital or other similar performance except for
members of the cast when smoking is a part of the stage production;
   (F)   In any restaurant as the term is defined in §
8-6-1-2 of this chapter, where food is being served to the general public;
   (G)   Within any retail food sales establishments including grocery stores
and supermarkets;
   (H)   In public areas such as reading rooms, museums and libraries, when
open to the public; and
   (I)   Within retail stores doing business with the general public.
(Ord. 439, passed 1-17-1995)
§ 8-6-3-2 SIGNS.
   “No smoking”, must be posted at each entrance to the building. Where smoking
is permitted in designated areas of the building or structure, a sign stating
“Smoking is prohibited except in designated areas” must be posted at each
entrance to the building or structure. Ashtrays, receptacles or other devices
used for extinguishing or discarding smoking materials shall be removed from
all nonsmoking areas.
(Ord. 439, passed 1-17-1995)
§ 8-6-4 REGULATION OF SMOKING IN PRIVATE PLACES OF EMPLOYMENT.
§ 8-6-4-1 SMOKE FREE AREAS.
   It shall be the responsibility of employers in the incorporated area of the
city to provide smoke free areas for nonsmokers within existing facilities to
the maximum extent possible. Such employers are not required to incur any
expense to make structural or other physical modifications in providing these
areas.
(Ord. 439, passed 1-17-1995)
§ 8-6-4-2 WRITTEN POLICIES.
   Each employer shall adopt, implement and maintain a written no smoking
policy which shall contain at a minimum the following:
   (A)   Prohibition of smoking in employer conference and meeting rooms,
classrooms, auditoriums, restrooms, medical facilities, hallways and elevators;
   (B)   In any dispute arising under the no smoking policy, the right to not
involuntarily smoke shall be given precedence;
   (C)   Whenever smoking is prohibited, conspicuous signs shall be posted by
the employer so stating; and
   (D)   The smoking policy shall be communicated to all employees by the
employer within one month of its adoption and thereafter upon employment.
(Ord. 439, passed 1-17-1995)
§ 8-6-4-3 NONSMOKING AREAS.
   Every employer shall have the right to designate any workplace as a
nonsmoking area.
(Ord. 439, passed 1-17-1995)
§ 8-6-4-4 COMPLIANCE.
   An employer who makes reasonable efforts to develop and promulgate a policy
regarding smoking and nonsmoking in the workplace shall be deemed to be in
compliance with this section provided that a policy which knowingly omits the
minimum requirements of §
8-6-4-2 of this chapter shall not be deemed in compliance.
(Ord. 439, passed 1-17-1995)
§ 8-6-4-5 RETALIATION.
   No person or employer shall discharge or in any manner retaliate against any
employee because such employee exercises any rights afforded by this section.
(Ord. 439, passed 1-17-1995)
§ 8-6-4-6 ENFORCEMENT POLICY.
   Compliance with this section concerning adoption, implementation and
maintenance of a no smoking policy is mandatory. Willful failure to comply
shall be unlawful.
(Ord. 439, passed 1-17-1995)
§ 8-6-4-7 SIGNS.
   Signs which designate smoking or no smoking areas established by this
section shall be clearly, sufficiently and conspicuously posted in rooms,
buildings or other places so covered by this section as reasonably deemed
necessary by the department head, operator, manager or other person having
control of such room, building or other place. Ashtrays, receptacles or other
devices used for extinguishing or discarding smoking materials shall be removed
from all nonsmoking areas.
(Ord. 439, passed 1-17-1995)
§ 8-6-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS.
§ 8-6-5-1 EXEMPTED AREAS.
   Notwithstanding any provision of this chapter to the contrary, no regulation
or prohibition of smoking is required in the following areas:
   (A)   Bars and taverns.
      1.   Generally. Smoking is permitted in bars and taverns if they meet the
ventilation standards described below. For the purposes of state law, a BAR or
TAVERN means a facility primarily devoted to the serving of alcoholic
beverages, in which the serving of food is incidental. A bar or tavern can be
freestanding, but also includes those facilities located within a hotel or
motel or other transient occupancy establishment. When a bar or tavern is
located in conjunction with another use, such as a restaurant, the definition
of bar or tavern applies only to those areas used primarily for the sale and
service of alcoholic beverages. Bar or tavern does not include the dining areas
of a restaurant, regardless of whether alcohol is served in them.
      2.   Ventilation standards for gaming clubs and bars.
         (a)   State law permits smoking in gaming clubs and bars/taverns until
the earlier of the following:
            (1)   January 1, 1997; or
            (2)   The date of adoption of regulations by the occupational
safety and health standards board (Cal-OSHA) or the Federal EPA reducing the
permissible employee exposure level to environmental tobacco smoke to a level
that will prevent anything other than insignificantly harmful effects to
exposed employees.
         (b)   If such a regulation is adopted on or before January 1, 1997,
smoking is permitted in gaming clubs and bars, if they fully comply with the
regulations within two years of the adoption of the regulations. If the two
agencies adopt inconsistent regulations, the stricter regulation prevails.
         (c)   If a ventilation standard is not adopted by January 1, 1997,
state law prohibits smoking in gaming clubs and bars. This prohibition remains
until a regulation is adopted. If a regulation is adopted after January 1,
1997, an establishment has two years in which to come into full compliance with
the ventilation regulation. During that time, smoking would be permitted If the
establishment fails to come into full compliance during that two-year period,
then smoking would be prohibited.
   (B)   Private residences. Private residences, except when used as a business
in which more than two people are employed or when used as a childcare or
healthcare facility;
   (C)   Hotel/motel guestrooms. Sixty five percent of guestrooms in a hotel,
motel or similar transient lodging establishment may be set aside for smokers.
This means that at least 35% of hotel/motel sleeping rooms must be nonsmoking
rooms;
   (D)   Retail tobacco stores. Retail tobacco stores;
   (E)   Meeting and banquet rooms.
      1.   Smoking is permitted in meeting and banquet rooms only during
private functions in a hotel, motel or other transient lodging establishment
similar to a hotel, motel, restaurant or public convention center. However,
smoking is not permitted when food or beverage functions are taking place,
including setup, service and cleanup activities, or when the room is used for
exhibit purposes. At a time when smoking is not permitted, the establishment
may permit smoking in corridors and prefunction areas adjacent to and serving
the meeting or banquet room if no employee is stationed in that corridor or
area, other than on a passing basis.
      2.   Thus, if a hotel, motel, restaurant or convention center has meeting
or banquet rooms, smoking is permitted except during food or beverage service,
which includes setup and cleanup.
   (F)   Healthcare facilities. Semiprivate rooms of healthcare facilities
occupied by one or more patients all of whom are smokers who have requested in
writing on the healthcare facility’s admission forms to be placed in a room
where smoking is permitted provided such healthcare facility allows smoking at
said facility.
(Ord. 439, passed 1-17-1995)
§ 8-6-5-2 EXEMPTIONS.
   Only those exemptions provided for in Cal. Labor Code § 6404.5(d) are
permittable.
(Ord. 439, passed 1-17-1995)
§ 8-6-5-3 CERTIFICATION.
   All public officers of the city shall require, while an establishment which
is subject to the provisions of this chapter is undergoing otherwise mandated
inspections, a self-certification from the owner, manager, operator or other
person having control of such establishment that all requirements of this
chapter have been complied with.
(Ord. 439, passed 1-17-1995)
§ 8-6-5-4 COMPLAINTS.
   (A)   Any person who desires to register a complaint under this chapter may
do so by filing it with the City Manager. Any person may bring legal action to
enforce any provision of this chapter after written notification to the City
Manager.
   (B)   After three violations have been issued within one year, the Division
of Occupational Safety and Health (Cal-OSHA) will respond to a complaint filed
by an employee of the place of employment. Cal-OSHA enforcement is limited to
investigation of employee complaints against employers, not citizen complaints.
Therefore, Cal-OSHA will not investigate a complaint from a restaurant or hotel
customer. That type of investigation is subject to local enforcement.
(Ord. 439, passed 1-17-1995)
§ 8-6-5-5 ENFORCEMENT OFFICER.
   Enforcement of this chapter shall be by the public safety officer of the
city.
(Ord. 439, passed 1-17-1995)
§ 8-6-5-6 VIOLATIONS.
   Per the Cal. Penal Code § 6405.5(d), violations of this chapter are
punishable by a fine not to exceed $100 for the first violation, $200 for a
second violation within one year and $500 for a third or each subsequent
violation within one year.
(Ord. 439, passed 1-17-1995)
§ 8-6-5-7 SEVERABILITY.
   If any provision of this chapter or the application thereof to any person or
circumstances is held invalid, such invalidity shall not affect other
provisions or applications of this chapter which can be given effect without
the invalid provisions or applications, and to this end the provisions of this
chapter are severable.
(Ord. 439, passed 1-17-1995)
CHAPTER 7: COLLECTING AND LOADING OF RECYCLABLE MATERIALS
Section
8-7-1 Purpose
8-7-2 Definitions
8-7-3 General requirements
8-7-4 Design standards
8-7-5 Location
§ 8-7-1 PURPOSE.
   (A)   Cities and counties must divert 50% of all solid waste by January 1,
2000, through source reduction, recycling and composting activities.
   (B)   Diverting 50% of all solid waste requires the participation of the
residential, commercial, industrial and public sectors.
   (C)   The lack of adequate areas for collecting and loading recyclable
materials that are compatible with surrounding land uses is an impediment to
diverting solid waste and constitutes a need for state and local agencies to
address access to solid waste for source reduction, recycling and composting
activities. This chapter has been developed to meet that need.
(Ord. 421, passed 7-20-1993)
§ 8-7-2 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   DEVELOPMENT PROJECT. Any of the following:
      1.   A project for which a building permit is required for a commercial,
industrial or institutional building, marina or residential building having
five or more living units, where solid waste is collected and loaded and any
residential project where solid waste is collected and loaded in a location
serving five or more living units; or
      2.   Any new public facility where solid waste is collected and loaded
and any improvements for areas of a public facility used for collecting and
loading solid waste.
   PROJECT FOR WHICH A BUILDING PERMIT IS REQUIRED. A project for which a
building permit is required is, at a minimum:
      1.   All new projects;
      2.   Any single alteration of an existing project requiring a building
permit; and
      3.   Any sum total of alterations requiring a building permit to an
existing project conducted within a 12-month period.
   RECYCLING AREA (AREAS FOR RECYCLING). Space allocated for collecting and
loading of recyclable materials.
(Ord. 421, passed 7-20-1993)
§ 8-7-3 GENERAL REQUIREMENTS.
   (A)   Any new development project for which an application for a building
permit is submitted on or after September 1, 1993, should consider including
adequate, accessible and convenient areas for collecting and loading recyclable
materials.
   (B)   Any improvements for areas of a public facility used for collecting
and loading solid waste should consider including adequate, accessible and
convenient areas for collecting and loading recyclable materials.
   (C)   Any project for which an application for a building permit is
submitted on or after September 1, 1993, for modifications that meet one or
both of the conditions below should consider including adequate, accessible and
convenient areas for collecting and loading recyclable materials:
      1.   Modification to the project adds 30% or more to the existing floor
area; or
      2.   The price of modification exceeds 10% of the then current assessed
value of the subject parcel.
(Ord. 421, passed 7-20-1993)
§ 8-7-4 DESIGN STANDARDS.
   (A)   Where provided, areas for recycling shall be adequate in capacity,
number and distribution to serve the development where the project occurs.
   (B)   Dimensions of the recycling area shall accommodate containers
consistent with current methods of collection in the area in which the project
is to be located.
   (C)   An adequate number of bins or containers to allow for the collection
and loading of recyclable materials generated by the development should be
located within the recycling areas of development projects.
   (D)   The design and construction of recycling areas shall be compatible
with surrounding land uses.
   (E)   Recycling areas should be secured to prevent the theft of recyclable
materials by unauthorized persons, while allowing authorized persons access for
disposal of materials.
   (F)   Recycling areas or the bins or containers placed therein must provide
protection against adverse environmental conditions which might render the
collected materials unmarketable.
   (G)   Driveways or travel aisles shall provide unobstructed access for
collection vehicles and personnel and provide at least the minimum clearance
required by the collection methods and vehicles utilized by the hauler in the
area in which the development project exists.
   (H)   A sign clearly identifying all recycling and solid waste collection
and loading areas and the materials accepted therein should be posted adjacent
to all points of access to the recycling areas.
   (I)   Residential developers and property owners are encouraged to include
recycling areas or systems within the residence; such as roll out drawers below
the sink for recycling receptacles; fireproof, cleanable, secure chutes from
the living space to the space for collecting and loading recyclable materials
and the like. Recommended internal storage space for individual living units of
residential development projects is three cubic feet.
(Ord. 421, passed 7-20-1993)
§ 8-7-5 LOCATION.
   (A)   Recycling areas shall not be located in any area required by this code
to be constructed or maintained as unencumbered, according to fire and other
applicable building and/or public safety laws.
   (B)   Any recycling area(s) should be located so they are at least as
convenient as the location(s) where solid waste is collected and loaded.
Whenever feasible, areas for collecting and loading recyclable materials should
be adjacent to the trash collection areas.
   (C)   When provided, each recycling area within a multi-family residential
development should be no greater than 250 feet from each living unit.
(Ord. 421, passed 7-20-1993)
CHAPTER 8: PROHIBITION AGAINST UNAUTHORIZED ENTRY INTO WASTE CONTAINERS
Section
8-8-1 Findings
8-8-2 Prohibition
8-8-3 Public nuisance
8-8-4 Penalty
§ 8-8-1 FINDINGS.
   The City Council finds as follows.
   (A)   Allowing unauthorized individuals to rummage through waste containers
results in risks to the health, safety and general welfare of city residents.
   (B)   Unauthorized entry of waste containers can lead to intruders obtaining
information for identity theft. Unauthorized rummaging also results in trash
being left in roadways and sidewalks, which impedes the flow of vehicular
traffic and impairs the cleanliness and safety of the city’s rights-of-way.
   (C)   Waste containers left open after the intrusion create a nuisance by
attracting animals and insects.
   (D)   Individuals rummaging through waste containers place themselves in
danger of coming into contact with unknown contaminants.
   (E)   Prohibiting individuals from rummaging through waste containers will
reduce the amount of recyclables being taken from the marked containers. As
part of the city’s solid waste management, the city contracts with private
haulers for the collection of solid waste and recyclables. The city and the
private haulers factor revenues collected by the recyclables in establishing
the collection rates for residents. The theft of recyclable goods increases the
cost of waste collection for the city’s solid waste haulers which may result in
an increase in rates for residents.
   (F)   Allowing individuals to take recyclable goods that are left in
designated waste containers negatively impacts the city’s ability to
demonstrate compliance with the waste diversion mandates of Assembly Bill 939,
being the California Integrated Waste Management Act (IWMA) of 1989, Cal.
Public Resources Code, Division 30, §§ 40000 through 49654.
(Ord. 621, passed 1-20-2015)
§ 8-8-2 PROHIBITION.
   It shall be unlawful for any person, except the owner, or someone with the
owner’s consent, or authorized city, county, state or federal personnel, or
employees of the solid waste company contracted by the city to collect solid
waste and/or recyclables in the performance of their duties, to rummage,
explore, tamper with, move, remove, tip, deface, destroy, scavenge or otherwise
search waste or recyclable containers or the contents thereof.
(Ord. 621, passed 1-20-2015)
§ 8-8-3 PUBLIC NUISANCE.
   Rummaging, exploring, scavenging or otherwise searching a waste container,
as prohibited by §
8-8-2 of this chapter, is a violation of the provisions of this chapter and is
hereby declared a public nuisance.
(Ord. 621, passed 1-20-2015)
§ 8-8-4 PENALTY.
   (A)   A violation of this chapter shall be deemed an administrative citation
pursuant to Title 1, Chapter 18 of this code.
   (B)   Any person receiving an administrative citation for violating this
chapter may be punished by:
      1.   A warning for the first violation;
      2.   A fine of not more than $25 for a second violation of the same
section within a 12-month period; and
      3.   A fine of not more than $50 for a third (or subsequent) violation of
the same section by the same person within a 12-month period.
   (C)   Any person receiving an administrative citation may contest the
citation by following the procedures set forth in Title 1, Chapter 18 of this
code (§§
1-18-10 through
1-18-13 of this code).
   (D)   This chapter and the penalties under this section shall be in addition
to any relief provided for under Chapter 2 of this title for violations of §
8-2-15, Scavenging Prohibited, of this title.
(Ord. 621, passed 1-20-2015)
CHAPTER 9: CAMPING AND STORAGE OF PERSONAL PROPERTY
Section
8-9-1 Purpose and authority
8-9-2 Definitions
8-9-3 Camping prohibited
8-9-4 Storage of property prohibited
8-9-5 Property removal
8-9-6 Property disposition
8-9-7 Camping permit
8-9-8 Posting copy of permit
8-9-9 Violation
§ 8-9-1 PURPOSE AND AUTHORITY.
   (A)   The streets and public areas within the city should be readily
accessible and available to residents and the public at large. The use of these
areas for camping purposes or storage of personal property interferes with the
rights of others to use the areas for which they were intended. Such activity
can constitute a public health and safety hazard which adversely impacts
neighborhoods and commercial areas. Camping on private property without the
consent of the owner, proper sanitary measures and for other than a minimal
duration adversely affects private property rights as well as public health,
safety and welfare of the city. The purpose of this chapter is to maintain
streets, parks and other public and private areas within the city in a clean,
sanitary and accessible condition, and to adequately protect the health, safety
and public welfare of the community, while recognizing that, subject to
reasonable conditions, camping and camp facilities associated with special
events can be beneficial to the cultural and educational climate in the city.
Nothing in this chapter is intended to interfere with otherwise lawful and
ordinary uses of public or private property.
   (B)   This chapter is adopted consistent with the city’s police power
provided by Article XI, Section 7 of the State of California Constitution and
is necessary to preserve the public peace, safety and general welfare of the
citizens.
(Ord. 630, passed 6-6-2017)
§ 8-9-2 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   CAMP FACILITIES. Tents, huts or temporary shelters, and the like.
   CAMP or CAMPING. To pitch or occupy camp facilities, or to use camp
paraphernalia to live temporarily in a camp facility or outdoors.
   CAMP PARAPHERNALIA. Tarpaulins, cots, beds, sleeping bags, hammocks, fire
stoves and similar equipment.
   ESTABLISH. Setting up or moving equipment, supplies or materials onto public
or private property to “camp” or operate camp facilities.
   MAINTAIN. Keeping or permitting equipment, supplies or materials to remain
on public or private property in order to camp or operate camp facilities.
   OPERATE. Participating or assisting in establishing or maintaining a camp or
camp facility.
   PARK. Any public space designated as a park by the City of Livingston.
   PERSONAL EFFECTS. Important documents such as birth certificate or driver’s
license, medication, eye glasses or other medical devices, a sanitary and non-
verminous sleeping bag or bed roll, tents in usable and reasonably good
condition, clean and non-verminous clothing stored in a manner protecting it
from the elements, and personal property which would have obvious sentimental
or monetary value to a reasonable person.
   PERSONAL PROPERTY. Property that is movable, as opposed to real property or
real estate.
   PRIVATE PROPERTY. All private property including, but not limited to,
streets, sidewalk, alleys, and improved or unimproved land.
   PUBLIC PROPERTY. All public property including, but not limited to, streets,
sidewalks, alleys, improved or unimproved land and parks.
   STORE. To keep, put aside or accumulate for future use when needed.
   STREET. All alleys, lanes, courts, boulevards, public ways, public squares,
public places and sidewalks.
(Ord. 630, passed 6-6-2017)
§ 8-9-3 CAMPING PROHIBITED.
   It is unlawful and a public nuisance for any person to camp, occupy camp
facilities, or use camp paraphernalia in the following areas:
   (A)   Any public property; or
   (B)   Any private property.
      1.   It is not intended by this section to prohibit overnight camping on
private residential property by friends or family of the property owner, so
long as the owner consents and the overnight camping is limited to not more
than three consecutive nights, unless a permit is obtained pursuant to §
8-9-7 of this chapter for a period of more than three consecutive nights.
      2.   Nothing in this chapter is intended to prohibit or make unlawful,
activities of an owner of private property, or other lawful user of private
property, that are normally associated with and incidental to the lawful and
authorized use of private property for residential or other purposes; and
provided further, nothing is intended to prohibit or make unlawful, activities
of a property owner or other lawful user if such activities are expressly
authorized by this code or other laws, ordinances and regulations.
      3.   The City Manager, or his or her designee, may, as provided in §
8-9-7 of this chapter, issue a temporary permit to allow camping on public or
private property in connection with a special event or to allow overnight
camping on private residential property that will be more than three
consecutive nights.
(Ord. 630, passed 6-6-2017)
§ 8-9-4 STORAGE OF PROPERTY PROHIBITED.
   It is unlawful and a public nuisance for any person to store personal
property, including camp paraphernalia, in the following areas, except as
otherwise provided by resolution of the City Council:
   (A)   Any public property; or
   (B)   Any private property without the written consent of the owner.
(Ord. 630, passed 6-6-2017)
§ 8-9-5 PROPERTY REMOVAL.
   Any city law enforcement officer or code enforcement officer may remove
personal property unlawfully stored as follows:
   (A)   The location of any personal property, including camp facilities and
paraphernalia, shall be tagged and dated with a notice including the following:
      It is illegal to store personal property in a city park, street, public
parking lot, or public area, improved or unimproved and on private property
without the written consent of the owner of that property. If this personal
property is not removed by (specify at least forty-eight (48) hours from
posting), THIS PERSONAL PROPERTY SHALL BE DEEMED INTENTIONALLY ABANDONED AND
SUBJECT TO REMOVAL AND POSSIBLE DESTRUCTION. Remaining on the property after
the date specified in this notice may cause further law enforcement action.
Shelter is available at the following locations:
      (list shelters in local area)
   (B)   The city law enforcement officer or code enforcement officer may
remove any personal property still unlawfully stored or remaining after the
posting period has expired, but shall leave a written notice at the location of
confiscation confirming that a seizure has occurred pursuant to this chapter,
and providing instructions on how to claim the property.
(Ord. 630, passed 6-6-2017)
§ 8-9-6 PROPERTY DISPOSITION.
   (A)   1.   Following removal of unlawfully stored or remaining personal
effects pursuant to §
8-9-5 of this chapter, a city law enforcement officer or code enforcement
officer shall:
         (a)   Maintain an inventory identifying the personal effects, where
the personal effects were approximately located, and the reasonable value of
each item;
         (b)   Place the removed personal effects in containers labeled in a
manner facilitating identification by the enforcement officer and owner and
which reasonably protect such property from damage or theft; and
         (c)   Store removed personal effects in an area designated by the
enforcement officer for a period of 90 days in accordance with Cal. Civil Code
§§ 2080 et seq. (as amended), and shall, to the extent reasonably practical,
and without any duty to investigate the recommended storage parameters,
properly store perishable items such as medication.
      2.   Any personal property or personal effects which a city law
enforcement officer or code enforcement officer deems to be biohazardous or
contaminated with a hazardous material including, but not limited to, items
with feces, urine, fungus or vermin infestation, will be photographed but shall
not be stored pursuant to this section and shall be properly disposed of.
   (B)   If personal effects are claimed within 90 days from removal, unless
the property is connected to a crime or is illegal to possess, a city law
enforcement officer or code enforcement officer shall release the stored
property to the owner upon his or her identification of the property, and the
approximate location where the property was left by the owner.
   (C)   Unlawfully stored or found personal effects pursuant to this chapter
remaining unclaimed at the end of 90 days from removal shall be disposed of
pursuant to Cal. Civil Code §§ 2080 et seq. (as amended), and may be sold at a
public auction, dedicated for public use, or given for charitable use to a
local nonprofit agency by the city.
(Ord. 630, passed 6-6-2017)
§ 8-9-7 CAMPING PERMIT.
   The City Manager may, in his or her discretion, issue a permit to establish,
maintain and operate a camp or a camp facility in connection with a special
event or to allow overnight camping on private residential property that will
be more than three consecutive nights. A special event is intended to include,
but not be limited to, programs operated by youth or school events, marathons
or other sporting events and scouting activities. The City Manager may consult
with various city departments, the health officer and the public prior to
issuing any temporary permit. Each department or person consulted may provide
comments regarding any health, safety or public welfare concerns, and provide
recommendations pertaining to the issuance, denial or conditioning of the
permit. A reasonable fee, to be set by the City Council, shall be paid in
advance by the applicant. The fee shall be returned if the application is
denied. In exercising his or her discretion to issue a temporary permit, the
City Manager may consider any facts or evidence bearing on the sanitary,
health, safety and welfare conditions on or surrounding the area or tract of
land upon which the proposed temporary camp or camp facility is to be located.
(Ord. 630, passed 6-6-2017)
§ 8-9-8 POSTING COPY OF PERMIT.
   It is unlawful for any person to establish, maintain, conduct or carry on
any camp or camp facility unless there shall be at all times, posted in a
conspicuous place upon the area or tract of land upon which the camp or camp
facility is located, a permit obtained from the City Manager in accordance with
the provisions of §
8-9-7 of this chapter.
(Ord. 630, passed 6-6-2017)
§ 8-9-9 VIOLATION.
   A violation of this section shall be prosecuted in accordance with §
1-4-3 of this code. In addition to other penalties provided by this code, any
violation of this chapter, or other city ordinance, or any condition caused or
permitted to exist in violation of any of the provisions of this code, is a
public nuisance and may be abated as such by the city. For purposes of this
section, an administrative citation shall be punished for a first violation by
a fine not exceeding $100, and for subsequent violations of the same offense
within one year, by a fine not exceeding $200.
(Ord. 630, passed 6-6-2017)
TITLE 9: PUBLIC WAYS AND PROPERTY
CHAPTER 1: STREETS AND SIDEWALKS
Section
9-1-1 Sidewalk and street obstructions
9-1-2 Repair or reconstruction of sidewalks
9-1-3 Compliance with construction specifications
9-1-4 Street openings or cuts; permit required
§ 9-1-1 SIDEWALK AND STREET OBSTRUCTIONS.
   (A)   Nuisance declared, exceptions.
      1.   It is hereby declared a public nuisance and it shall be unlawful for
any person, agent, official or employee to place any obstruction of any kind in
any public street or alley, or any public parkway or sidewalk in the city, or
to authorize, procure or permit any obstruction to be placed therein or
thereon, and a separate offense shall be deemed committed for each day any such
obstruction is maintained or permitted in any such street or alley or on any
such parkway or sidewalk. Provided, that merchants and others receiving and
delivering goods, whose premises are not served by an alley, shall be allowed
two hours from the time such goods are deposited on a sidewalk or parkway until
they are removed; provided further, that a space of five feet in width shall at
all times be kept clear for a combination of persons passing.
      2.   The provisions of this section shall not apply to the temporary
obstruction of streets or alleys by buildings while the same are being moved
from one place to another, nor to temporary obstructions for which encroachment
permits have been first obtained from the Director of Public Works, nor shall
the provisions of this section apply to potted shrubs or plants, clocks,
drinking fountains and public telephones placed or maintained upon public
parkways or sidewalks within the city by any person who shall have first
obtained a permit in writing so to do from the Director of Public Works, nor to
newsracks placed or maintained upon public parkways or sidewalks within the
city; provided, they are in daily use and are so placed as to not interfere
with or obstruct pedestrian traffic in the vicinity of their location.
   (B)   Notice to abate.
      1.   The Director of Public Works, with any required assistance from the
Chief of Police, is hereby authorized and empowered to notify in writing the
owner, agent or person having charge of or occupying the premises on which the
nuisance is being committed, and the person creating, causing, committing or
maintaining it to abate this nuisance. Such notice shall specify the nuisance
and the manner in which it is being committed, and shall be sent by registered
mail, addressed to the persons above mentioned at their last known address.
      2.   A copy of said notice shall also be sent by registered mail, return
receipt requested, to the person owning the land on which the nuisance is being
committed as such person’s name and address appear on the last equalized
assessment roll.
      3.   Said notice shall also specify that the nuisance must be abated
within 15 days after the date of the mailing of said notice, or such shorter
time as the Director of Public Works deems the abatement to be an emergency,
then he or she shall have the power to order the abatement summarily within 24
hours of the giving of the written notice as set forth above.
   (C)   Penalty. Any person who violates any provision of this section shall
be guilty of an infraction and upon conviction thereof shall be punishable as
provided in §
1-4-1 of this code.
(Ord. 180, passed 11- -1974)
§ 9-1-2 REPAIR OR RECONSTRUCTION OF SIDEWALKS.
   (A)   Whenever any portion of any sidewalk space on any street, avenue,
lane, alley, court or place in the city shall be in need of reconstruction and
in such a condition to endanger persons or property passing thereon, or so as
to interfere with the public convenience in the use thereof, the Director of
Public Works shall require the property owner fronting on any such street,
avenue, lane, alley, court or place, to repair and/or reconstruct those damaged
areas forthwith.
   (B)   The Director of Public Works will notify property owners of said
defect(s) by way of a written notice to be delivered by the postal service in
the form of a certified letter. The Director of Public Works shall particularly
specify in said written notice what work is required to be done, and within
lawful limits, what materials shall be used in said repairs and/or
reconstruction.
   (C)   Within ten business days of receipt of the written notice, the
property owner shall contact the Director of Public Works or his or her
designee to arrange a time frame whereby such repairs and/or reconstruction
will commence and when they will be completed. The property owner will be
advised they can engage the services of the Public Works Department. The
property owner will be responsible to pay for the cost of all materials and
supplies. If the property owner does not engage the services of the city, the
property owner will be responsible for all costs incurred.
   (D)   Every property owner who fails to correct those portions of sidewalk
that are in need of repair and/or reconstruction as noticed are in violation of
this code. Should this situation arise, the Public Works Department will cause
the repairs and/or reconstruction to occur and the property owner will be
responsible for paying “all” costs associated with the repairs and/or
reconstruction. The property owner will also be charged a $100 administrative
fee.
   (E)   Should the property owner fail to pay said fees, a lien will be placed
on the property until such time as all fees are paid in full to the city.
(Ord. 501, passed 8-15-2000)
§ 9-1-3 COMPLIANCE WITH CONSTRUCTION SPECIFICATIONS.
   All curbs, gutters, sidewalks and drainage structures constructed in the
city shall be in accordance with plans and specifications prepared by the City
Engineer and on file in the office of the City Clerk.
(Ord. 90, passed 12-8-1955)
§ 9-1-4 STREET OPENINGS OR CUTS; PERMIT REQUIRED.
   (A)   No person shall cut or open any public street, alley, lane, court or
other public place in the city for the purpose of laying therein any water or
gas pipe, box, flume or for any other purpose whatsoever, without first
obtaining a permit from the Director of Public Works.
   (B)   Any person violating any of the provisions of this section, or doing
any of the acts herein declared to be unlawful shall be guilty of a misdemeanor
and upon conviction thereof shall be punishable as provided in §
1-4-1 of this code.
(Ord. 3, passed 2-20-1923)
CHAPTER 2: STREET TREE REGULATIONS
Section
9-2-1 Title
9-2-2 Definitions
9-2-3 Street tree plan
9-2-4 Enforcement and plan administration
9-2-5 Authority of Park Superintendent
9-2-6 Permission to plant street trees
9-2-7 Prohibited trees
9-2-8 Planting of trees in new subdivisions
9-2-9 Trimming or removal of trees
9-2-10 Pruning by public utilities
9-2-11 Commercial tree trimming businesses
9-2-12 Abuse or mutilation of trees prohibited
9-2-13 Open ground maintenance
9-2-14 Private tree maintenance; dangerous trees a nuisance
9-2-15 Appeals
9-2-16 Liability of property owner
9-2-17 Effect of chapter
9-2-18 Penalties
§ 9-2-1 TITLE.
   This chapter shall be known and may be cited as the “Street Tree Ordinance
of the City of Livingston”.
(Ord. 293, passed 1-23-1986)
§ 9-2-2 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   APPROVED TREES. Trees planted and growing in accordance with the street tree
plan, both as to variety and location. All other street trees shall be known as
NONCONFORMING TREES.
   PARK SUPERINTENDENT. The Director of Parks and Recreation or his or her
authorized representative.
   PERMIT. A written or printed authorization issued by the Park
Superintendent.
   STREET TREES.
      1.   All trees planted or growing within public rights-of-way, public
easements, parks, streets, parking strips, alleys, roads and ways within the
city.
      2.   The locations herein referred to plus five feet on each side
thereof, shall be known as street tree areas.
(Ord. 293, passed 1-23-1986)
§ 9-2-3 STREET TREE PLAN.
   (A)   1.   The City Council shall cause to be prepared a street tree plan
which when approved and adopted shall be the street tree plan of the city.
      2.   The street tree plan may be amended by resolution of the City
Council.
      3.   The street tree plan shall include a list of approved street trees,
a uniform method of street tree planning, and designating certain streets or
blocks of certain specimens of tree or trees.
   (B)   The street tree plan shall be strictly adhered to in regard to all
future planting of trees in street tree areas.
(Ord. 293, passed 1-23-1986)
§ 9-2-4 ENFORCEMENT AND PLAN ADMINISTRATION.
   It shall be the duty of the Park Superintendent of the city to administer,
control, regulate and enforce the street tree program of the city in accordance
with the provisions of the street tree plan and of this chapter.
(Ord. 293, passed 1-23-1986)
§ 9-2-5 AUTHORITY OF PARK SUPERINTENDENT.
   The Park Superintendent shall have the authority to prune, trim, clip,
spray, maintain and care for the street trees, or private trees to the extent
that they overhang or project within public rights-of-way, or public roads of
the city, as needed, to remove or require the removal by the owner of the
adjoining property of diseased or dead trees, and encourage planting of
approved trees throughout the city.
(Ord. 293, passed 1-23-1986)
§ 9-2-6 PERMISSION TO PLANT STREET TREES.
   No trees or shrubs shall hereafter be planted in any street tree area
without written permission of the Park Superintendent and the Park
Superintendent shall require that all new plantings of street trees shall be
accordance with the provisions of this chapter, and the street tree plan.
(Ord. 293, passed 1-23-1986)
§ 9-2-7 PROHIBITED TREES.
   Some types of trees, upon maturing, instead of becoming assets to the
community, become liabilities due to structural weaknesses, disease or insect
susceptibility, short life, destructive root systems, and rank growing branches
requiring excessive maintenance. Due to one or more of these characteristics,
it shall be unlawful for any person to plant in any street tree area any of the
following trees: sycamore; poplar; willow; American elm; walnut; fruitless
mulberry; eucalyptus; conifers; pepper; palm; acacia; and Modesto ash.
(Ord. 293, passed 1-23-1986)
§ 9-2-8 PLANTING OF TREES IN NEW SUBDIVISIONS.
   Before any street improvements in any new subdivision are accepted by the
city, the subdivider shall comply with §
6-10-27 of this code (subdivision improvements - street trees). Watering and
care of the trees shall be the responsibility of the owner of the property.
(Ord. 293, passed 1-23-1986)
§ 9-2-9 TRIMMING OR REMOVAL OF TREES.
   (A)   No person shall cut, prune, remove, injure or interfere with any tree,
shrub or plant, upon or in any street tree area or other public place in the
city without first obtaining a permit from the Park Superintendent.
   (B)   Said permit shall be issued only for work to be done in compliance
with the street tree plan and this chapter, and shall be issued without a fee.
All work done pursuant to a permit shall be done under supervision of the Park
Superintendent. Whenever any street tree, whether approved or nonconforming is
removed or needs replacing, it must be replaced with a tree approved for that
specific street tree area.
(Ord. 293, passed 1-23-1986)
§ 9-2-10 PRUNING BY PUBLIC UTILITIES.
   Any person doing business as a public utility subject to the jurisdiction of
the Public Utilities Commission of the state and any duly constituted public
agency authorized to provide and providing utility service, shall be given a
permit from the Park Superintendent, valid for one year from the date of
issuance, permitting such person to trim, brace, remove or perform such other
acts with respect to trees growing adjacent to the public streets of the city
or which grow upon private property to the extent that they encroach upon such
public streets as may be necessary to comply with the safety regulations of
said Public Utilities Commission and as may be necessary to maintain the safe
operation of its business.
(Ord. 293, passed 1-23-1986)
§ 9-2-11 COMMERCIAL TREE TRIMMING BUSINESSES.
   Any person engaged in the business of pruning, trimming or removing of trees
in the city shall secure a business license permit to operate in the city. As a
condition of the obtaining of such permit, the person shall carry, and shall
furnish evidence to the Park Superintendent, that he or she has public
liability insurance in the amount of $100,000 for injury to any one individual
and in the amount of $200,000 in the aggregate, and property damage insurance
in the amount of $25,000. The policy or policies or certificates thereof shall
be filed with the Park Superintendent prior to the granting of such permit, and
such person shall keep said insurance in full force and effect during the term
of the permit.
(Ord. 293, passed 1-23-1986)
§ 9-2-12 ABUSE OR MUTILATION OF TREES PROHIBITED.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person to abuse, break, injure, deface,
mutilate, kill or destroy any tree or set fire or permit any fire to burn where
such fire or the heat thereof will injure any portion of any tree, plant or
shrub in a street tree area or any other public place in the city or to attach
or place any rope, wire (other than one used to support a young or broken
tree), sign, poster, handbill, paint, or other thing or device to or on any
tree growing in a public place or to cause or permit any wire charged with
electricity to be placed or attached to any such tree, or allow any gaseous
liquid or solid substances which are harmful to such trees to come in contact
with their roots or leaves.
   (B)   Anything in this section to the contrary notwithstanding, the City
Council may upon written application therefor grant to any person upon such
terms and conditions as the City Council may determine a permit for the
temporary attachment to trees or shrubs of wires charged with electricity for
purposes such as Christmas tree decorations.
(Ord. 293, passed 1-23-1986)
§ 9-2-13 OPEN GROUND MAINTENANCE.
   No person shall place or maintain any stone, cement or other substance so
that it shall impede the free access of water or air to the roots of any street
tree; not less than 12 square feet of open ground shall be left and maintained
around every street tree.
(Ord. 293, passed 1-23-1986)
§ 9-2-14 PRIVATE TREE MAINTENANCE; DANGEROUS TREES A NUISANCE.
   (A)   Any tree or shrub growing in a street tree area public place or on
private property which in any way may endanger the life, health, safety or
property of the public, the security or usefulness of any public street,
sidewalk, sewer or other public place or the full and safe operation of public
utility wires, is hereby declared to be a nuisance, and the Park Superintendent
may cause the same to be trimmed or removed.
   (B)   In the case of any such trees or shrubs in the private property
portion of the street tree area, the Park Superintendent shall notify the
owner, or his or her duly authorized agent, in writing that tree or shrub is a
nuisance and should be trimmed or removed.
   (C)   Failure of the property owner or his or her duly authorized agent to
remove or trim such tree or shrub within 15 days after receipt of said notice
by the Park Superintendent shall be a violation of this section, and the Park
Superintendent may then remove or trim said tree or shrub and assess the cost
against the property owner.
(Ord. 293, passed 1-23-1986)
§ 9-2-15 APPEALS.
   (A)   Appeals to the City Council from any direction or order given or made
by the Park Superintendent under §
9-2-14 of this chapter may be made provided the appeal is filed in writing with
the City Clerk not more than five days after the date of such order, whose
decision, after public hearing of said matter, shall be final and conclusive.
   (B)   In the event the City Council shall uphold the direction or order of
the Park Superintendent, the property owner, or his or her duly authorized
agent, shall within ten days thereafter comply with such direction or order, or
the Park Superintendent will remove to trim said tree or shrub and assess the
cost against the property owner.
   (C)   The acts of the Park Superintendent on ordinary trimming or
maintenance of street trees are not subject to appeal.
(Ord. 293, passed 1-23-1986)
§ 9-2-16 LIABILITY OF PROPERTY OWNER.
   Nothing contained in this chapter shall be deemed to impose any liability
upon the city, its officers or employees, nor to relieve the owner of any
private property from the duty to keep any tree, shrub, or plant upon any
street tree area on his or her property or under his or her control in such
condition as to prevent it from constituting a hazard or an impediment to
travel or vision upon any street, park, pleasure ground, boulevard, alley or
public place within the city.
(Ord. 293, passed 1-23-1986)
§ 9-2-17 EFFECT OF CHAPTER.
   If any section, subsection, clause or phrase of this chapter is, for any
reason, held to be unconstitutional or otherwise invalid, such decision shall
not affect the validity of the remaining portions of this chapter. The City
Council hereby declares that it would have passed this chapter and each
section, subsection, sentence, clause and phrase thereof, irrespective of the
fact that any one or more sections, subsections, sentences, clauses, or phrases
be declared unconstitutional or otherwise invalid.
(Ord. 293, passed 1-23-1986)
§ 9-2-18 PENALTIES.
   (A)   Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter, except as
otherwise provided under this chapter, is guilty of a misdemeanor, and upon
conviction thereof shall be punishable by a fine of not more than $500, or by
imprisonment for a period of not more than six months, or by both such fine and
imprisonment, as provided in §
1-4-1 of this code.
   (B)   Where any work is done or materials purchased by the city in
performing any of the acts required by this chapter after failure of the owner
or occupant of the abutting property to do so upon demand, the cost thereof may
be recovered from such owner or occupant by civil action. The bringing of such
action shall not prevent a criminal prosecution for the same act or omission.
(Ord. 293, passed 1-23-1986)
CHAPTER 3: UNDERGROUND UTILITIES
Section
9-3-1 Underground utilities
9-3-2 Administrative penalties
§ 9-3-1 UNDERGROUND UTILITIES.
   Utilities serving new development shall be installed underground rather than
by the use of poles and overhead lines, and where applicable shall be installed
in accordance with California Public Utilities Commission rules and regulation.
This requirement applies to electrical service and telecommunications
(including cable TV, telephone and data transmission) connections between
utility company distribution lines and all proposed structures on a site, and
all new installations that distribute utilities within a site. This section
does not apply to the following:
   (A)   New structures on parcels of five acres or larger, or requiring
uninterrupted utility runs of 500 feet or more;
   (B)   Public utility distribution service to the edge of the lot, except in
an underground utility district or where 75% of the lots on the street within
1,000 feet of the site area already developed, and have overhead service from
the utility company distribution source to the residences;
   (C)   Where underground installation may cause a substantial adverse
environmental impact, as determined by the City;
   (D)   Temporary overhead extensions for use during construction and/or for
the purpose of testing the power supply.
   This section may require an applicant to underground utilities from the
utility company distribution source to the site, as well as on the site itself.
The utility service provider should be contacted for information on the Public
Utility Commission's rules and regulations regarding the undergrounding of
utilities. Poles and overhead lines other than those allowed by this section
are allowable subject to Minor Use Permit approval, provided that the City
first finds that either topographical, soil or similar physical conditions or
the distance to the utility company distribution source make the use of
underground utilities unreasonable or impractical.
(Ord. 653, passed 4-16-2024)
§ 9-3-2 ADMINISTRATIVE PENALTIES.
   (A)   The administrative citation penalty for all violations of this
chapter, within a rolling twelve-month period, deemed misdemeanors under the
Livingston Municipal Code shall be as follows:
      1.   First administrative citation: $250.00 per violation;
      2.   Second administrative citation: $500.00 per violation;
      3.   Third administrative citation: $1,000.00 per violation; and
      4.   One thousand dollars ($1,000.00) per violation for each subsequent
administrative citation.
   (B)   The administrative citation penalty for all violations of this
chapter, within a rolling 12-month period, deemed infractions under the
Livingston Municipal Code shall be as follows:
      1.   First administrative citation: $100.00 per violation;
      2.   Second administrative citation: $200.00 per violation;
      3.   Third administrative citation: $500.00 per violation; and
      4.   Five hundred dollars ($500.00) per violation for each subsequent
administrative citation.
(Ord. 653, passed 4-16-2024)
§ 9-3-3 DESIGNATION OF UNDERGROUND UTILITY DISTRICTS.
   (A)   If, after any such public hearing, the Council finds that the public
necessity, health, safety or welfare requires such removal and such underground
installation within a designated area, the Council shall, by resolution,
declare such designated area an underground utility district and order such
removal and underground installation.
   (B)   Such resolution shall include a description of the area comprising
such district and shall fix the time within which such removal and underground
installation shall be accomplished and within which affected property owners
must be ready to receive underground service.
   (C)   A reasonable time shall be allowed for such removal and underground
installation, having due regard for the availability of labor, materials and
equipment necessary for such removal and for the installation of such
underground facilities as may be occasioned thereby.
(Ord. 146, passed 12-9-1968)
§ 9-3-4 UNLAWFUL ACTS.
   Whenever the Council creates an underground utility district and orders the
removal of poles, overhead wires and associated overhead structures therein as
provided in §
9-3-3 of this chapter, it shall be unlawful for any person or utility to erect,
construct, place, keep, maintain, continue, employ or operate poles, overhead
wires and associated overhead structures in the district after the date when
said overhead facilities are required to be removed by such resolution, except
as said overhead facilities may be required to furnish service to an owner or
occupant of property prior to the performance by such owner or occupant of the
underground work necessary for such owner or occupant to continue to receive
utility service as provided in §
9-3-8(B) of this chapter, and for such reasonable time required to remove said
facilities after said work has been performed, and except as otherwise provided
in this chapter.
(Ord. 146, passed 12-9-1968)
§ 9-3-5 EXCEPTION, EMERGENCY OR UNUSUAL CIRCUMSTANCES.
   (A)   Notwithstanding the provisions of this chapter, overhead facilities
may be installed and maintained for a period not to exceed ten days, without
authority of the City Council in order to provide emergency service.
   (B)   The Council may grant special permission, on such terms as the Council
may deem appropriate, in cases of unusual circumstances, without discrimination
as to any person or utility, to erect, construct, install, maintain, use or
operate poles, overhead wires and associated overhead structures.
(Ord. 146, passed 12-9-1968)
§ 9-3-6 OTHER EXCEPTIONS.
   This chapter and any resolution adopted pursuant to §
9-3-3 of this chapter shall, unless otherwise provided in such resolution, not
apply to the following types of facilities:
   (A)   Any municipal facilities or equipment installed under the supervision
and to the satisfaction of the City Engineer;
   (B)   Poles or electroliers used exclusively for street lighting;
   (C)   Overhead wires (exclusive of supporting structures) crossing any
portion of a district within which overhead wires have been prohibited, or
connecting to buildings on the perimeter of a district, when such wires
originate in an area from which poles, overhead wires and associated overhead
structures are not prohibited;
   (D)   Poles, overhead wires and associated overhead structures used for the
transmission of electric energy at nominal voltages in excess of 34,500 volts;
   (E)   Overhead wires attached to the exterior surface of a building by means
of a bracket or other fixture and extending from one location on the building
to another location on the same building or to an adjacent building without
crossing any public street;
   (F)   Antennas, associated equipment and supporting structures used by a
utility for furnishing communication services;
   (G)   Equipment appurtenant to underground facilities, such as surface
mounted transformers, pedestal mounted terminal boxes and meter cabinets, and
concealed ducts; and
   (H)   Temporary poles, overhead wires and associated overhead structures
used or to be used in conjunction with construction projects.
(Ord. 146, passed 12-9-1968)
§ 9-3-7 NOTICE TO PROPERTY OWNERS AND UTILITY COMPANIES.
   (A)   Within ten days after the effective date of a resolution adopted
pursuant to §
9-3-3 of this chapter, the City Clerk shall notify all affected utilities and
all persons owning real property within the district created by said resolution
of the adoption thereof. Said City Clerk shall further notify such affected
property owners of the necessity that, if they or any person occupying such
property desire to continue to receive electric, communication or similar or
associated service, they or such occupant shall provide all necessary facility
changes on their premises so as to receive such service from the lines of the
supplying utility or utilities at a new location, subject to applicable rules,
regulations and tariffs of the respective utility or utilities on file with the
commission.
   (B)   Notification by the City Clerk shall be made by mailing a copy of the
resolution adopted pursuant to section
9-3-3 of this chapter, together with a copy of this chapter, to affected
property owners as such are shown on the last equalized assessment roll and to
the affected utilities.
(Ord. 146, passed 12-9-1968)
§ 9-3-8 DESIGNATION OF RESPONSIBILITY.
   (A)   Utility companies. If underground construction is necessary to provide
utility service within a district created by any resolution adopted pursuant to
§
9-3-3 of this chapter, the supplying utility shall furnish that portion of the
conduits, conductors and associated equipment required to be furnished by it
under its applicable rules, regulations and tariffs on file with the
Commission.
   (B)   Property owners.
      1.   Every person owning, operating, leasing, occupying or renting a
building or structure within a district shall construct and provide that
portion of the service connection on his or her property between the facilities
referred to in subsection (A) of this section and the termination facility on
or within said building or structure being served, all in accordance with
applicable rules, regulations and tariffs of the respective utility or
utilities on file with the commission.
      2.   In the event any person owning, operating, leasing, occupying or
renting said property does not comply with the provisions of subsection (B)1.
of this section within the time provided for in the resolution enacted pursuant
to §
9-3-3 of this chapter, the Director of Public Works shall post written notice
on the property being served and 30 days thereafter shall have the authority to
order the disconnection and removal of any and all overhead service wires and
associated facilities supplying utility service to said property.
   (C)   City. The city shall remove, at its own expense, all city owned
equipment from all poles required to be removed hereunder in ample time to
enable the owner or user of such poles to remove the same within the time
specified in the resolution enacted pursuant to §
9-3-3 of this chapter.
(Ord. 146, passed 12-9-1968)
§ 9-3-9 EXTENSION OF TIME.
   In the event that any act required by this chapter or by a resolution
adopted pursuant to §
9-3-3 of this chapter cannot be performed within the time provided on account
of shortage of materials, war, restraint by public authorities, strikes, labor
disturbances, civil disobedience or any other circumstances beyond the control
of the actor, then the time within which such act will be accomplished shall be
extended for a period equivalent to the time of such limitation.
(Ord. 146, passed 12-9-1968)
§ 9-3-10 PENALTY.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to violate any provision or to fail to
comply with any of the requirements of this chapter. Any person violating any
provision of this chapter or failing to comply with any of its requirements
shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction thereof shall be
punished as provided in §
1-4-1 of this code. Each such person shall be deemed guilty of a separate
offense for each day during any portion of which any violation of any of the
provisions of this chapter is committed, continued or permitted by such person,
and shall be punishable therefor as provided for in this chapter.
(Ord. 146, passed 12-9-1968)
§ 9-3-11 NEW FACILITIES.
   (A)   All new utility distribution facilities and lines including, but not
limited to, gas, water, sewer, electrical communications, street lighting and
cable television shall be installed underground, except that overhead utility
lines may be permitted when it is determined by the City Council that such
facilities are designed to serve areas larger than that being subdivided and
that it is impractical to locate such facilities underground.
   (B)   When overhead lines are approved by the City Council, they shall
extend along alleys, side lot, rear yard or privately owned easements,
whichever is possible, except where such overhead lines cross streets, or must
be located outside of easements for good and sufficient reasons as determined
by the City Council.
   (C)   Street lighting standards, underground cables of conduit and
conductors and all materials and appurtenances necessary shall be installed of
a design and at a location approved by the City Engineer.
   (D)   It shall be the responsibility of the subdivider to ensure that
utilities are installed in compliance with the requirements of this section. He
or she shall make the necessary arrangements with the companies or other
agencies for such installation, according to the specifications of the
governing agency. For the purpose of this section, appurtenances and associated
equipment such as, but not limited to, surface mounted switches, transformers,
pedestal mounted terminal boxes and meter cabinets may be placed above ground.
(Ord. 515, passed 4-20-2004)
CHAPTER 4: CITY UTILITY SERVICES
Section
9-4-1 Deposit for city services
9-4-2 Franchise fees
§ 9-4-1 DEPOSIT FOR CITY SERVICES.
   (A)   Deposit required. An application for water, garbage and/or sewer
service hereafter shall be accompanied by:
      1.   A creditworthiness statement meeting the qualifications as
determined by the city;
      2.   A deposit of three times the estimated monthly bill; or
      3.   Written consent of property owner to be responsible for tenant’s
bill, as long as owner qualifies with a creditworthiness statement.
   (B)   Additional deposit. Any tenant, renter or homeowner who has tendered a
deposit less than the amount as described in subsection (A) of this section
shall not be required to increase their deposit unless their account becomes
delinquent and services are shut off for nonpayment. If this should happen, an
additional $25 will be required each time the account becomes delinquent until
the new deposit amount is paid in full to the city. This addition to the
deposit amount will be required the same as the payment for the services and
penalties prior to restoring services.
   (C)   Deposit refunds. Deposits will be refunded if any of the following
apply (see Chapters 5 and 6 of this title and Title 8, Chapter 2 of this code
relating to water, sewer and garbage regulations):
      1.   After the closing bill is paid in full;
      2.   May be applied to the closing bill at customer’s request in
conjunction with payment of any outstanding balance above the amount of the
deposit, or applied with a refund of the unused portion; and
      3.   If after a 12 consecutive month period the account has been paid in
a timely manner for all 12 months, the deposit will be applied to the account.
   (D)   Deposit forfeitures. In the event a customer leaves the area and has a
deposit on file with the city, the deposit will first be applied to any unpaid
balance on their account. If there is any portion of the deposit remaining,
staff will attempt to contact said customer by telephone and/or mail in order
to complete the refund. If staff is unable to locate said customer, the deposit
will be held for six months. If after that time period the customer does not
claim the deposit, the deposit shall be forfeited equally to the water, garbage
and/or sewer funds.
(Ord. 456, passed 6-4-1996)
§ 9-4-2 FRANCHISE FEES.
   The Director of Finance is authorized to collect a franchise fee of up to 9%
based on gross receipts from all municipally owned or contracted utilities as
payment of a consideration for the privilege of using city streets and other
public property within their franchise areas.
(Ord. 393, passed 6-4-1990)
CHAPTER 5: WATER SERVICE REGULATIONS
Section
9-5-1 General definitions
9-5-2 Purpose
9-5-3 Provisions of chapter deemed incorporated into water service agreements
9-5-4 Authority to establish administrative procedures
9-5-5 City is sole source of water service
9-5-6 Right to refuse water service
9-5-7 Private water wells prohibited
9-5-8 Public Works Department provides water service
9-5-9 Public Works Department duties
9-5-10 Duty to treat water
9-5-11 Duty to maintain water system
9-5-12 Compliance with California Code and this code
9-5-13 Connection authorized
9-5-14 Water service assigned to one premises
9-5-15 New meter sets
9-5-16 Extension of water system
9-5-17 Responsibility of service lines and house lines
9-5-18 Replacement of existing service line
9-5-19 Installation and maintenance of meters and property stops
9-5-20 Permit for service line repair, alteration or connection
9-5-21 Unauthorized water connection or restoration of service
9-5-22 Tampering with meters
9-5-23 Misrepresentation in application or service agreement
9-5-24 Customer responsibility
9-5-25 Forwarding water balances
9-5-26 Discontinuance of service by water service user
9-5-27 Charges for water service
9-5-28 Free service prohibited
9-5-29 Application of utility bill payments
9-5-30 Payment delinquency
9-5-31 Water shutoff notice
9-5-32 Water service shutoff
9-5-33 Unauthorized water service; theft of services
9-5-34 Appeals
9-5-35 Legal action
9-5-36 Responsibility for water leakage
9-5-37 Water meters
9-5-38 Interruption of water service
9-5-39 Water supply and pressure
9-5-40 Disconnection of service; condemned buildings
9-5-41 Repair and replacement of house lines
9-5-42 Authorized city representatives to have free access
9-5-43 Abandonment of service lines and house lines
9-5-44 Outdoor water sprinklers
9-5-45 Water use curtailment
9-5-46 Trespass and damage to water system
9-5-47 Water use by contractors
9-5-48 Maintenance and control of public fire hydrants
9-5-49 Drawing of water from fire hydrants
9-5-50 Use of water service during fire
9-5-51 Fire sprinkler system inspections
9-5-52 Private fire service water mains, sprinkler systems and fire service
storage tanks
9-5-53 Purpose of city water backflow prevention and cross connection program
9-5-54 Water cross connections and potential water cross connections prohibited
9-5-55 Responsibility for city backflow prevention and cross connection program
9-5-56 Responsibility of owner and customer for water cross connections,
potential cross connections and backflow prevention
9-5-57 Water backflow prevention and cross connection program
9-5-58 Investigations by Public Works Department
9-5-59 Right to enter premises
9-5-60 Evaluation of water user health hazards
9-5-61 User Supervisor
9-5-62 Approval of backflow prevention devices
9-5-63 Type and construction of backflow prevention devices
9-5-64 Determination and inspection of backflow prevention devices
9-5-65 Location of backflow prevention devices
9-5-66 Minimum backflow prevention protection required
9-5-67 Contamination costs and the consumer
9-5-68 Lawn sprinkler backflow prevention specifications
9-5-69 Testing and maintenance of backflow prevention devices
9-5-70 Violations and penalties for water cross connections, potential cross
connections and backflow prevention regulations
9-5-71 Waste of water prohibited
9-5-72 Water restrictions
9-5-73 Severability
§ 9-5-1 GENERAL DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   AIR GAP SEPARATION (AG). The physical break between the supply line and a
receiving vessel.
   APPROVED WATER SUPPLY. A water supply whose potability is regulated by the
federal government, State of California or City of Livingston.
   AUXILIARY WATER SUPPLY. Any water supply other than that received from the
city. These auxiliary waters may include water from another purveyor’s public
water supply or any natural source(s), such as a well, spring, river, stream,
harbor and so forth; used waters; or industrial fluids. These waters may be
contaminated or polluted, or they may be objectionable and constitute an
unacceptable water source over which the city does not have sanitary control.
   AWWA STANDARD. The official standard developed and approved by the American
Water Works Association (AWWA).
   BACK PRESSURE. A pressure, higher than the supply pressure, caused by a
pump, elevated tank, boiler or any other means that may cause backflow.
   BACK SIPHONAGE. Backflow caused by negative or reduced pressure in the
supply piping.
   BACKFLOW. The undesirable reversal of flow in a potable water distribution
system as a result of a cross connection or the unwanted flow of used or
nonpotable water, foreign liquids or gases or any other substance from any
domestic, industrial or institutional piping system into the pure, potable
water distribution system.
   BACKFLOW PREVENTER or BACKFLOW PREVENTION DEVICE. A safety device used to
prevent pollution or contamination of the water supply due to the reserves flow
of water or other substance into the public potable water supply.
   BASE RATE OR FIXED COMPONENT. The minimum fixed charge per billing period
for water service to a user as set by the City Council by resolution.
   BILLING PERIOD. The calendar accounting unit for which charges are assessed
and imposed for water service.
   CITY. The City of Livingston.
   CITY COUNCIL. The City Council of the City of Livingston.
   CONNECTION. Refers to the act of linking the service pipe of a house,
building or other property to the city water system, and also to the physical
apparatus by which such linking is accomplished.
   CONSTRUCTION METER. A temporary meter attached to a fire hydrant at a
construction site to measure water usage at the site.
   CONTAMINATION. An impairment of a potable water supply by the introduction
or admission of any foreign substance that degrades the quality and creates a
health hazard.
   CROSS CONNECTION. The unprotected actual connection or potential connection
between a potable water system used to supply water for drinking purposes and
any source or system, sewer drain, conduit, pool storage reservoir, plumbing
fixture or other device containing unapproved water or a substance that is not
or cannot be approved as safe, wholesome and potable. Bypass arrangements,
jumper connections, removable sections, swivel or changeover devices, or other
devices through which backflow could occur, shall be considered to be CROSS
CONNECTIONS.
   CUSTOMER or CONSUMER. All persons obtaining water service from the water
supply system of the city.
   DEVELOPER. A person, natural or otherwise, who divides a tract of land into
lots for sale as residential property or who makes improvements to residential,
commercial, office or industrial properties.
   DOUBLE CHECK VALVE ASSEMBLY (DC) BACKFLOW PREVENTION DEVICE. An assembly of
at least two independently acting check valves including tightly closed shutoff
valves on each side of the check valve assembly and test cocks available for
testing the watertightness of each check valve.
   HAZARDOUS MATERIALS. Any material that, because of its quantity,
concentration, or physical or chemical characteristics, poses a significant
present or potential hazard to human health and safety or to the environment if
released into the workplace or the environment. HAZARDOUS MATERIALS include,
but are not limited to, hazardous substances, hazardous waste and any material
that a handler or the administering agency has a reasonable basis for believing
that it would be injurious to the health and safety of persons or harmful to
the environment if released into the workplace or the environment.
   HAZARDOUS SUBSTANCE.
      1.   Includes, but is not limited to, any HAZARDOUS SUBSTANCE as that
term is defined under Cal. Health and Safety Code §§ 25281(h), 25501(n), and
pursuant to 42 U.S.C. § 9601(14); any HAZARDOUS WASTE as that term is defined
under 42 U.S.C. § 6903(5), and under Cal. Health and Safety Code § 25501(n);
any HAZARDOUS MATERIAL as that term is defined under Cal. Health and Safety
Code § 25501(n); any chemical which the Governor of the state has identified as
a chemical known to cause cancer or reproductive toxicity, pursuant to Cal.
Health and Safety Code § 25249.8; and any crude oil or refined or unrefined
petroleum product, or any fraction or derivative thereof, and any asbestos or
asbestos containing material.
      2.   The term HAZARDOUS SUBSTANCE includes any amendments to the above
referenced statutes and regulations.
   HEALTH AGENCY. The California Department of Health Services, or the local
health officer with respect to a small water system.
   HOUSE LINE. That portion of the water service pipe from the discharge side
of the meter to the structure serviced.
   INDUSTRIAL FLUIDS SYSTEM. Any system containing a fluid or solution that may
be chemically, biologically or otherwise contaminated or polluted in a form or
concentrate, such as would constitute a health, system, pollution or plumbing
hazard, if introduced into the city’s water supply.
   LOCAL HEALTH AGENCY. The county or city health authority.
   MAIN. A water line designed or used to serve more than one premises.
   METER TAMPERING. Cutting water meter locks or alteration or damage of any
water meter or any of its components or unauthorized connections to the city
water system or the use of “straight lines”, “cheater pipes” or “bypass hoses”
or any other means to take water by bypassing the city water meter or prevent
water from being properly metered by the city.
   PERSON. Any person, firm, association of persons or corporation, including
public, private or municipal corporation.
   POTENTIAL CROSS CONNECTION. A fixture or appurtenance with threaded hose
connection, tapered spout or other connection which would facilitate extension
of the water supply line beyond its legal termination point.
   PREMISES. A private home, building apartment house, condominium, trailer
court, mobilehome park, a group of adjacent buildings or property utilized
under one ownership and under a single control with respect to use of water and
the responsibility for payment thereof.
   PRIVATE FIRE HYDRANT. A discharge pipe with a valve and spout located on
private property at which water may be drawn.
   PRIVATE FIRE SERVICE MAIN. A pipe and its appurtenances on private property
that is:
      1.   Between a source of water and the base of the riser for water based
fire protection systems;
      2.   Between a source of water and inlets to fire foam making systems;
      3.   Between a source of water and base elbow of private fire hydrants or
monitor nozzles;
      4.   Used as a fire pump suction and discharge piping; or
      5.   Beginning at the inlet side of the check valve on a gravity or
pressure tank.
   PROCESSING FLUIDS. Any fluid or solution which may be chemically or
biologically or otherwise contaminated or polluted in a form or concentration
such as would constitute a health, pollution or system hazard if introduced
into the public water system or a consumer’s potable water system. This
includes, but is not limited to, polluted or contaminated waters; processed
waters; used waters originating from the public water supply system which may
have deteriorated in sanitary quality; cooling waters; questionable or
contaminated natural waters taken from wells, lakes, streams or irrigation
systems; chemicals in solution or suspension; oils, gases, acids, alkalis and
other liquid and gaseous fluids used in industrial or other processes, or for
firefighting purposes.
   PUBLIC FIRE HYDRANT. A discharge pipe with a valve and spout located on
public property for use primarily by fire service personnel at which water may
be drawn from the water main.
   RECLAIMED WATER. Wastewater which as a result of treatment is suitable for
uses other than potable use.
   REDUCED PRESSURE PRINCIPLE (RP) BACKFLOW PREVENTION DEVICE. A backflow
preventer incorporating not less than two check valves, an automatically
operated differential relief valve located between the two check valves, a
tightly closed shutoff valve on each side of the check valve assembly, and
equipped with necessary test cocks for testing.
   ROVING METER. A meter attached to a movable vehicle to measure water drawn
from a fire hydrant into a tank attached to the vehicle.
   SERVICE LINE. That portion of water service pipe from the main line up to
and including the discharge side of the water meter.
   STRAIGHT LINE OR CHEATER PIPE. Any type of device installed in lieu of a
water meter, connecting to the city’s water service line to a private service
line for the purpose of obtaining unmetered water.
   SUBDIVISION. A tract of land divided by a subdivider, or any lot or lots or
tract of real property on which any building is or will be built.
   SURVEY. The collection of information pertaining to a customer’s piping
system regarding the location of all connections to the public water supply
system and must include the location, type and most recent inspection and
testing date of all cross connection control devices and methods located within
that customer’s piping system. The survey must be in written form, and should
not be an actual plumbing inspection.
   SYSTEM. All water source and supply facilities, transmission pipelines and
storage facilities, pumping stations, distribution mains and appurtenances,
vehicles and materials storage facilities.
   USAGE CHARGE OR VARIABLE COMPONENT. The charge per 1,000 gallons of water
used by a water user established by the City Council by resolution.
   USER. A person, natural or otherwise, who utilizes the water system of the
city for any purpose.
   USER CONNECTION. The point of connection of a user’s piping to the city’s
water facilities.
   WATER MAIN. The water pipe owned by the city from which water service lines
lead.
   WATER METER. The instrument which measures and records the amount of water
which flows through it.
   WATER SERVICE. The provision of culinary water such that water flows through
a plumbing system connected to the city water system.
   WATER SYSTEM. Includes pipes, water mains, meters, valves, reservoirs,
tanks, wells, springs, hydrants, sources, pumps and all other property and
equipment owned by the city and through or from which water flows.
   WATER USER. Any person obtaining water from the city’s water supply.
   WELL. An opening in the surface of the earth for the purpose of removing
water through nonmechanical or mechanical means for any purpose.
(Ord. 576, passed 12-16-2008)
§ 9-5-2 PURPOSE.
   The purpose of this chapter is to:
   (A)   Establish rules, regulations, policies and procedures for the service
and the extension of service from the water system of the city; and
   (B)   To promote the public health, safety and general welfare of the users
of the water system in accordance with standards established by the city,
county, state and federal governments.
(Ord. 576, passed 12-16-2008)
§ 9-5-3 PROVISIONS OF CHAPTER DEEMED INCORPORATED INTO WATER SERVICE
AGREEMENTS.
   (A)   All provisions of this chapter shall be deemed to be incorporated into
every service agreement between the city and its water service customer.
   (B)   Each customer shall be charged with knowledge of the provisions of
this chapter and, by applying for and accepting water service from the city, to
have assented to the provisions of this chapter.
(Ord. 576, passed 12-16-2008)
§ 9-5-4 AUTHORITY TO ESTABLISH ADMINISTRATIVE PROCEDURES.
   The City Manager, or City Engineer or their designees, shall have the
authority to adopt administrative procedures necessary to effectively implement
the provisions of this chapter.
(Ord. 576, passed 12-16-2008)
§ 9-5-5 CITY IS SOLE SOURCE OF WATER SERVICE.
   To protect the health, safety and welfare of the community and provide
efficiency in the delivery of municipal services, the city shall be the only
allowed source of municipal, industrial and domestic water supply within the
incorporated boundaries of the city with the exception of bottled water
purchased for consumption from licensed vendors or retail store, and with the
further exception of wells in existence prior to the effective date of §
8-4-2 of this code.
(Ord. 576, passed 12-16-2008)
§ 9-5-6 RIGHT TO REFUSE WATER SERVICE.
   The city reserves the right to refuse water service, to limit the amount of
water provided for any function, or to refuse to provide water service for a
particular function of an applicant, consumer or customer at its sole
discretion.
(Ord. 576, passed 12-16-2008)
§ 9-5-7 PRIVATE WATER WELLS PROHIBITED.
   Except for wells in existence prior to the effective date of §
8-4-2 of this code, no person, firm, association, corporation or any other
entity shall drill, install, sink, construct, maintain or use a water well
within the city limits.
(Ord. 576, passed 12-16-2008)
§ 9-5-8 PUBLIC WORKS DEPARTMENT PROVIDES WATER SERVICE.
   The Public Works Department shall have authority to operate and maintain the
city’s water system and furnish water service to the residents of the city for
fees set by the City Council by resolution or ordinance. To accomplish these
purposes, the Public Works Department is empowered to employ persons, acquire
equipment and perform all other acts necessary or incidental to the
accomplishment of the above described purposes, subject to all applicable
ordinances, resolutions, rules, regulations, policies and directions of the
City Manager and the City Council.
(Ord. 576, passed 12-16-2008)
§ 9-5-9 PUBLIC WORKS DEPARTMENT DUTIES.
   The Public Works Department shall administer and enforce this chapter under
the direction of the City Manager or his or her designees and manage the city’s
water system pursuant to the provisions of this chapter and pursuant to the
resolutions, rules, regulations and directives issued by the City Manager or
adopted by the City Council prescribing their powers and duties.
(Ord. 576, passed 12-16-2008)
§ 9-5-10 DUTY TO TREAT WATER.
   The Public Works Department shall treat or cause to be treated the water
furnished to the water users hereunder using current water treatment methods
such that the water shall conform to ordinary and contemporary standards of
purity and fitness for culinary use.
(Ord. 576, passed 12-16-2008)
§ 9-5-11 DUTY TO MAINTAIN WATER SYSTEM.
   The Public Works Department shall keep the water system in good repair. Any
leaks, breaks or equipment failures shall be promptly repaired.
(Ord. 576, passed 12-16-2008)
§ 9-5-12 COMPLIANCE WITH CALIFORNIA CODE AND THIS CODE.
   All new buildings or structures located within or outside the corporate city
limits, and any additions, modifications, alterations or repairs of existing
buildings that use the water facilities of the city shall comply with the
requirements of this code and the California Building Code as amended,
including securing of all permits and inspections required by such code.
(Ord. 576, passed 12-16-2008)
§ 9-5-13 CONNECTION AUTHORIZED.
   The Public Works Department shall cause to be connected with the city’s
water system the service line of any property abutting on a city water main
after the property owner or his or her agent complies with all of the following
provisions of this section.
   (A)   Water service agreement. The property owner other than a developer,
fills out, signs and files with the City Finance Department a water service
agreement approved by the City Manager and the City Attorney.
   (B)   Service line. The property owner or his or her agents shall install a
service line to the property location designated by the City Public Works
Department which meets the following requirements.
      1.   The service line is of material and quality approved by the Public
Works Department.
      2.   The service line, when used, be buried at a location, depth and
grade approved by the Public Works Department.
      3.   The service line does not cross property owned by a person other
than the property owner who applied for the connection, unless written
permission is obtained from the Public Works Department.
      4.   The service line, when connected, will supply water to no more than
one building, except where written permission is obtained from the Public Works
Department. Connection of such a service line may be added, if the property
owner applying for the connection is the owner of all buildings located to such
service line. For the purposes of payment of fees under this chapter, however,
each building which shall receive water service through a common service line
shall be deemed to receive said water service through a separate service line
for the payment of charges set forth in subsection (F) of this section.
   (C)   Illegal use of water pressure. The water provided through the
connection will not be used for the purpose of driving any motor, siphon,
turbine, or other wheel, or any hydraulic engine, or elevator, or for driving
or propelling machinery of any kind whatsoever, or for any other purpose which
the City Engineer, City Manager or City Council have not approved in writing.
   (D)   Inspection. The service line of the building to be connected has been
inspected by an authorized employee of the city and found to conform to city
water ordinances and to the provisions of the Livingston building code. The
service line and all other underground water lines or connections shall be open
and visible to the inspector at the time of the inspection.
   (E)   Charges current. The user requesting connection has no unpaid
delinquent water charge assessed against him or her by the city for any
location within the city’s utility services boundary.
   (F)   Fees due at connection. The user shall pay at the time he or she files
his or her application for connection all of the following applicable fees:
      1.   The connection charge specified by the City Council by resolution;
      2.   Water impact fees adopted by the City Council by resolution; and
      3.   Any other fees adopted by the City Council by resolution or included
in any development agreement approved by the City Manager or City Council.
(Ord. 576, passed 12-16-2008)
§ 9-5-14 WATER SERVICE ASSIGNED TO ONE PREMISES.
   No person shall supply or furnish water in any way for use outside of the
premises to which the service is assigned or appurtenant.
(Ord. 576, passed 12-16-2008)
§ 9-5-15 NEW METER SETS.
   (A)   The City Engineer or City Manager or their designees shall have the
authority to establish rules, regulations, and specifications regarding new
meter sets and meter vaults. Meters may be purchased from the Public Works
Department.
   (B)   Installation of new meters and construction of meter vaults for new
construction shall be at the expense of the contractor or customer. Approval by
the Public Works Department shall be required before the water meter set is
constructed and service begins.
(Ord. 576, passed 12-16-2008)
§ 9-5-16 EXTENSION OF WATER SYSTEM.
   In addition to the immediate preceding section, the following provisions
shall apply to anyone seeking to connect to the city water system where said
system does not extend to such property.
   (A)   Agreement. Whenever a developer or builder desires or is required to
install water connections and extensions for a subdivision or other
development, the developer shall enter into a written water extension agreement
with the city which shall constitute an application for permission to make said
extensions and connections that shall be made and the payments that shall be
required.
   (B)   Sizing of main line extensions. The city reserves the right to
determine the size of the pipe necessary in making any extension, but in no
case shall pipe smaller than six inches in diameter be installed.
   (C)   Dedication. Any extension of the city water system granted in
accordance with the provisions of subsection (B) of this section, including all
easements necessary to accommodate its installation and maintenance, shall upon
completion and acceptance become the property of the city.
   (D)   Limitation of extension rules. Nothing contained in this chapter shall
limit or prevent the city from extending its distribution system whenever it
may determine that circumstances so warrant.
   (E)   Service outside city limits.
      1.   The city is under no obligation to supply water outside the city
limits. However, the city may enter into an agreement to furnish water service
from its water system to persons outside the city in accordance with the
provisions of this section, the terms and conditions of any assessment district
or in accordance with City Council policies or action. In addition, any person
or persons located outside the city limits that desires to be supplied with
water service from the city water system must be willing to:
         (a)   Pay in advance the whole expense of extending the water system
to his or her property; and
         (b)   Be annexed to the city.
      2.   If, at the time the initial request for annexation is submitted, the
area upon which the facility is located is not contiguous with the city limits
or otherwise not legally available for annexation, the owner of the property
shall enter into a contract with the city to be approved by the City Council,
which contract shall provide that the property owner shall not withdraw the
written request for annexation, that the written request for annexation shall
be kept in full force and effect until such time as the area becomes legally
available for annexation. If the annexation request is withdrawn the facility
shall be disconnected from city water. The contract shall run with the land and
will be filed at the County Recorder’s office.
      3.   In addition to the water requirements set forth in this section, any
agreement shall contain a certified acknowledgment that the petitioner
understands that the city in granting the petition need only supply such water
to the petitioner which from time to time shall be deemed by the City Council
to be beyond the requirements of water use within the city limits and the
provision of water service may be curtailed or terminated by the city at any
time for any reason. If the City Council grants the petition or any portion
thereof, the petitioner and the city shall enter into a written water system
extension agreement, which agreement shall be executed prior to the
commencement of any work upon said water extension.
      4.   If the property is acquired by a new owner, the new owner shall,
within 90 days of acquiring the property, submit a written request for the
annexation of the area to the city and execute a contract as specified in this
section to be approved by the City Council. If no such request or contract is
received within the time specified, the property shall be disconnected from
city water service.
(Ord. 576, passed 12-16-2008)
§ 9-5-17 RESPONSIBILITY OF SERVICE LINES AND HOUSE LINES.
   (A)   The city’s responsibility for all water service lines is from the
connection at the city’s main water line to the water meter box.
   (B)   From the water meter box to the customer’s premises is the sole
responsibility of the customer to install, own, maintain and/or replace.
(Ord. 576, passed 12-16-2008)
§ 9-5-18 REPLACEMENT OF EXISTING SERVICE LINE.
   The replacement of a previously used service line shall be deemed a
connection and the provision of §§
9-5-16 and
9-5-17 of this chapter shall apply to said replacement.
(Ord. 576, passed 12-16-2008)
§ 9-5-19 INSTALLATION AND MAINTENANCE OF METERS AND PROPERTY STOPS.
   In connecting to a water main, the customer or contractor shall install or
cause to be installed a service line of suitable quality under the street and a
meter box, meter, and property stop at a location determined by the Public
Works Department. Said connection pipe, meter box, meter and property stop are
and shall be the property of the city, which retains the sole right to
maintain, repair and service said facilities.
(Ord. 576, passed 12-16-2008)
§ 9-5-20 PERMIT FOR SERVICE LINE REPAIR, ALTERATION OR CONNECTION.
   It shall be unlawful for any person, to open, alter, repair or connect to
any existing water main or service line without it first having received a
permit from the Public Works Department or other authorized city department. No
permit authorizing such alteration, repair, connection or opening shall be
issued if said alteration or connection results in water service to a building
to which such service was not previously furnished, unless such building is
owned by the owner of all other buildings connected to said service line. Any
connection from an existing service line to a building to which water service
was not furnished before the connection is made shall need to be a new,
original service line connection and the property owner shall pay the fees set
by resolution or ordinance of the City Council before receiving the permit
referred to above.
(Ord. 576, passed 12-16-2008)
§ 9-5-21 UNAUTHORIZED WATER CONNECTION OR RESTORATION OF SERVICE.
   (A)   Prohibited. It shall be unlawful for any person by himself or herself
to directly or indirectly through family, servants or agents connect to,
disconnect, repair or alter the city water system or any part thereof,
including, but not limited to, any water line or water meter, or to open any
fire hydrant, property stop, valve or other fixtures attached to the system of
water supply unless it is done pursuant to a city approved application,
agreement, permit or resolution.
   (B)   Licensed utility contractor. A licensed utility contractor approved by
the city or a licensed utility contractor under contract with the city may tap
a city water line or water main in accordance with the following.
      1.   The utility contractor shall be responsible for any damage to the
water main or water line where the tap is being made. All repairs to the water
main or water line where damage has occurred shall be made by an authorized
employee of the Public Works Department or authorized licensed utility
contractor. The utility contractor shall be responsible for the cost of the tap
to an existing water main or water line.
      2.   The licensed utility contractor shall be responsible for any repairs
to the tap or service line extension due to any defects of materials or
workmanship for one year after the tap has been completed.
      3.   The licensed utility contractor shall use all his or her
professional skills to ensure that there is no contamination of city water
mains. Any contamination of city water mains shall be reported immediately to
the Public Works Department. Employees of the Department will take corrective
measures and fees will be assessed to the person responsible for the damage for
all repair work accomplished.
(Ord. 576, passed 12-16-2008)
§ 9-5-22 TAMPERING WITH METERS.
   (A)   Inspection and adjustment. Meters may be checked, inspected or
adjusted at the discretion of the city, and they shall not be adjusted or
tampered with in any manner or removed by the user or any other person.
   (B)   Opening boxes. Meter boxes shall not be opened for the purpose of
turning on or off the water except by an authorized representative of the city
unless special permission is given by the Public Works Department, except in an
emergency.
   (C)   Meter interference. No person shall:
      1.   Prevent water from passing through any meter connected directly or
indirectly with the public water mains;
      2.   Prevent any meter from accurately registering the amount of water
passing through such meter; or
      3.   Prevent or obstruct a meter from accurately registering the quantity
of water supplied, or in any way interfere with the purpose, action or just
registration of a meter.
   (D)   Responsibility to prevent. A user shall prevent any damage to the
water meter used by such user and shall pay the cost of repairing any damage to
the water meter other than normal wear and tear. Any amounts due by reason of
this subsection (D) may be added to a user’s bill for water service, and any
amount received from such user thereafter shall be applied first against the
amount due pursuant to this subsection (D) and thereafter to any other amount
(s) due from such user for other purposes.
(Ord. 576, passed 12-16-2008)
§ 9-5-23 MISREPRESENTATION IN APPLICATION OR SERVICE AGREEMENT.
   It shall be unlawful to misrepresent a material fact in applying for a water
connection or in a water service agreement. Material facts shall include the
identity of the applicant as the owner of the property to be connected, and the
purpose for which the water service provided will be used.
(Ord. 576, passed 12-16-2008)
§ 9-5-24 CUSTOMER RESPONSIBILITY.
   Customers are responsible for furnishing the city with their correct
address. Failure to receive bills will not be considered a reason for
nonpayment, nor permit an extension of the date at which time the account will
be considered delinquent.
(Ord. 576, passed 12-16-2008)
§ 9-5-25 FORWARDING WATER BALANCES.
   Should a customer have an unpaid balance from a previous location, a
forwarding balance will be added to the customer’s present account. The city
reserves the right to disconnect the customer’s present service for unpaid
forwarding balances.
(Ord. 576, passed 12-16-2008)
§ 9-5-26 DISCONTINUANCE OF SERVICE BY WATER SERVICE USER.
   Any user desiring to discontinue water service shall notify the Finance
Department. Any credit balance in favor of the user, as a result of a deposit
or advance payment, shall be refunded promptly after receipt of the notice of
discontinuance, except that an amount to be set by the City Council by
resolution or ordinance shall be retained by the Finance Department as a fee
for turning off water service.
(Ord. 576, passed 12-16-2008)
§ 9-5-27 CHARGES FOR WATER SERVICE.
   (A)   Water fees. The City Council shall by resolution or ordinance set the
amount of charges, fees and assessments that include, but are not limited to,
the following:
      1.   Base rate or fixed component service charges;
      2.   Usage charge or variable component charges per 1,000 gallons used;
      3.   Service charges other than the base rate;
      4.   Late fees;
      5.   Return check fees;
      6.   Development water impact fees;
      7.   Water connection fees;
      8.   Reconnection fees during regular business hours after water shutoff;
      9.   Fire hydrant water use fees from construction or roving meters;
      10.   Fee for water used by contractors in new construction;
      11.   Meter tampering fee;
      12.   Missed appointment fee after second missed appointment;
      13.   Penalty fee for unauthorized water connections and use of city
water by the use of “cheater pipes”, “straight lines”, “hoses” or other means;
and
      14.   Other fees as determined by the City Council.
   (B)   Water billing duration.
      1.   The City Manager shall determine the duration of the billing period
and may change the duration of the billing period from time to time.
      2.   If the due date is a Saturday, Sunday or legal holiday, charges
shall become delinquent at the close of business on the next business day after
said Saturday, Sunday or legal holiday.
      3.   Postmarks will not be accepted as the date the payment was received.
   (C)   Unified billing. Municipal utility services shall be billed under a
unified bill which includes water, sewer, garbage collection charges and other
charges as the City Council designates.
   (D)   Unpaid water bills are liens. All unpaid accounts for water delivered
at any premises shall constitute a lien against the same and shall be subject
to collection all as provided by the Revenue Bond Law of 1941 as found in Cal.
Gov’t Code Title 5, Division 2, Part 1, Chapter 6.
(Ord. 576, passed 12-16-2008; Ord. 583, passed 8-4-2009)
§ 9-5-28 FREE SERVICE PROHIBITED.
   There shall be no free service rendered by the city, and if any local, state
or federal government, or any department, agency or instrumentality thereof, or
any other public body shall desire service to be rendered by the city, it shall
apply for and receive such service pursuant to the city’s ordinances,
resolutions, policies, rules and regulations and shall pay for the same as
established by resolution or ordinance of the City Council.
(Ord. 576, passed 12-16-2008)
§ 9-5-29 APPLICATION OF UTILITY BILL PAYMENTS.
   Any payments received by the city for the payment of utility bills shall be
applied to the outstanding balances of service charges in the following order:
   (A)   Fines, penalties or assessments;
   (B)   Garbage charges;
   (C)   Sewer charges; and
   (D)   Water charges.
(Ord. 576, passed 12-16-2008)
§ 9-5-30 PAYMENT DELINQUENCY.
   A basic penalty of up to 10% of the rate for one month shall be added to
each delinquent bill for the first month the bill is delinquent. After
assessing the basic penalty, thereafter an additional penalty of 0.5% per month
shall be added to all delinquent charges and basic penalties remaining unpaid,
until the City Council requests the City Finance Director (or equivalent) to
lien the amount of all delinquencies against the appropriate premises as set
forth in §
9-5-27 of this chapter. Monies paid where any portion of an account is
delinquent shall first be credited to the delinquent portion of the bill and
then to the current billing.
(Ord. 583, passed 8-4-2009)
§ 9-5-31 WATER SHUTOFF NOTICE.
   If a service charge remains unpaid for two complete billing periods, the
Finance Department shall notify in writing by mail the occupant of the premises
that the water service will be discontinued if payment is not made within 15
calendar days after the date on the notice. A shutoff notice processing fee as
determined by resolution of the City Council shall be charged at the time that
the notice is sent.
(Ord. 576, passed 12-16-2008)
§ 9-5-32 WATER SERVICE SHUTOFF.
   (A)   Policy. Under the holdings in a State Court of Appeals case, the city
is required to follow the termination procedure set forth in the Cal. Public
Utilities Code Division 5, §§ 10001 et seq., governing the operation of
utilities owned by municipal corporations, specifically including charter
cities. The procedures set forth herein comply with the minimum statutory
requirements set forth in Cal. Public Utilities Code §§ 10010 and 10010.1, and
SB 998, the Water Shutoff Protection Act (Cal. Health and Safety Code §§ 116900
et seq.).
   (B)   Disconnection of residential water service for nonpayment. If the
delinquent customer does not make the required payment, request an appeal or
request a payment agreement for the unpaid charges, water service shall be
terminated on the date specified in the final notice. The date of
discontinuation of service shall be at least 60 calendar days from the date on
the initial bill and at least seven business days from the date of the final
notice.
   (C)   Discontinuation of residential water service for nonpayment
prohibited. Discontinuation of residential water service for nonpayment is
prohibited in the following instances:
      1.   While an appeal is pending;
      2.   During a pending investigation by the city of a customer complaint;
      3.   When the customer has been granted an extension of the period for
payment of a bill; or
      4.   When there exists a primary care provider certification of threat to
life or serious threat to health and safety of a resident of premises,
including:
         (a)   The customer, or a tenant of the customer, submits the
certification of a primary care provider that discontinuation of residential
service would be life threatening to, or pose a serious threat to the health
and safety of, a resident of the premises and where residential service is
provided;
         (b)   (1)   The customer demonstrates that he or she is financially
unable to pay for the service within the normal billing cycle, and the customer
is willing to enter into an amortization agreement, alternative payment
schedule, or a plan for deferred or reduced payment with respect to all
delinquent charges.
            (2)   The customer is deemed financially unable to pay for
residential service within the normal billing cycle if any member of the
customer’s household is a current recipient of CalWORKs, CalFresh, general
assistance, Medi-Cal, a supplemental security income/state supplementary
payment program, or a state special supplemental nutrition program for women,
infants and children, or the customer declares that the household’s annual
income is less than the 200% federal poverty level.
         (c)   If the conditions of (C)4.(b)(1) and (C)4.(b)(2) above are met,
the city shall offer one of the following:
            (1)   Amortization of the unpaid balance;
            (2)   Participation in an alternative payment schedule;
            (3)   A partial or full reduction of the unpaid balance financed
without additional charges to other rate payers;
            (4)   Temporary deferral of payment;
            (5)   The city may choose which of the payment options the customer
may undertake and set parameters for that payment option with repayment within
12 months unless a longer period is necessary to avoid undue hardship to the
customer based upon the circumstances of the individual case;
            (6)   Service may be disconnected no sooner than five business days
after a final notice is posted in a prominent and conspicuous location at the
property under either of the following circumstances:
               a.   The customer fails to comply with an amortization
agreement, an alternative payment schedule, or a deferral or reduction in
payment plan for delinquent charges for more than 60 days or more; or
               b.    While undertaking an amortization agreement, an
alternative payment schedule, or a deferral or reduction in payment plan for
delinquent charges, the customer does not pay his or her current residential
service charges for 60 days or more.
            (7)   On any Saturday, Sunday, legal holiday or at any time which
the Finance Department office is not open to the public.
   (D)   Multi-unit or multi-tenant residential structures.
      1.   Multi-unit or multi-tenant residential structures or mobilehome
parks where water service is provided through a master meter will be held to
the same delinquency process as the single residential customers.
      2.   Multi-unit customers will receive all three past due and
termination/discontinuation of service notices. The Public Works Department
shall post an additional notice of delinquency and impending termination on the
door of each residential occupant at least 15 days prior to actual termination.
      3.   If it is not reasonable or practicable to post the notice on the
door of each residential unit under (D)2. above, the Public Works Department
shall post five copies of the notice of delinquency and impending termination
in each accessible common area and at each point of access to the structure or
structures.
      4.   The notice of delinquency and impending termination for multi-unit
and multi-tenant residential structures or mobilehome parks shall further
include the following information:
         (a)   When the account is in arrears;
         (b)   The service will be terminated on the specified date;
         (c)   The residential occupants may become customers, and, if so, the
occupants will be billed for water services. To do so, the occupants must agree
to the terms and conditions of service and meet the requirements of the city’s
rules and tariffs;
         (d)   The occupants will not be required to pay the delinquent amount;
         (e)   What the residential occupants are required to do to prevent
termination or reestablish the service;
         (f)   The title, address and telephone number of a representative of
the Finance Department who could assist the residential occupants in continuing
service; and
         (g)   The address and telephone number of a legal services project
recommended by the local county bar association.
      5.   Residential water service may be discontinued no sooner than seven
business days after the city posts a final notice of intent to disconnect
service in a prominent and conspicuous location of the property under either of
the following circumstances:
         (a)   The customer fails to comply with the alternative payment
schedule for the delinquent charges for 60 days or more; or
         (b)   While undertaking the alternative payment schedule, the customer
does not pay his or her current residential charges for 60 days or more.
      6.   Any residential customer who has initiated a complaint, requested an
appeal or made a request for a payment agreement shall be given the opportunity
for review of said complaint, investigation or payment agreement by the Finance
Department.
      7.   The review under (D)6. above shall include consideration of whether
the customer shall be permitted to start a payment agreement of the delinquent
balance of the account over a reasonable period of time, not to exceed 12
months.
      8.   No termination of service shall be effected for any customer
complying with the payment agreement, provided that the customer also keeps the
account current as charges accrue in each subsequent billing period.
   (E)   Restoration of service. In order to restore terminated service, a
service fee up to $75 must be paid. If a deposit is not currently on the
account, a three-month security deposit may be required.
   (F)   Options to avert discontinuation of residential water service. In
order to assist customers in averting the discontinuation of residential water
service, the city is willing to discuss the following options:
      1.   Alternative payment schedules;
      2.   Deferred payments;
      3.   Minimum payments; and/or
      4.   Amortization of unpaid balances.
(Ord. 576, passed 12-16-2008; Ord. A-33, passed 2-1-2020)
Editor’s note:
   Any update to the United States Code or other state or federal regulations
that impact the provisions and enforcement this section shall be implemented
automatically upon passage and approval.
Statutory reference:
   Related provisions, see California Apartment Association v. City of Stockton
(2000) 80 Cal., App. Fourth 699
§ 9-5-33 UNAUTHORIZED WATER SERVICE; THEFT OF SERVICES.
   (A)   Prohibited.
      1.   (a)   It shall be unlawful to provide oneself or others with (or
make use of) water service from the city water system without authorization
from the city.
         (b)   When water service has been discontinued by the Public Works
Department for nonpayment of water charges, noncompliance with city water
ordinances, or for any other reason, it shall be unlawful to restore water
service or receive water service by any means without authorization by the
city.
      2.   The presence at any time on or about any meter, water line or water
main of the city (whether such meter is owned or operated by the city or
others) of a pipe or any other device which diverts water or results in taking
of any water except through an authorized meter shall constitute prima facie
evidence on the part of the person owning or having custody or control of the
premises (where such a device or pipe is located) of the knowledge of the
existence thereof.
      3.   The knowledge of such existence by the person who would benefit by
the failure of the water to be accurately metered, and shall further constitute
prima facie evidence of intention on the part of such person to violate this
section.
   (B)   Meter removal. If water service has been discontinued by the Public
Works Department due to nonpayment or for any other reason, and the customer
turns the service back on or otherwise restores service without approval, the
Public Works Department may remove the meter and plug the service.
   (C)   Unauthorized water use charges. In addition to any criminal penalties,
the city may assess charges and fees established by resolution or ordinance for
meter tampering, meter removal or unauthorized use of the city water service.
Such charges may be collected as provided by this chapter.
(Ord. 576, passed 12-16-2008)
§ 9-5-34 APPEALS.
   The City Manager is hereby authorized to hear appeals regarding water
service and make any corrections of any assessments or charges that he or she
believes is just and appropriate under the circumstances. Refer to §
9-5-32 for further provisions concerning consumer right to contest and appeal
water bills.
(Ord. 576, passed 12-16-2008)
§ 9-5-35 LEGAL ACTION.
   The Finance Director, City Attorney or City Manager or their designees are
hereby authorized and empowered to enforce the payment of all delinquent water
charges whether for water connection or for water service, by any action at law
in the corporate name of the city if the amount paid in advance or in deposit,
if any, by the defaulting water user is not sufficient to fully extinguish the
liability of said user to the city for the water connection or water service.
(Ord. 576, passed 12-16-2008)
§ 9-5-36 RESPONSIBILITY FOR WATER LEAKAGE.
   All property owners, or their agents and tenants, shall be held responsible
as consumers for loss of water due to leakage in the pipe or plumbing beyond
the discharge side of the meter or on the property. If lost water is not paid
in accordance with the provisions of this chapter and in accordance with rates
established by resolution or ordinance by the City Council, the water service
may be discontinued until all amounts due are paid. Water service will not be
restored until all leaks have been repaired to the satisfaction of the Public
Works Department.
(Ord. 576, passed 12-16-2008)
§ 9-5-37 WATER METERS.
   (A)   Water metering required. All water delivered by the city to its
customers shall be metered through water meters owned by the city. However, the
City Manager or his or her designees may authorize unmetered water use for
temporary special purposes, and enter into agreements for the assessment of
charges thereof.
   (B)   Submetering. It shall be unlawful for any person to construct, occupy
or allow to be occupied any structure in which the construction plan provides
for a master meter and submetering of water consumption of one or more owners
or tenants, unless the plan has been approved by the City Manager or his or her
designees. Each occupied structure and any unimproved parcel shall be served
water through a separate metered connection, except that structures located on
a single parcel and under the same ownership, office buildings, hotels, motels,
apartment houses, courts and multi-family dwellings may be served by a single
metered connection.
   (C)   Meters to be approved by city. The size, type, location and right to
own and control all meters installed or used by consumers of its water shall be
determined by the Public Works Department.
   (D)   Ownership and installation. All meters installed on water service
connections shall be and remain the property of the city and shall be removed
only by the city. Consistent with §
9-5-15 of this chapter, installation of new meters and construction of meter
vaults for new construction shall be at the expense of the contractor or
customer.
   (E)   Maintenance and repair. The city shall maintain and repair all
domestic, commercial and industrial service water meters and shall replace
meters periodically, when necessary, if rendered unserviceable by ordinary use.
When replacement or repairs to any meter are made necessary by the willful act,
neglect or carelessness of the owner or occupant of the premises serviced, all
expenses of such replacement shall be borne by the owner or occupant of the
premises.
   (F)   Testing. If a user submits a written request for a test of his or her
water meter, the Public Works Department may, if the circumstances deem it
advisable, order a test of the meter measuring the water delivered to such
user. If such request to test the meter is made within 12 months after the date
of the last previous test, the user will be required to pay the costs of such
test if the meter is found in such test to record from 97% to 103% of accuracy
under testing methods satisfactory to the Public Works Department. In the event
that the meter is found to be recording less than 97% or more than 103% of
accuracy, the city shall make such adjustments in the user’s bill as are just
and fair under the circumstances.
   (G)   Stopped meters. If meters fail to register at any time, the water
delivered during this period shall be estimated on the basis of previous
consumption. If the user has no previous consumption then a reasonable estimate
may be made by the Finance Department and Public Works Department based on
historical information maintained by the city.
   (H)   Construction meters and roving meters. Construction meters are to be
installed or moved by the contractor under the supervision of city personnel.
Roving meters are to be installed on equipment by the contractor. A deposit may
be required for construction or roving meters owned by the city and will be
forfeited if the meter is lost, damaged or stolen. Meter readings are to be
reported by the user to the Public Works Department or Finance Department
monthly. Failure to provide a monthly meter reading will cause the Public Works
Department to estimate usage and bill accordingly. A minimum charge will be
assessed if no usage is recorded on the meter.
   (I)   Loaned meters. No person shall refuse to deliver any meter or other
appliance loaned to him or her by the Public Works Department for the purpose
of furnishing water through the meter and registering the quantity thereof.
   (J)   Access to meters. Access to water meters by city personnel must be
provided at all times.
   (K)   Plumbers. Notwithstanding any other provision of this chapter, in the
case of leaks or other accidents damaging service lines or other apparatus
connected with the water system, plumbers or other qualified persons may shut
off the water at the water box to make necessary repairs and turn on the water
upon completion of such repairs without obtaining authorization.
(Ord. 576, passed 12-16-2008)
§ 9-5-38 INTERRUPTION OF WATER SERVICE.
   (A)   Water service may be interrupted. The city will undertake to use
reasonable care and diligence in order to prevent and avoid interruptions and
fluctuations in water service, but it cannot and does not guarantee that such
will not occur.
   (B)   Repairs, connections, extensions and maintenance. The city reserves
the right to temporarily discontinue and to reconnect water service without
notice to all users for the purpose of making repairs, connections, extensions
and cleaning of mains, machinery, storage reservoirs or any other appurtenances
to the water supply and distribution system. All users having boilers, air
conditioning equipment or other water consuming devices which may become
damaged due to interruption of water service, and which are supplied directly
with city water, need to take action to avoid or minimize their risk. The city
shall not be liable for any damage that may occur on account of the water being
cut off for any purpose.
   (C)   Water pressure. The city shall not be liable for any damage to
plumbing, pipes or fixtures on premises caused by pressure from the city water
system.
   (D)   Notice. While it is the intention of the city to give notice in
advance of any work (which is not considered an emergency) which must be done
that will necessitate any interruption of the supply, such notice is to be
considered a courtesy, and not a requirement on the part of the city. Property
owners must so regulate their installations connected with the water supply
system that damage will not occur if water is shut off or turned back on
without notice.
(Ord. 576, passed 12-16-2008)
§ 9-5-39 WATER SUPPLY AND PRESSURE.
   (A)   Water supply and pressure. The city does not guarantee a uniform
pressure, or an uninterrupted supply of water, and customers are cautioned to
provide appropriate devices to satisfy specific pressure requirements and
sufficient storage of water where absolutely uninterrupted water supply and
pressure must be assured.
   (B)   Minimum water pressure. Based on the Department of Health services
(DHS) regulations, the city provides each customer with a minimum of 20 pounds
per square inch (psi) water pressure as measured at the water main in the
street.
(Ord. 576, passed 12-16-2008)
§ 9-5-40 DISCONNECTION OF SERVICE; CONDEMNED BUILDINGS.
   Whenever a premises supplied with water has been found by the proper
authorities to be dangerous to human life and unfit for human habitation, and
notice of such findings has been issued by the proper authority, the city shall
cause the water service to such premises to be turned off. Water service to
such premises shall not be restored until the owner and/or his or her agent has
secured a release or clearance from the proper authorities.
(Ord. 576, passed 12-16-2008)
§ 9-5-41 REPAIR AND REPLACEMENT OF HOUSE LINES.
   It shall be the responsibility of the owner of the property to make all
repairs and replacements of house lines from the discharge side of the water
meter to the structure. A permit is required for the replacement of a house
line.
(Ord. 576, passed 12-16-2008)
§ 9-5-42 AUTHORIZED CITY REPRESENTATIVES TO HAVE FREE ACCESS.
   (A)   Service access. Free access at ordinary hours shall be granted to the
city and its authorized representatives to any place supplied with water
service from the municipal system for the purpose of examining the apparatus,
the amounts of water used, manner of its use, to make any and all necessary
adjustments to said system, and to assure conformity to all city water
ordinances, resolutions, policies and regulations.
   (B)   No service without access. Whenever the owner or the occupant of any
premises provided service by the city restrains authorized city employees from
making such necessary inspections, water service may be refused or
discontinued.
(Ord. 576, passed 12-16-2008)
§ 9-5-43 ABANDONMENT OF SERVICE LINES AND HOUSE LINES.
   (A)   Permanent abandonment. All service lines and house lines which are
permanently abandoned shall be securely capped or plugged at a location
designated by the City Public Works Department.
   (B)   Temporary abandonment. Water service lines which will be abandoned
temporarily shall be cut and plugged at the property line leaving the meter
installation and meter box intact.
   (C)   Inspection. Any water service pipe temporarily abandoned for more than
two years must be inspected by the Public Works Department before that pipe can
be placed into operation. If the service line or house line does not conform to
minimum standards, the service pipe shall not be used and shall be abandoned
permanently by the owner.
(Ord. 576, passed 12-16-2008)
§ 9-5-44 OUTDOOR WATER SPRINKLERS.
   (A)   Water pressure. It shall be unlawful for any person to use such number
of outdoor water sprinkler outlets simultaneously or to use such sprinklers or
combinations of sprinklers or outlets as will, in the opinion of the Public
Works Department, materially affect the pressure or water supply of the city
water system or any part thereof. The Public Works Department may specify by
regulation combinations or number of sprinkler and outlets which may have such
effect.
   (B)   Notice. The Public Works Department shall, after determination that
such improper sprinkler use exists, notify the offending water user, or the
owner of the premises whereon such use occurs, of such determination in writing
and order such use discontinued.
(Ord. 576, passed 12-16-2008)
§ 9-5-45 WATER USE CURTAILMENT.
   (A)   In time of water scarcity, whenever it shall in the judgment of the
City Council by resolution be necessary to limit the use of water, it shall be
unlawful for any person by himself or herself, family, servants or agents to
violate any resolution made by the City Council pursuant to this section.
   (B)   If any violation shall occur, then in addition to any other penalty,
the water service to the premises upon which such violation occurs may be shut
off. If shut off for this reason, it shall not be turned on again until the
payment of an amount set by the City Council for each violation of the said
resolution is received.
(Ord. 576, passed 12-16-2008)
§ 9-5-46 TRESPASS AND DAMAGE TO WATER SYSTEM.
   (A)   Prohibited. It shall be unlawful for any person to destroy, deface,
damage, injure, tamper or interfere with the operation of any part, pipe,
fixture, appliance, appurtenance or property of the city water system, or shall
place or cause to be placed, or induced into the city water system or any
source of water supplying said system, any substance poisonous to human life or
harmful to human health or detrimentally affecting the taste, smell, color,
odor or other aesthetic characteristic of the water.
   (B)   Trespassing upon waterworks. It shall be unlawful to trespass inside
the fenced enclosure of any city owned water or Public Works Department
facility or in any other manner to interfere with or prevent the operation of
such systems and the water supply therefor, or any portion thereof.
   (C)   Clear access. It shall be unlawful for any person to store, maintain
or keep any goods, merchandise, materials or rubbish within a distance of five
feet of, or to interfere with, the access or operation of any water meter, gate
valve, fire hydrant, or other apparatus in use on any water service,
connection, water main or fire protection service.
   (D)   Restitution.
      1.   All damages or injury to the lines, meters or other materials of the
city on or near a user’s premises caused by any act or neglect of the user or
his or her agents shall, in the discretion of the city, be repaired by or at
the expense of the user.
      2.   The user shall pay all costs and expenses, including reasonable
attorney fees, which may arise or accrue to the city through its efforts to
repair or recover expenses for the repair of the damage to the lines, meters or
other equipment of the city water system or Public Works Department.
(Ord. 576, passed 12-16-2008)
§ 9-5-47 WATER USE BY CONTRACTORS.
   The Public Works Department may permit use of water from fire hydrants by
contractors of public work, or by public utilities that are engaged in work on
public streets, subject to the conditions of this chapter. A charge shall be
paid in advance for use of water from fire hydrants which shall be set by the
City Council by resolution.
(Ord. 576, passed 12-16-2008)
§ 9-5-48 MAINTENANCE AND CONTROL OF PUBLIC FIRE HYDRANTS.
   Public fire hydrants are the property of the city and are under the control
of and shall be kept in repair by the Public Works Department. Private fire
hydrants on private property shall be kept in repair by the private property
owner.
(Ord. 576, passed 12-16-2008)
§ 9-5-49 DRAWING OF WATER FROM FIRE HYDRANTS.
   (A)   Unauthorized use. It shall be unlawful for any person, except a member
of the Fire Department, Public Works Department or other authorized city
employee in the scope of employment, to open or use water from a fire hydrant,
or to take off the cap without permission from the Public Works Department, or
to remove the cap by using any wrench other than the wrench made specifically
for that purpose.
   (B)   Permit required. No person other than a duly authorized employee of
the city shall use water from, or connect any apparatus to, a fire hydrant, nor
shall any person remove, obliterate, deface or obstruct any permit. Any permit,
wrench, connecting apparatus, valve, hose or other apparatus attached to a fire
hydrant in violation of this section shall be subject to confiscation by the
city.
(Ord. 576, passed 12-16-2008)
§ 9-5-50 USE OF WATER SERVICE DURING FIRE.
   In the event of a fire within the city, a firefighter or employee of the
Public Works Department may order that all valves, taps and property stops
connected to the plumbing systems of any property supplied with water service
be closed and remain closed until the fire is extinguished.
(Ord. 576, passed 12-16-2008)
§ 9-5-51 FIRE SPRINKLER SYSTEM INSPECTIONS.
   Every customer receiving water from the Public Works Department through a
fire sprinkler system for the purpose of fire protection which is not metered
shall at all reasonable times permit the Public Works Department, Fire
Department or other authorized employee to enter the premises and building for
examination of pipes and fixtures to ensure that the system is maintained only
for fire protection. Refusal by such customer shall result in refusal of water
supply from the Public Works Department until such permission is granted.
(Ord. 576, passed 12-16-2008)
§ 9-5-52 PRIVATE FIRE SERVICE WATER MAINS, SPRINKLER SYSTEMS AND FIRE SERVICE
STORAGE TANKS.
   (A)   Sprinkler and fire service connections. No connection for a sprinkler
or private fire service main shall be permitted unless application therefor has
been made to and granted by the Public Works Department and approved by the
Fire Department and city building official. In no instance shall any connection
be made with any sprinkler or private fire service main without the written
consent of the Public Works Department. Should it be found that any
unauthorized connection has been made, or that any water has been used from a
sprinkler or private fire service main for any other purpose than extinguishing
a fire, or that a waste of water is permitted from such connection through
leaks in the pipes or fixtures, the water service may be discontinued until a
meter prescribed by the Public Works Department has been installed at the
expense of the customer. Fire sprinkler systems and fire service connections
shall be installed with a detection meter of a size and type approved by the
City Engineer.
   (B)   Financial responsibility. The furnishing, installation, maintenance
and inspection of all meters and services, checks, bypasses, valves, piping and
the like, necessary for the installation and operation of sprinkler systems and
fire services shall be at the expense of the customer.
   (C)   Insurance services office guidelines. Fire protection systems shall be
provided in accordance with insurance services office (ISO) guidelines.
   (D)   Ground storage reservoirs or fire pumps. When ground storage
reservoirs or fire pumps are installed on private property, such pumps shall
discharge into a fire system approved by the Public Works Department, Fire
Department and city building official.
      1.   An approved check valve shall be installed in the owner’s fire
service between the point where the pump discharges into such service and the
connection of such fire service to the city water mains to prevent backflow
from the fire pump into the city distribution system.
      2.   The water in such fire storage tanks will be maintained in a potable
condition and subject to periodic inspection by Public Works Department
personnel. Such tanks and water quality shall be maintained in compliance with
the standards and requirements of the State Department of Health and the city.
Such tanks shall not be of the pressure type. The delivery of city water to the
tank shall be above the tank flow line with a one foot air gap. The supply line
to this tank shall not be controlled by a quick acting valve which will cause
water hammer in the distribution system. Water tanks shall be equipped with an
overflow pipe at least 12 inches below the city inlet pipe. The overflow pipe
shall be protected as to prevent access of insects, birds or animal life into
the reservoir. The pipe shall be at least two inches in diameter larger than
the inlet supply line from the city distribution system. Such storage tank
shall be provided with a drainpipe and valve for easy drainage of the tank. The
drainpipe may not be connected to the city sanitary sewer system.
(Ord. 576, passed 12-16-2008)
§ 9-5-53 PURPOSE OF CITY WATER BACKFLOW PREVENTION AND CROSS CONNECTION
PROGRAM.
   The purpose of the city’s water backflow prevention and cross connection
program is to:
   (A)   Protect city water system. Protect the public potable water supply of
the city from the possibility of contamination or pollution by isolating within
the customer’s internal distribution system(s) or customer’s private water
system(s) such contaminants or pollutants that could backflow into the public
water system;
   (B)   Eliminate water cross connections or potential water cross
connections. Promote the elimination or control of existing water cross
connections, actual or potential, between the customer’s in-plant potable water
system(s) and nonpotable water systems, plumbing fixtures and industrial piping
systems; and
   (C)   Cross connection program. Provide for the maintenance of a continuing
program of cross connection control that will systematically and effectively
prevent the contamination or pollution of all potable water systems.
(Ord. 576, passed 12-16-2008)
§ 9-5-54 WATER CROSS CONNECTIONS AND POTENTIAL WATER CROSS CONNECTIONS
PROHIBITED.
   The installation or maintenance of a water cross connection or potential
water cross connection is prohibited. Any such cross connection or potential
cross connection now existing or hereafter installed is hereby declared a
public health hazard and a public nuisance and shall be abated immediately.
Water service will be discontinued to any premises upon failure to comply with
the provisions of this chapter. For protection of the city’s water supply from
backflow, furnishing of water service shall be contingent upon the customer
providing cross connection control approved by the city.
(Ord. 576, passed 12-16-2008)
§ 9-5-55 RESPONSIBILITY FOR CITY BACKFLOW PREVENTION AND CROSS CONNECTION
PROGRAM.
   The City Engineer and Public Works Department shall be responsible for the
protection of the public water system from contamination or pollution due to
the backflow of contaminants or pollutants through any water service
connection. The City Engineer and Public Works Department shall determine the
type, design, layout and location of backflow prevention devices required at
each premises.
(Ord. 576, passed 12-16-2008)
§ 9-5-56 RESPONSIBILITY OF OWNER AND CUSTOMER FOR WATER CROSS CONNECTIONS,
POTENTIAL CROSS CONNECTIONS AND BACKFLOW PREVENTION.
   (A)   The owner or customer shall be responsible for protection of the
public water supply system from contamination due to backflow or back siphonage
of contaminants through the owner’s or customer’s water service connection.
   (B)   If, in the judgment of the City Engineer or Public Works Department or
their authorized representatives, an approved backflow prevention device is
necessary for the safety of the public water supply system, the City Engineer
or the Public Works Department shall give notice to the owner or customer to
install such approved backflow prevention device at each service connection to
the premises.
   (C)   The owner or customer shall immediately install such approved device
or devices at his or her own expense. Failure, refusal or inability on the part
of the consumer to install such device or devices immediately shall constitute
grounds for discontinuing water service to the premises until such device or
devices have been installed.
   (D)   The City Engineer or Public Works Department may require the consumer
to submit a cross connection inspection report to the city to assist in
determining whether or not service line protection will be required.
(Ord. 576, passed 12-16-2008)
§ 9-5-57 WATER BACKFLOW PREVENTION AND CROSS CONNECTION PROGRAM.
   (A)   Generally.
      1.   The city shall protect the public water supply from contamination by
implementation of a backflow prevention and cross connection control program.
      2.   The program, or any portion thereof, may be implemented:
         (a)   Directly by the city;
         (b)   By contract with a private firm or organization;
         (c)   By means of a contract with the local health agency; or
         (d)   With another agency approved by the local health agency.
   (B)   Cross connection control program. The city’s cross connection control
program shall be for the purpose of addressing the requirements of Cal. Code of
Regulations §§ 7585 through 7605, Title 17, Division 1, Chapter 5, Group 4. It
includes, but is not limited to, the following:
      1.   Rules and regulations. The adoption of operating rules, regulations,
ordinances and resolutions to implement the cross connection program;
      2.   Surveys. The conducting of surveys to identify water user premises
where cross connections or potential cross connections are likely to occur;
      3.   Backflow protection. The provision of backflow protection by the
water user at the user’s connection or within the user’s premises or both;
      4.   Cross connection specialist. The provision of at least one person
trained in cross connection control to carry out the cross connection program;
      5.   Testing. The establishment of a procedure or system for testing
backflow preventers; and
      6.   Records. The maintenance of records of locations, tests, and repairs
of backflow preventers.
(Ord. 576, passed 12-16-2008)
§ 9-5-58 INVESTIGATIONS BY PUBLIC WORKS DEPARTMENT.
   It shall be the duty of the Public Works Department and its authorized
representatives to cause surveys and investigations to be made of residential,
commercial and industrial and other properties served by the public water
supply to determine whether actual or potential hazards to the public water
supply may exist. Such surveys and investigations shall be made a matter of
public record and shall be repeated at least every two years or as often as the
inspector shall deem necessary. Records of such surveys shall be maintained and
available for review for a period of at least five years.
(Ord. 576, passed 12-16-2008)
§ 9-5-59 RIGHT TO ENTER PREMISES.
   (A)   The approved cross connection control device inspector shall have the
right to enter at any reasonable time any property served by a connection to
the public water supply or distribution system for the purpose of verifying the
presence or absence of cross connections and that the inspector or his or her
authorized agent shall have the right to enter at any reasonable time any
property served by a connection to the public water supply or distribution
system for the purpose of verifying information submitted by the customer
regarding the required cross connection control inspection.
   (B)   1.   On demand, the owner, lessee or occupants of any property so
served shall furnish to the inspector any information which he or she may
request regarding the piping system or systems or water use on such property.
      2.   The refusal of such information when demanded shall, within the
discretion of the inspector, be evidence of the presence of improper
connections as provided in this chapter.
(Ord. 576, passed 12-16-2008)
§ 9-5-60 EVALUATION OF WATER USER HEALTH HAZARDS.
   (A)   Generally.
      1.   The city shall evaluate the degree of potential health hazard to the
public water supply which may be created as a result of conditions existing on
a user’s premises. The city, however, shall not be responsible for abatement of
cross connections which may exist within a water user’s premises.
      2.   As a minimum, the evaluation should consider:
         (a)   The existence of cross connections;
         (b)   The nature of materials handled on the property;
         (c)   The probability of backflow occurring;
         (d)   The degree of piping system complexity; and
         (e)   The potential for piping system modification.
   (B)   Special consideration. Special consideration shall be given to the
premises of the following types of users:
      1.   Hazardous substances, hazardous materials, biological wastes,
biological byproducts, processing fluids or industrial fluids. Premises where
hazardous substances, hazardous materials, biological wastes, biological
byproducts, processing fluids or industrial fluids harmful to health are
handled under pressure or in a manner which could permit their entry into the
public water system. This includes chemical or biological processing waters and
water from public water supplies which have deteriorated in sanitary quality;
      2.   Auxiliary water supply. Premises having an auxiliary water supply,
unless the auxiliary supply is accepted as an additional source by the city and
is approved by the local health agency;
      3.   Internal cross connections. Premises that have internal cross
connections that are not abated to the satisfaction of the city or health
agency;
      4.   Restricted entry areas. Premises where cross connections are likely
to occur and entry is restricted so that cross connection inspections cannot be
made with sufficient frequency or on sufficiently short notice to assure that
cross connections do not exist; and
      5.   History of cross connections. Premises having a repeated history of
cross connections being established or reestablished.
(Ord. 576, passed 12-16-2008)
§ 9-5-61 USER SUPERVISOR.
   (A)   The health agency and the city, may at their discretion, require an
industrial water user to designate a user supervisor when the water user’s
premises have a multipiping system that conveys various types of fluids, some
of which may be hazards and where changes in the piping system are frequently
made.
   (B)   The user supervisor shall be responsible for the avoidance of cross
connections during the installation, operation and maintenance of the water
user’s pipelines and equipment.
(Ord. 576, passed 12-16-2008)
§ 9-5-62 APPROVAL OF BACKFLOW PREVENTION DEVICES.
   Backflow prevention devices required by this chapter shall have passed
laboratory and field evaluation tests performed by a recognized testing
organization which have demonstrated their competency to perform such tests to
the Department of Health Services (DHS).
(Ord. 576, passed 12-16-2008)
§ 9-5-63 TYPE AND CONSTRUCTION OF BACKFLOW PREVENTION DEVICES.
   (A)   Air gap separation (AG) backflow prevention device. An air gap
separation (AG) backflow prevention device shall be at least double the
diameter of the supply pipe, measured vertically from the flood rim of the
receiving vessel to the supply pipe; however, in no case shall this separation
be less than one inch.
   (B)   Reduced pressure principle (RP) backflow prevention device. A required
reduced pressure principle (RP) backflow prevention device shall, as a minimum,
conform to the AWWA standard C506-78 (R83) adopted on January 28, 1978, for
reduced pressure principle type backflow prevention devices which is herein
incorporated by reference.
   (C)   Double check valve assembly (DC) backflow prevention device. A
required double check valve assembly (DC) backflow prevention device shall, as
a minimum conform to the AWWA standard C506-78 (R83) adopted on January 28,
1978, for double check valve type backflow prevention devices which is herein
incorporated by reference.
(Ord. 576, passed 12-16-2008)
§ 9-5-64 DETERMINATION AND INSPECTION OF BACKFLOW PREVENTION DEVICES.
   The Public Works Department or City Engineer or their authorized
representatives shall determine the type, design and layout of backflow
prevention devices required at each premises. All devices shall be installed at
the expense of the customer. The backflow prevention devices shall be
inspected, tested and approved by the City Engineer or the Public Works
Department or their authorized representatives as a condition of water service
to the premises. The backflow prevention devices shall be inspected, tested and
approved by the City Engineer or Public Works Department as a condition of
service to the premises. If in the judgment of the Public Works Department or
City Engineer, an approved backflow prevention device is required at the water
service connection for the protection of the water system, the Public Works
Department or City Engineer or their authorized representative shall give
notice in writing to the consumer, and the notice shall direct the consumer to
install an approved backflow assembly at specific locations on his or her
premises. Failure, refusal or inability on the part of the customer to install
the backflow prevention assembly, shall constitute grounds for discontinuing
water service to the premises until such requirements have been met.
(Ord. 576, passed 12-16-2008)
§ 9-5-65 LOCATION OF BACKFLOW PREVENTION DEVICES.
   (A)   Air gap separation (AG) backflow prevention device. An air gap
separation (AG) backflow prevention device shall be located as close as
practical to the user’s connection and all piping between the user’s connection
and the receiving tank shall be entirely visible unless otherwise approved in
writing by the city and the health agency.
   (B)   Reduced pressure principle (RP) backflow prevention device. A reduced
pressure principle (RP) backflow prevention device shall be located as close as
practical to the user’s connection and shall be installed a minimum of 12
inches above grade and not more than 36 inches above grade as measured from the
bottom of the device and with a minimum of 12 inches side clearance.
   (C)   Double check valve assembly (DC) backflow prevention device. A double
check valve assembly backflow prevention device shall be located as close as
practical to the user’s connection and shall be installed above grade, if
possible, and in a manner where it is readily accessible for testing and
maintenance.
(Ord. 576, passed 12-16-2008)
§ 9-5-66 MINIMUM BACKFLOW PREVENTION PROTECTION REQUIRED.
   The type of protection that shall be provided to prevent backflow into the
public water supply shall be determined by the city and be commensurate with
the degree of hazard that exists on the consumer’s premises. The type of
protective device that may be required (listed in an increasing level of
protection) includes: double check valve assembly (DC) backflow prevention
device; reduced pressure principle (RP) backflow prevention device; and an air
gap separation (AG) backflow prevention device. The water user may choose a
higher level of protection than required by the city. The minimum types of
backflow protection required to protect the public water supply, at the water
user’s connection with various degrees of hazard, are given below. Situations
not covered below shall be evaluated on a case by case basis and the
appropriate backflow protection shall be determined by the city.
   (A)   Sewage, hazardous substances, hazardous materials, biological wastes,
biological byproducts, processing fluids, or industrial fluids.
      1.   Minimum protection; air gap separation (AG) backflow prevention
device. Premises where there is wastewater pumping and/or treatment plants and
there is no interconnection with the potable water system. This does not
include a single-family residence that has a sewage lift pump.
      2.   Minimum protection; air gap separation (AG) backflow prevention
device. Premises where hazardous substances, biological wastes or biological
byproducts, processing fluids or industrial fluids or any other objectionable
or toxic substances are handled in a fashion as to create an actual or
potential hazard to the public water system. This does not include a single-
family residence that has a sewage lift pump.
      3.   Minimum protection; reduced pressure principle (RP) backflow
prevention device. Premises where there are irrigation systems into which
fertilizers, herbicides or pesticides are, or can be, injected.
   (B)   Auxiliary water supplies.
      1.   Minimum protection; air gap separation (AG) backflow prevention
device. Premises where there is an unapproved auxiliary water supply which is
interconnected with the public water system. An RP or DC may be provided in
lieu of an AG if approved by the city.
      2.   Minimum protection; reduced pressure principle (RP) backflow
prevention device. Premises where there is an unapproved auxiliary water supply
and there are no interconnections with the public water system. A DC may be
provided in lieu of an RP if approved by the city.
   (C)   Recycled water.
      1.   Minimum protection; air gap separation (AG) backflow prevention
device. Premises where the public water system is used to supplement the
recycled water supply.
      2.   Minimum protection; reduced pressure principle (RP) backflow
prevention device. Premises where recycled water is used other than as allowed
in subsection (C)3. of this section, and there is no interconnection with the
potable water system.
      3.   Minimum protection; double check valve assembly (DC) backflow
prevention device. Residences using recycled water for landscape irrigation as
part of an approved dual plumbed use area.
   (D)   Fire protection systems.
      1.   Minimum protection; double check valve assembly (DC) backflow
prevention device. Premises where the fire system is directly supplied from the
public water system and there is an unapproved auxiliary water supply on or to
the premises (not interconnected).
      2.   Minimum protection; air gap separation (AG) backflow prevention
device. Premises where the fire system is supplied from the public water system
and interconnected with an unapproved auxiliary water supply. An RP may be
provided in lieu of an AG if approved by the city.
      3.   Minimum protection; double check valve assembly (DC) backflow
prevention device. Premises where the fire system is supplied from the public
water system and where either elevated storage tanks or fire pumps which take
suction from private reservoirs or tanks are used.
      4.   Minimum protection; double check valve assembly (DC) backflow
prevention device. Premises where the fire system is supplied from the public
water supply and where recycled water is used in a separate piping system
within the same building.
   (E)   Restricted entry areas; minimum protection; reduced pressure principle
(RP) backflow prevention device. Premises where entry is restricted so that
inspections for cross connections cannot be made with sufficient frequency or
at sufficiently short notice to assure that water cross connections do not
exist.
   (F)   History of water cross connections; minimum protection; reduced
pressure principle (RP) backflow prevention device. Premises where there is a
repeated history of cross connections being established or reestablished.
   (G)   Substances objectionable, but not hazardous to health; minimum
protection; double check valve assembly (DC) backflow prevention device.
Premises where there is water or a substance that would be objectionable, but
not hazardous to health, if introduced into the water system.
(Ord. 576, passed 12-16-2008)
§ 9-5-67 CONTAMINATION COSTS AND THE CONSUMER.
   The water customer or consumer shall be responsible for back siphoned
material or contamination through backflow, if contamination of the potable
water supply system occurs through an illegal cross connection or an improperly
installed, maintained or repaired device, or a device which has been bypassed,
shall bear the cost of cleanup of the potable water supply system.
(Ord. 576, passed 12-16-2008)
§ 9-5-68 LAWN SPRINKLER BACKFLOW PREVENTION SPECIFICATIONS.
   (A)   Backflow prevention device required. A lawn sprinkler system connected
to a residential, commercial or industrial premises shall be equipped with an
approved backflow prevention device placed between the sprinkler stop and waste
valve and the first sprinkler outlet. The approved backflow prevention device
shall be placed at a height as provided in the applicable city plumbing code.
The stop and waste valve and approved backflow prevention device shall be in
the sprinkler line after it branches from the water service pipe or building
plumbing.
   (B)   Installation.
      1.   The stop and waste valve for a lawn sprinkler shall be at the same
depth as the water service pipe. However, the lawn sprinkler system may be laid
to a lesser depth at the option of the owner. Such additional stop and waste
valves, as are required to properly drain the sprinkler piping shall also be
installed.
      2.   All backflow prevention devices shall be inspected by an authorized
city employee prior to utilization of the system. Water service may be refused
on existing lawn sprinkler systems which are not equipped with a stop and waste
valve and an approved backflow prevention device.
(Ord. 576, passed 12-16-2008)
§ 9-5-69 TESTING AND MAINTENANCE OF BACKFLOW PREVENTION DEVICES.
   (A)   Responsibility. It shall be the duty of the water user at any premises
on which backflow prevention devices are installed to have these devices
maintained, inspected, tested and repaired in accordance with the directives of
the Public Works Department or City Engineer.
   (B)   Maintenance. The city shall assure that adequate maintenance and
periodic testing are provided by the water user to ensure their proper
operation.
   (C)   Tester competency. Backflow prevention devices shall be tested by
persons who have demonstrated their competency in testing of these devices to
the city or health agency.
   (D)   Inspection and testing. Backflow preventers shall be inspected and
tested at least annually or more frequently if determined to be necessary by
the health agency or the city. When devices are found to be defective, they
shall be repaired or replaced in accordance with the provisions of this
chapter. Any defects found in any backflow device shall be corrected by the
customer within three days. Failure to correct such defects is cause for
discontinuance of water service.
   (E)   Testing timing. Backflow prevention devices shall be tested
immediately after they are installed, relocated or repaired and not placed in
service unless they are functioning as required.
   (F)   Testing notification. The city shall notify the water user when
testing of backflow preventers is needed. The notice shall contain the date
when the test must be completed.
   (G)   Testing reports. Reports of testing and maintenance shall be
maintained by the city for a minimum of three years.
(Ord. 576, passed 12-16-2008)
§ 9-5-70 VIOLATIONS AND PENALTIES FOR WATER CROSS CONNECTIONS, POTENTIAL CROSS
CONNECTIONS AND BACKFLOW PREVENTION REGULATIONS.
   (A)   Deny or discontinue service. The city shall deny or discontinue, after
reasonable notice to the occupants thereof, the water service to any premises
wherein any backflow prevention device required by the city is not installed,
tested, maintained and repaired in a manner acceptable to the city, or if it is
found that the backflow prevention device has been removed or bypassed, or if
an unprotected cross connection exists on the premises, or if a low pressure
cutoff required by these regulations is not installed and maintained in working
order
   (B)   Compliance required. Water service to such premises shall not be
restored until the consumer has corrected or eliminated such conditions or
defects in conformance with these regulations and to the satisfaction of the
city, and the required reconnection fee is paid.
   (C)   No liability. Neither the city or its agents or assigns, shall be
liable to any customers of the city for any injury, damages or lost revenues
which may result from termination of said customer’s water supply in accordance
with the terms of this chapter, whether or not said termination of the water
supply was with or without notice.
   (D)   Cleanup costs. The water customer or consumer responsible for back
siphoned material or contamination through backflow, if contamination of the
potable water supply system occurs through an illegal cross connection or an
improperly installed, maintained or repaired device, or a device which has been
bypassed, must bear the cost of cleanup of the potable water supply system.
   (E)   Notice. Any person found to be violating any provision of this chapter
shall be served with written notice stating the nature of the violation and
providing a reasonable time limit for the satisfactory correction thereof. The
offender shall, within the period of time stated in such notice, permanently
cease all violation.
   (F)   Fines and penalties. Any person violating any of the provisions of
this chapter in addition to the fine provided, shall become liable to the city
for any expense, loss or damage occasioned by the city by reason of such
violation, whether the same was caused before or after notice.
(Ord. 576, passed 12-16-2008)
§ 9-5-71 WASTE OF WATER PROHIBITED.
   (A)   Customers are prohibited from wasting city water. Water waste through
inappropriate use, leaks or other wasteful use must be stopped within 48 hours’
notice by the city.
   (B)   The City Council, by resolution, shall declare what is considered
water waste.
(Ord. 623, passed 5-5-2015)
§ 9-5-72 WATER RESTRICTIONS.
   The City Council, by resolution, shall establish water use restrictions for
the city.
(Ord. 623, passed 5-5-2015)
§ 9-5-73 SEVERABILITY.
   If any section, subsection, sentence or clause or phrase of this chapter is,
for any reason held to be unconstitutional, void or unlawful, such decision
shall not affect the validity of the remaining portions of this chapter.
(Ord. 576, passed 12-16-2008)
CHAPTER 6: SEWER SERVICE SYSTEMS
Section
9-6-1 Purpose
9-6-2 Definitions
9-6-3 Disposal of wastes
9-6-4 Private wastewater disposal systems
9-6-5 Confidentiality
9-6-6 Prohibited discharges
9-6-7 Specific limitations of wastes into wastewater sewers
9-6-8 Limitations on infectious wastes
9-6-9 Pretreatment of wastewater
9-6-10 Connections, repair permits and conditions of use
9-6-11 Construction of sewer laterals
9-6-12 Damage caused by prohibited discharges, slug discharges or other causes
9-6-13 Inspections
9-6-14 Industrial wastewater discharge permits; categories
9-6-15 General industrial/commercial user permits
9-6-16 Significant industrial user (SIU) permits
9-6-17 Industrial wastewater discharge permits; general procedures and
conditions
9-6-18 Wastewater sampling, analysis and flow measurements
9-6-19 Reporting requirements for industrial users
9-6-20 Discrepancies between actual and reported discharge quantities
9-6-21 Restrictions or refusal of service
9-6-22 Separation of domestic and industrial wastewaters
9-6-23 Admission of wastes into storm sewers
9-6-24 Parameters establishing industrial service charges
9-6-25 Service charges
9-6-26 Storm drainage charges
9-6-27 Enforcement
9-6-28 Sewer main extensions
9-6-29 Refund agreements
9-6-30 Oversized lines
9-6-31 Ownership of sewers
9-6-32 Maintenance
9-6-33 Discharges from swimming pools
9-6-34 Enforcement officials; authority
9-6-35 Disposition of revenues
9-6-36 Publication of significant industrial users (SIUs) in noncompliance
9-6-37 Violation; penalty
9-6-38 Civil penalties
9-6-39 Notice of violation
9-6-40 Cease and desist orders
9-6-41 Appeal
9-6-42 Authority of City Council
9-6-43 Lien
9-6-44 Superior Court action
9-6-45 Injunction
9-6-46 Public nuisance
9-6-47 Attorney fees
9-6-48 Nonexclusive remedies
§ 9-6-1 PURPOSE.
   (A)   This chapter establishes procedures and requirements for the use of
the city’s wastewater collection (sanitary sewer), treatment and disposal
facilities. These requirements are necessary to protect the health and safety
of the citizens of the service area and to assure compliance with applicable
portions of the Federal Water Pollution Control Act, being 33 U.S.C. §§ 1251 et
seq., (Clean Water Act), the provisions of the clean water grant regulations,
and the discharge requirements as set by the Regional Water Quality Control
Board, Central Valley Region. This chapter regulates the use and construction
of the wastewater collection system, the quality and quantity of the wastewater
discharged to the system, and the issuance of permits prior to connections to
the system and reserves to the city control over additions and expansions to
the system.
   (B)   This chapter also establishes procedures for the equitable
distribution of the costs of operating and maintaining the wastewater
collection, treatment and disposal system, including the capital outlay, debt
service costs, capital improvements and the replacement of equipment.
(Ord. 497, passed 6-20-2000)
§ 9-6-2 DEFINITIONS.
   Unless the context specifically indicates otherwise, the meanings of terms
used in this chapter shall be as defined in the American Society Of Civil
Engineers’ Manual Of Engineering Practice No. 37 and the current edition of the
book Standard Methods for the Examination of Water and Wastewater, published by
the American Public Health Association. For the purpose of this chapter, the
following definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or
requires a different meaning.
   ACT or THE ACT. The Federal Water Pollution Control Act, Also Known as the
Clean Water Act, as amended, 33 U.S.C. §§ 1251 et seq.
   APPLICANT. Any person or group of persons who applies for the use of the
city’s wastewater collection, treatment and disposal system.
   BOD. A five-day biochemical oxygen demand at 20°C expressed in milligrams
per liter (mg/l), determined according to the current edition of standard
methods.
   CATEGORICAL PRETREATMENT STANDARD or CATEGORICAL STANDARD. Any regulation
containing pollutant discharge limits promulgated by the EPA in accordance with
§ 307(b) and (c) of the Act (33 U.S.C. § 1317) which apply to a specific
category of users and which appear in 40 C.F.R. chapter I, subchapter N, parts
405 through 471.
   CHLORINE DEMAND. The difference between the amount of chlorine added to a
wastewater sample and the amount remaining at the end of a 30-minute period as
determined by the procedures given in standard methods.
   CITY. The City of Livingston and its representative.
   CITY COUNCIL or COUNCIL. The City Council of the City of Livingston.
   CITY MANAGER. The City Manager of the City of Livingston, or the Manager’s
representative.
   COMMERCIAL GARBAGE GRINDER. A mechanical unit for pulverizing large
quantities of waste by a commercial user.
   CONNECTION. The physical attachment of a building premises fixture, plumbing
system, trap or another facility discharging wastewater to a city sewer.
   CUSTOMER. Any person connected to the city’s wastewater collection,
treatment and disposal system.
   DIRECTOR OF PUBLIC WORKS. The Director of Public Works of the city or his or
her representative.
   DISSOLVED SOLIDS or DISSOLVED MATTER. The solid matter in solution in the
wastewater and shall be obtained by evaporation of a sample from which all
suspended matter has been removed by filtration as determined by the procedures
in standard methods.
   DOMESTIC WASTEWATER. The water carried wastes produced from commercial or
nonindustrial activities and which result from normal human living processes.
   EFFLUENT. The liquid outflow of any facility designed to treat, convey or
retain wastewater.
   EMERGENCY. A situation, which reasonably appears to present an imminent
endangerment to the health or welfare of persons, or the environment, or which
threatens to interfere with the operation of the city’s publicly owned
treatment works (POTW).
   ENVIRONMENTAL PROTECTION AGENCY or EPA. The U.S. Environmental Protection
Agency or, where appropriate, the Regional Water Management Division Director,
or other duly authorized official of said agency.
   FIXTURE. A lavatory, tub, shower, water closet, garbage disposal or other
facility connected by a private plumbing system to the sewer.
   FIXTURE UNIT. The flow producing effect of different fixtures on the
collection system as defined by the Uniform Plumbing Code, latest edition,
published by the International Association Of Plumbing and Mechanical
Officials.
   GARBAGE. Solid wastes from the preparation, cooking and dispensing of food
and from the handling, storage, processing and sale of produce.
   GRAB SAMPLE. A sample which is taken from a waste stream without regard to
the flow in the waste stream and over a period of time not to exceed 15
minutes.
   GRAVITY SEPARATION INTERCEPTOR. Any facility designed, constructed and
operated for the purpose of removing and retaining dangerous, deleterious or
prohibited constituents from wastewater by differential gravity separation
before discharge to the POTW.
   GREASE, OIL AND FAT. Any material, or like material, that is soluble in
petroleum ether.
   INDUSTRIAL USER. Any person who discharges nondomestic wastewater to the
POTW or any other system tributary thereto.
   INDUSTRIAL WASTEWATER. All water carried wastes and wastewater discharged by
any person, excluding domestic wastewater and uncontaminated water, and
includes all wastewater from any producing, manufacturing, processing,
institutional, commercial, agricultural or other operation where the wastewater
discharged includes significant quantities of wastes of nonhuman origin,
including, but not limited to, water softening regeneration plants.
   INSPECTOR. A person authorized by the Director of Public Works to inspect
wastewater generation, conveyance, processing and disposal facilities.
   INTERFERENCE. A discharge which, alone or in conjunction with a discharge or
discharges from other sources, both:
      1.   Inhibits or disrupts the POTW, including its collection system,
treatment processes or operations, or its sludge processes, use or disposal;
and
      2.   Results in a cause of violation of any requirement of the city’s
waste discharge requirements (including, without limitation, an increase in the
magnitude or duration of a violation) or of the prevention of sewage sludge use
or disposal in compliance with all applicable statutory provisions and
regulations or permits issued thereunder (or more stringent state or local
regulations) including, without limitation, § 405 of the Clean Water Act, being
33 U.S.C. § 1345, the Solid Waste Disposal Act, being 42 U.S.C. §§ 6901 et
seq., (SWDA) (including Title II, more commonly referred to as the Resource
Conservation and Recovery Act (RCRA)), and including state regulations
contained in any state sludge management plan prepared pursuant to subtitle D
of the SWDA, the Clean Air Act, 42 U.S.C. §§ 7401 et seq., the Toxic Substances
Control Act, being 15 U.S.C. §§ 2601 et seq., and the Marine Protection,
Research and Sanctuaries Act, being 16 U.S.C. §§ 1431 et seq. and 33 U.S.C. §§
1401 et seq.
   LOCAL LIMIT. Any requirement or prohibition against pollutant discharges
from any nondomestic user, as established by the city, to address federal
standards as well as state and local regulations.
   MEDICAL WASTE. Any isolation wastes, infectious agents, human blood and
blood products, pathological wastes, sharps, body parts, contaminated bedding,
surgical wastes, potentially contaminated laboratory wastes and dialysis
wastes.
   NATIONAL PRETREATMENT STANDARD or PRETREATMENT STANDARD or STANDARD. Any
regulation containing pollutant discharge limits promulgated by the
Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) in accordance with § 307(b) and (c) of
the Clean Water Act, being 33 U.S.C. § 1317(b) and (c), which applies to
industrial users. This term includes prohibitive discharge limits established
pursuant to 40 C.F.R. § 403.5.
   NEW SOURCE.
      1.   Any building, structure, facility or installation from which there
is or may be a discharge of pollutants (the construction of which commenced
after the publication of proposed pretreatment standards under § 307(c) of the
Clean Water Act, being 33 U.S.C. § 1317(c), which will be applicable to such
source if such standards are thereafter promulgated in accordance with that
section) provided that:
         (a)   The building, structure, facility or installation is constructed
at a site at which no other source is located;
         (b)   The building, structure, facility or installation totally
replaces the process or production equipment that causes the discharge of
pollutants at an existing source; or
         (c)   The production or wastewater generating process of the building,
structure, facility or installation is substantially independent of an existing
source at the same site. In determining whether these are substantially
independent, factors such as the extent to which the new facility is integrated
with the existing plant, and the extent to which the new facility is engaged in
the same general type of activity as the existing source should be considered.
      2.   Construction on a site at which an existing source is located
results in a modification rather than a new source if the construction does not
create a new building, structure, facility or installation meeting the criteria
of subsection 1.(b) or 1.(c) of this definition but otherwise alters, replaces
or adds to existing process or production equipment.
      3.   Construction of a NEW SOURCE has commenced if the owner or operator
has:
         (a)   Begun, or caused to begin as part of a continuous on site
construction program:
            (1)   Any placement, assembly or installation of facilities or
equipment; or
            (2)   Significant site preparation work including clearing,
excavation or removal of existing buildings, structures, or facilities which is
necessary for the placement, assembly, or installation of new source facilities
or equipment.
         (b)   Entered into a binding contractual obligation for the purchase
of facilities or equipment which is intended to be used in its operation within
a reasonable time. Options to purchase or contracts which can be terminated or
modified without substantial loss and for feasibility, engineering, and design
studies do not constitute a contractual obligation under this definition.
   PASS-THROUGH. A discharge which exits the POTW in quantities or
concentrations which, alone or in conjunction with a discharge or discharges
from other sources, is a cause of violation of any requirement of the city’s
waste discharge requirements (including an increase in the magnitude or
duration of a violation) established for the reuse or disposal of effluent or
sludge.
   PEAK FLOW RATE. The average rate at which wastewater is discharged to a
public sewer during the highest 30-minute flow period in the preceding 12
months.
   PERMIT. A written authorization by the Director of Public Works to connect
to and discharge to the city’s wastewater collection, treatment and disposal
system in accordance with the provisions of this chapter or any other ordinance
or regulations of the city.
   PERSON. Any individual, partnership, association, corporation, limited
liability company, public agency and any other organization or group of
persons, public or private.
   POLLUTANT. Any constituent or characteristic of wastewater on which a
discharge limitation may be imposed either by the city or the regulatory bodies
empowered to regulate the city.
   PRETREATMENT REQUIREMENT. Any substantive or procedural requirement related
to pretreatment, other than a national pretreatment standard, imposed on an
industrial user.
   PROPERLY GROUND GARBAGE. The wastes from the preparation, cooking and
dispensing of food that has been shredded to such a degree that all particles
will be carried freely under the flow conditions normally prevailing in public
sewers, with no particle greater than one-half inch in any dimension.
   PUBLICLY OWNED USC TREATMENT WORKS or POTW. A “treatment works”, as defined
by § 212 of the Clean Water Act (33 U.S.C. § 1292) which is owned by the city.
This definition includes any devices or systems used in the collection,
storage, treatment, recycling, and reclamation of sewage or industrial wastes
of a liquid nature and any conveyances which convey wastewater to a treatment
plant.
   RADIOACTIVE WASTE. Wastes that contain chemical elements that spontaneously
change their atomic structure by emitting any particles, rays or energy forms.
   REGIONAL ADMINISTRATOR. The Region IX of the United States Environmental
Protection Agency.
   REGIONAL WATER QUALITY CONTROL BOARD or RWQCB. California Regional Water
Quality Control Board, Central Valley Region.
   REVENUE PROGRAM. The system of charges and fees established for the use of
the city’s wastewater collection, treatment and disposal system and all
supporting data used in determining such charges and fees.
   SIU. Significant industrial user (see definition of SIGNIFICANT INDUSTRIAL
USER).
   SEWAGE (WASTEWATER). A combination of wastes and water, including industrial
wastewater, whether treated or untreated, from residences, commercial
buildings, institutions and industrial establishments, which are discharged
into the sewer.
   SEWER. A pipe or conduit for holding and carrying wastewater, including the
manholes and all other appurtenant facilities which are necessary or convenient
to the holding or carrying of wastewater.
   SIGNIFICANT INDUSTRIAL USER.
      1.   Except as provided in subsection 2. of this definition, the term
SIGNIFICANT INDUSTRIAL USER means:
         (a)   All industrial users subject to categorical pretreatment
standards under 40 C.F.R. § 403.6 and 40 C.F.R. chapter I, subchapter N; and
         (b)   Any other industrial user that:
            (1)   Discharges an average of 25,000 gallons per day or more of
process wastewater to the POTW (excluding sanitary, noncontact cooling and
boiler blow down wastewater);
            (2)   Contributes a process waste stream which makes up 5% or more
of the average dry weather hydraulic or organic capacity of the POTW; or
            (3)   Is designated as such by the Director of Public Works on the
basis that the industrial user has a reasonable potential for adversely
affecting the POTW’s operation or for violating any pretreatment standard or
requirement (in accordance with 40 C.F.R. § 403.8(f)(6)).
      2.   Upon a finding that an industrial user meeting the criteria in
subsection 1.(b) of this definition has no reasonable potential for adversely
affecting the POTW’s operation or for violating any pretreatment standard or
requirement, the city may at any time, on its own initiative or in response to
a written request from an industrial user, and in accordance with 40 C.F.R. §
403.8(f)(6), determine that such industrial user is not a significant
industrial user.
   SLUG. Any discharge of water, sewage or industrial waste which, in
concentration of any given constituent or in quantity of flows, exceeds, for
any period of duration longer than 15 minutes, more than five times its average
hourly concentration or flow.
   SOLID WASTES. Nonliquid carried wastes normally considered to be suitable
for disposal with refuse at sanitary landfill refuse disposal sites.
   STANDARD METHODS. The current edition of Standard Methods for the
Examination of Water and Wastewater as published by the American Public Health
Association.
   STORMWATER. Waters other than wastewater, including, but not limited to,
rainwater, street drainage, roof drainage or yard drainage.
   SUSPENDED SOLID. Solids that either float on the surface of, or are in
suspension in, water, sewage, wastewater or other liquids and which are
removable by laboratory filtration. This is also called SUSPENDED MATTER in
standard methods.
   TRAP. Any facility designed, constructed and operated for the purpose of
removing and retaining dangerous, deleterious, or prohibited constituents from
wastewater by differential gravity separation or mechanical separation before
discharge to the sewer.
   UNPOLLUTED WATER LIQUID.
      1.   Any water or liquid containing none of the following: free or
emulsified grease or oil; acids or alkalis; substances that may impact taste
and odor or color characteristics; or toxic or poisonous substances in
suspension, colloidal state, or solution.
      2.   UNPOLLUTED WATER OR LIQUID shall contain not more than 500 parts per
million of dissolved solids, and not more than 25 parts per million each of
suspended solids or biochemical oxygen demand, or meet the most recent
requirements for secondary treatment defined by the State Water Resources
Control Board. Any analytical determination shall be made in accordance with
the procedures set forth in the current edition of standard methods. Any water
having contact with potential pathogen sources shall be considered to be
polluted.
   USER. Industrial user (see definition of INDUSTRIAL USER).
   WASTE. Sewage and any and all other waste substances, liquid, solid, gaseous
or radioactive, associated with human habitation or of human or animal nature,
including such wastes placed within containers of whatever nature prior to and
for the purpose of disposal.
   WASTE DISCHARGE REQUIREMENTS. Requirements issued to the city by the
California Regional Water Quality Control Board for disposal of treated
wastewater pursuant to Cal. Water Code § 13263.
   WASTE DISPOSAL MANAGER. The person so designated by the Director of Public
Works.
   WASTEWATER. See definition of SEWAGE (WASTEWATER).
   WATER SOFTENER. A unit using the ion exchange process removing hardness from
a water supply and requiring sodium chloride to regenerate the exchange bed.
(Ord. 497, passed 6-20-2000)
§ 9-6-3 DISPOSAL OF WASTES.
   (A)   It is unlawful for any person to cause, suffer or permit the disposal
of wastewaters, human excrement or other liquid wastes in any place or manner
except through and by means of a plumbing and wastewater collection system
which has been approved by the Director of Public Works.
   (B)   Stormwater, groundwater, rainwater, street drainage, subsurface
drainage or yard drainage shall not be discharged through direct or indirect
connections to the sewer. Such waters may be discharged to the storm sewer.
(Ord. 497, passed 6-20-2000)
§ 9-6-4 PRIVATE WASTEWATER DISPOSAL SYSTEMS.
   It is unlawful to construct within the city any privy, privy vault, septic
tank, cesspool or other facility designed or intended to be utilized for the
disposal of wastewater, except in those cases where the property line is more
than 200 feet from a city sewer. Existing systems which are functioning
properly may be used and pumped, but repairs, additions or alterations shall be
prohibited. At the time a repair, addition or alteration is required, the
system shall be abandoned and a connection made to the city sewer.
(Ord. 497, passed 6-20-2000)
§ 9-6-5 CONFIDENTIALITY.
   (A)   1.   Information submitted to the city pursuant to this chapter may be
identified as confidential by the submitter. Any such identification must be
asserted at the time of submission of the information by placing the words
“Confidential Business Information” on each page containing such information.
      2.   If no identification is made at the time of submission, the city may
make the information available to the public without further notice.
      3.   If confidentiality identification is asserted, the information will
not be made available to the general public except as may be required by
federal, state or local law, ordinances, rules or regulations.
   (B)   Any and all information and data provided to the city pursuant to this
chapter which is effluent data shall be available to the public without
restriction and without further notice. EFFLUENT DATA means:
      1.   Information necessary to determine that identity, amount, frequency,
concentration, temperature or other characteristics of any wastewater which has
been discharged into the sewer;
      2.   Information necessary to determine the identity, amount, frequency,
concentration, temperature or other characteristics of wastewater which, under
an applicable standard or limitation, the source was authorized to discharge;
and
      3.   A general description of the location and/or nature of the source to
the extent necessary to identify the source and to distinguish it from other
sources (including, to the extent necessary for such purposes, a description of
the device, installation or operation constituting the source).
   (C)   Notwithstanding the above, the following information shall be
considered to be effluent data to the extent necessary to allow the city to
disclose publicly that a source is (or is not) in compliance with the
provisions of this chapter or to allow the city to demonstrate the feasibility,
practicability or attainability (or lack thereof) of an existing or proposed
standard or limitation:
      1.   Information concerning research, or the results of research, or any
product, method, device or installation (or any component thereof) which was
produced, developed, installed and used only for research purposes; and
      2.   Information concerning any product, method, device or installation
(or any component thereof) designed or intended to be marketed or used
commercially but not yet so marketed or used.
(Ord. 497, passed 6-20-2000)
§ 9-6-6 PROHIBITED DISCHARGES.
   No user shall introduce or cause to be introduced into the POTW any
pollutant or wastewater which causes pass-through or interference. These
general prohibitions apply to all users of the POTW whether or not they are
subject to categorical pretreatment standards or any other federal, state or
local pretreatment standards or requirements. No person shall discharge,
deposit, throw, cause, allow or permit to be discharged into any public sewer
or plumbing fixture connected to the sewer any of the following described
materials:
   (A)   Any solids, liquids or gases which by themselves or by interaction
with other substances may cause fire or explosion hazards or in any other way
be injurious to persons, property or the operation of the sewer including, but
not limited to, waste streams with a closed cup flashpoint of less than 140°F
(60°C) using the test methods specified in 40 C.F.R. § 261.21;
   (B)   Any noxious or malodorous solids, liquids or gases which, either
singly or by interaction with other substances, are capable of creating a
public nuisance or hazard to life, public health or safety, or preventing entry
into sewers for their maintenance and repair;
   (C)   Any solids, greases, slurries or viscous material of such character or
in such quantity that, in the opinion of the Director of Public Works, may
cause an obstruction to the flow in the sewer or otherwise interfere with the
proper functioning of the POTW;
   (D)   Any toxic substances, chemical elements or compounds in quantities
sufficient, in the opinion of the Director of Public Works, to impair the
operation or efficiency of the POTW or that will pass through the POTW, and
cause the effluent thereof to exceed the waste discharge requirements;
   (E)   Any garbage, except properly ground with a mechanical garbage grinder;
   (F)   Any sand, earth, ashes, mud, cement, broken glass, cinders, feathers,
straw, shavings, metal, rags, tar, wood, meat processing plant wastes, such as
animal skins, intestines, fleshings and paunch materials retained on a screen
having eight meshes per inch each way, or any other solid or viscous substance
capable of causing obstructions to the flow in sewers or other interference
with the proper operation or maintenance of the POTW;
   (G)   Any septic tank or cesspool waste, except as authorized by the waste
disposal manager for disposal at the septage receiving station at the POTW;
   (H)   Any radioactive wastes. In the event of an accidental spill of
radioactive material into any public sewer, the person responsible shall:
      1.   Immediately notify the waste disposal manager; and
      2.   Render such technical or other assistance to the city within its
power to prevent the POTW from becoming contaminated with radioactivity;
   (I)   Any petroleum oil, or refined petroleum products, nonbiodegradable
cutting oil, commonly called soluble oil, products of mineral origin in amounts
that will cause interference or pass-through in the sewerage system or POTW;
   (J)   Trucked or hauled wastes or pollutants, except at discharge points
designated by the city;
   (K)   Wastewater having a temperature of 150°F or higher, or which will
inhibit biological activity in the POTW resulting in interference, but in no
case wastewater which causes the temperature at the introduction to the POTW to
exceed 104°F or 40°C;
   (L)   Wastewater having a pH less than 6.0 or more than 11.0, or otherwise
causing corrosive structural damage to the POTW or equipment;
   (M)   Pollutants, including oxygen demanding pollutants (BOD and the like),
released in a discharge at a flow rate and/or pollutant concentration which,
either singly or by interaction with other pollutants, will cause interference
with the POTW;
   (N)   Any dispersed biodegradable oils and fats, such as lard, tallow or
vegetable oil in amounts that will cause interference or pass-through in the
sewerage system or POTW;
   (O)   Any gasoline, benzene, naphtha, fuel oil, or other inflammable or
explosive liquid or gas;
   (P)   Pollutants which result in the presence of toxic gases, vapors or
fumes within the POTW in a quantity that may cause acute worker health and
safety problems;
   (Q)   Sludges, membrane retentates, spent chemical solutions or other wastes
generated during the reclamation, recycling, purification or recovery of water,
chemical solutions, brines or other industrial process flow streams;
   (R)   Wastewater causing two readings on an explosion hazard meter at the
point of discharge into, or at any point in, the city’s sewerage facilities of
more than 10% or any single reading over 5% of the lower explosive limit of the
meter; and
   (S)   Medical wastes, except as specifically authorized by the city in a
wastewater discharge permit.
(Ord. 497, passed 6-20-2000)
§ 9-6-7 SPECIFIC LIMITATIONS OF WASTES INTO WASTEWATER SEWERS.
   (A)   Local limits. The following pollutant limits are established to
protect against materials which are toxic to humans, animals, the local
environment or which will cause interference or pass-through in the sewerage
system. No person shall discharge wastewater containing in excess of the
following:
Parameter Maximum Concentration Limitations (mg/l Unless Otherwise Noted)
Parameter                    Maximum Concentration Limitations (mg/l Unless
                             Otherwise Noted)
Arsenic                      0.31
Cadmium                      0.085
Chromium (total)             4.9
Copper                       1.41
Lead                         0.37
Mercury                      0.033
Molybdenum                   3.57
Nickel                       2.67
Selenium                     0.61
Silver                       0.78
Sulfides                     0.5
Zinc                         4.57
Total dissolved solids       1,500
Total petroleum hydrocarbons 610
 
      1.   The above limits may be revised from time to time by the city as may
be deemed necessary to protect the sewerage system and POTW from interference
and pass-through, or as may be required by the applicable federal, state or
local pretreatment standards.
      2.   The Director of Public Works may impose more restrictive standards
or requirements on a discharge he or she deems necessary to comply with the
objectives of this chapter, specific prohibitions or the terms of the city’s
waste discharge requirements.
      3.   The Director of Public Works may authorize discharges containing
higher concentrations on a site specific basis, provided that the
concentrations of such discharges shall not cause pass-through or interference.
Upon approval by the Director of Public Works, site specific limitations shall
be established through the terms specified in the industrial user’s industrial
wastewater discharge permit. The Director of Public Works may impose mass
limitations in addition to, or in place of, concentration based limitations,
due to reduced water usage by an industrial user.
   (B)   Slugs and equalized discharges. No person shall cause the discharge of
slugs of water or wastes. Each person producing a discharge of a slug into the
public sewers shall construct and maintain, at his or her own expense, a
suitable storage and flow control facility to ensure the equalization of the
discharge over a 24-hour period. Such facility shall have a capacity of at
least 80% of the total normal volume discharged during a 24-hour production
period, unless a smaller size is approved by the Director of Public Works, and
the outlet to the sewer shall be equipped with a rate discharge controller or
other device approved by the Director of Public Works, the regulation of which
shall be directed by the Director of Public Works.
   (C)   Special agreements. No statement contained in this chapter shall be
construed as prohibiting any special agreement or arrangement between the city
and any person whereby an industrial wastewater of unusual strength or
character may be admitted to the POTW, either before or after pretreatment,
when in the opinion of the Director of Public Works, unusual or extraordinary
circumstances compel special terms and conditions. No special agreement or
arrangement shall be allowed which, by reason of the admission of such wastes,
would result in pass-through, interference or violation of any federal, state
or local pretreatment standard. Any and all costs, expenses or fees incurred by
the city shall be paid by the person.
   (D)   Dilution.
      1.   No user shall ever attempt to dilute a discharge, as a partial or
complete substitute for adequate treatment to achieve compliance with a
discharge limitation unless expressly authorized by an applicable pretreatment
standard or requirement.
      2.   The Director of Public Works may impose mass limitations on users
who are using dilution to meet applicable standards or requirements.
(Ord. 497, passed 6-20-2000)
§ 9-6-8 LIMITATIONS ON INFECTIOUS WASTES.
   (A)   Infectious wastes which have been rendered noninfectious prior to
grinding as specified in the Cal. Health and Safety Code § 118215, from
hospitals, clinics and mortuaries may be disposed into the city’s sewer system
subject to the following limitations and requirements:
      1.   Pathologic specimens may not be disposed to the city’s sewer system;
      2.   The material shall be ground by an approved grinder having the
capabilities of meeting or exceeding the following fineness: at least 40% shall
pass a no. 8 sieve; at least 65% shall pass a no. 3 sieve; and 100% shall pass
a three-eighths inch screen opening;
      3.   Ground organic kitchen waste from hospital food preparation and
disposal facilities excluding all paper and plastic items may be discharged to
the city’s sewer system;
      4.   Disposable hypodermic needles, syringes and associated articles
following their use in hospitals, outpatient clinics, medical and dental
offices and the like, may not be discharged to the city’s sewer system; and
      5.   The materials must not violate any other requirements of this
chapter.
   (B)   The following shall not be discharged to the city sewer system by any
means:
      1.   Solid wastes generated in the rooms of patients who are isolated
because of a suspected or diagnosed communicable disease;
      2.   Any portions of the human anatomy; and
      3.   Wastes excluded by other provisions of this chapter except as
specifically permitted in this section.
   (C)   Nothing in this section shall be construed to limit the authority of
the health officer of Merced County to define wastes as being infectious.
(Ord. 497, passed 6-20-2000)
§ 9-6-9 PRETREATMENT OF WASTEWATER.
   (A)   Pretreatment facilities. Industrial users shall provide wastewater
treatment as necessary to comply with this chapter and shall achieve compliance
with all categorical pretreatment standards, local limits and the prohibitions
set forth in this chapter within the time limits set by the Director of Public
Works, the state or the EPA, whichever is the more stringent. Any facilities
necessary for compliance shall be provided, operated and maintained at the
user’s sole expense. Detailed plans describing such facilities and operating
procedures shall be prepared by a professional engineer registered in the state
and submitted to the city for review, and shall be acceptable to the city
before such facilities are constructed. The review of such plans and operating
procedures shall in no way relieve the user from the responsibility of
modifying such facilities as necessary to produce a discharge acceptable to the
city under the provisions of this chapter.
   (B)   Traps. Sand, grease and oil traps shall be provided when, in the
opinion of the Director of Public Works, they are necessary for the proper
handling of liquid wastes, sand or other harmful ingredients. All traps shall
be of a type and capacity approved by the Director of Public Works and shall be
so located as to be readily and easily accessible for cleaning and inspections.
   (C)   Additional pretreatment measures.
      1.   The admission into the sewer of any waters or wastes having:
         (a)   A BOD greater than 350 mg/l;
         (b)   Containing more than 350 mg/l of suspended solids; or
         (c)   Having the characteristics described in §
9-6-6 of this chapter or constituent levels in excess of those enumerated in §
9-6-7 of this chapter, shall be subject to the review and approval of the city.
      2.   When necessary in the opinion of the Director of Public Works the
industrial user shall provide, at its expense, such pretreatment as may be
necessary to:
         (a)   Reduce the BOD discharge to 350 mg/l and suspended solids to 350
mg/l;
         (b)   Reduce objectionable characteristics or constituents to within
the maximum limits provided in §
9-6-7 of this chapter; or
         (c)   Control the quantities and rates of discharge of such water or
wastes.
   (D)   Accidental discharge/slug control plan.
      1.   At least once every two years, the waste disposal manager shall
evaluate whether each significant industrial user needs an accidental
discharge/slug control plan. The waste disposal manager may require any user to
develop, submit for approval and implement such a plan. Alternatively, the
waste disposal manager may develop such a plan for any user.
      2.   An accidental discharge/slug control plan shall address, at minimum,
the following:
         (a)   Description of discharge practices, including nonroutine batch
discharges;
         (b)   Description of stored chemicals;
         (c)   Procedures for immediately notifying the waste disposal manager
of any accidental or slug discharge, as required by §
9-6-19(F) of this chapter; and
         (d)   Procedures to prevent adverse impact from any accidental or slug
discharge. Such procedures include, but are not limited to, inspection and
maintenance of storage areas, handling and transfer of materials, loading and
unloading operations, control of plant site runoff, worker training, building
of containment structures or equipment, measures for containing toxic organic
pollutants, including solvents, salts and chemicals, and/or measures and
equipment for emergency response.
   (E)   Salinity control plan. The Director of Public Works may require any
industrial user to develop, submit, and implement a salinity control plan at
any time. The salinity control plan shall address, at a minimum, the following:
      1.   Determinations or best estimates of the identities and approximate
quantities of salts or sources of salinity used and discharged;
      2.   Descriptions of the major salting operations and locations of
potential salt or salinity release points on site drawing;
      3.   Procedures for immediately notifying the waste disposal manager of
any accidental or slug discharge, as required by §
9-6-19(F) of this chapter;
      4.   Description of the methods of salt or salinity waste removal and
disposal;
      5.   Description of employee training program for salinity control;
      6.   Identification of person responsible for implementation of the
salinity control plan; and
      7.   Description of best management practices (BMPs) normally utilized by
the industrial user to control salinity discharges.
(Ord. 497, passed 6-20-2000)
§ 9-6-10 CONNECTIONS, REPAIR PERMITS AND CONDITIONS OF USE.
   Any person desiring to use the city sewer will be allowed to connect to the
city sewer if the property discharging into the sewer is in the area served by
the POTW and the following conditions are met:
   (A)   The effluent will meet the requirements of this chapter;
   (B)   A street cut permit is obtained;
   (C)   Payment of current connection fee;
   (D)   Repairs and connections to the sewers requiring excavations in streets
shall be bonded as required by this code;
   (E)   Uses by residential, industrial or commercial establishments outside
the city limits will not be granted if, in the opinion of the Director of
Public Works, they will impair the usage of the sewer system or any part
thereof by users within the city;
   (F)   1.   Enlargements, extensions or modifications of the city sewers for
use by outside residential, industrial or commercial establishments shall be
solely at the cost of such user. Such enlargements, extensions or modifications
shall be constructed according to plans and specifications approved in advance
of the construction by the Director of Public Works. Upon certification by the
Director of Public Works that construction is complete and in accordance with
approved plans and specifications, the city shall be granted an option to take
title and full control of such facilities. Such option shall remain in effect
until exercised by the city or as long as the facilities remain connected to
the city’s sewerage system.
      2.   Until the city exercises its option to take full title, such
enlargements shall be operated and maintained at the expense of such users,
except by special agreement. All limitations and requirements established by
this chapter shall apply to such enlargements, extensions or modifications
whether operated by the city or the user;
   (G)   The failure or refusal of any user to comply with any condition of
this chapter or of any contract granted pursuant to this chapter shall be
sufficient grounds for cutting off its connections with the sewer system after
five days’ notice thereof by the city;
   (H)   Maximum protection to the city shall be provided in the drafting of
any contract, and all applicable provisions of this chapter shall be implied
conditions of the contract; and
   (I)   Excepting industrial users, applicants shall apply at the office of
the city building inspector. All applicants shall complete and submit the
application form provided by the city. The city building inspector shall
determine whether the connection is feasible before any sewer lateral
construction is started and shall inspect connecting lines for installation in
accordance with all applicable codes, rules, and regulations, including,
without limitation, this code.
(Ord. 497, passed 6-20-2000)
§ 9-6-11 CONSTRUCTION OF SEWER LATERALS.
   The applicant shall bear all costs for the construction and installation of
laterals for connecting private sewer facilities to the sewer. All such
construction and installation shall be performed in accordance with all
applicable codes, rules and regulations, including, without limitation, this
code.
(Ord. 497, passed 6-20-2000)
§ 9-6-12 DAMAGE CAUSED BY PROHIBITED DISCHARGES, SLUG DISCHARGES, OR OTHER
CAUSES.
   Any person who discharges or causes the discharge of prohibited discharges
or slug discharges which cause damage to the city’s POTW, detrimental effects
on treatment processes or any other damages resulting in costs to the city,
shall pay to the city the full costs of any and all damages occasioned thereby.
(Ord. 497, passed 6-20-2000)
§ 9-6-13 INSPECTIONS.
   (A)   The Director of Public Works or the person(s) designated as inspector
(s) shall have the right to enter the premises of any user to determine whether
or not the user is complying with all requirements of this chapter and any
wastewater discharge permit or order issued hereunder. Users shall allow the
Director of Public Works or inspector ready access to all parts of the premises
for the purposes of inspection, conduct independent sampling, records
examination and copying, and the performance of any additional duties.
   (B)   Adequate identification shall be provided by the Director of Public
Works for all inspectors and other authorized personnel and these persons shall
identify themselves when entering any property for inspection purposes or when
inspecting the work of any contractor.
   (C)   Access to all of the facilities directly or indirectly connected to
the POTW shall be given to persons authorized by the Director of Public Works
at all reasonable times including those occasioned by emergency conditions.
   (D)   Any permanent or temporary obstruction to easy access to the sewerage
facility to be inspected shall promptly be removed by the facility user or
owner at the written or verbal request of the Director of Public Works and
shall not be replaced.
   (E)   No person shall unlawfully interfere with, delay, resist or refuse
entrance to an authorized city inspector attempting to inspect any wastewater
generation, conveyance or treatment facility connected directly or indirectly
to the city’s sewerage systems.
(Ord. 497, passed 6-20-2000)
§ 9-6-14 INDUSTRIAL WASTEWATER DISCHARGE PERMITS; CATEGORIES.
   Industrial wastewater discharge permits shall be issued under the following
categories, as determined by the Director of Public Works after review of the
permit application as described in §
9-6-17 of this chapter. The Director of Public Works may determine, upon review
of the permit application, that no permit is required for certain small
industries and commercial users.
   (A)   General industrial/commercial user permits.
      1.   General industrial/commercial user permits shall be issued to
certain small industries and some commercial users whose individual discharges
do not significantly impact the POTW, degrade wastewater quality or contaminate
sludge.
      2.   Industries that have the potential to discharge a nondomestic or
process waste stream, but at the present time discharge only sanitary waste,
may also be included in this group.
   (B)   Significant industrial user (SIU) permits.
      1.   SIU permits shall be issued to those industries which are determined
by the Director of Public Works to be significant industrial users (SIUs), as
defined in §
9-6-2 of this chapter.
      2.   The Director of Public Works may require other users to obtain an
SIU permit as necessary to carry out the purposes of this chapter.
(Ord. 497, passed 6-20-2000)
§ 9-6-15 GENERAL INDUSTRIAL/COMMERCIAL USER PERMITS.
   Information similar to that required for a significant industrial user (SIU)
permit will be required for a general industrial/commercial user permit, and
shall be furnished on forms to be provided by the city.
   (A)   General industrial/commercial user permits may contain the same
information, conditions, or requirements as SIU permits.
   (B)   Violators of the conditions of the general industrial/commercial user
permits shall be subject to the same penalties as SIU permit violators.
(Ord. 497, passed 6-20-2000)
§ 9-6-16 SIGNIFICANT INDUSTRIAL USER (SIU) PERMITS.
   (A)   Permit required. No SIU shall discharge or cause to be discharged any
industrial wastewaters directly or indirectly to the POTW owned by the city
without first obtaining an SIU permit from the city.
      1.   Conditions of permit. The Director of Public Works may require an
SIU permit to include pretreatment of industrial wastewaters before discharge,
restriction of peak flow discharges, discharge of certain wastewaters only to
specified sewers of the city, relocation of point of discharge, prohibition of
discharge of certain wastewater components, restriction of discharge to certain
hours of the day, payment of additional costs to defray increased costs of the
city created by the industrial wastewater discharge and such other conditions
as may be required to effectuate the purpose of this chapter.
      2.   Pretreatment standards. Users in industrial categories subject to
the categorical pretreatment standards developed by the EPA under the act are
required to comply with pretreatment standards promulgated pursuant to § 307 of
the Act, being 33 U.S.C. § 1317. The city may issue standards more stringent
than the federal standards if the Director of Public Works determines that the
limitations in the federal standards are not sufficient to:
         (a)   Protect the operation of the city’s POTW; or
         (b)   Protect the POTW from violating the water quality standards or
effluent limitations specified in the POTW’s waste discharge requirements.
      3.   Self-monitoring requirements. The SIU permits shall contain self-
monitoring requirements deemed necessary by the Director of Public Works to
ensure compliance with city, state or federal rules and regulations and shall
be submitted to the city for approval. The Director of Public Works may require
any or all of the following:
         (a)   A schedule for complying with effluent limitations;
         (b)   Compliance schedule progress reports;
         (c)   A report on final compliance with effluent limitations and
standards; and
         (d)   Periodic reports on continued compliance.
   (B)   Amended SIU permits.
      1.   No person shall discharge industrial wastewaters in excess of the
quantity or quality limitations set by the SIU permit. Any person desiring to
discharge industrial wastewaters or use facilities which are not in conformance
with the SIU permit or desiring to change its discharge parameters, shall apply
to the city for an amended permit. An amended permit shall be issued before
discharging at limits in excess of the current permit limits. Additional
connection fees will be assessed and paid, for the increase in permit limits,
as provided by Council fee resolution.
      2.   New or increased contributions of pollutants to the city sewage
system by industrial users, where such contributions do not meet applicable
national pretreatment standards and the requirements set forth in this chapter
or where such contributions would cause the city to violate its waste discharge
requirements, are prohibited, and no amended permit shall be issued for such
contributions.
(Ord. 497, passed 6-20-2000)
§ 9-6-17 INDUSTRIAL WASTEWATER DISCHARGE PERMITS; GENERAL PROCEDURES AND
CONDITIONS.
   (A)   Existing permitted industries; temporary permits.
      1.   All persons discharging industrial wastewater into the POTW prior to
the effective date of this chapter and who have obtained a permit or approval
on industrial wastewater discharge from the city, are granted a temporary
permit to discharge industrial wastewaters.
      2.   This temporary permit shall expire six months from the date of
written notification by the Director of Public Works that a new permit is to be
obtained.
      3.   Prior to the expiration of the temporary permit, the industrial user
shall apply for and obtain a new industrial wastewater discharge permit.
   (B)   Application procedure; conditions for approval.
      1.   Applicants for a permit for industrial wastewater discharge shall
complete a city application form available at the office of the Director of
Public Works. The city may require plans, specifications, lab analyses or
additional information on the characteristics of the wastewater discharge
beyond that required on the application form.
      2.   Any person signing the application statement submitted pursuant to
this section shall make the following certification:
      I certify under penalty of perjury that this document and all attachments
were prepared under my direction or supervision in accordance with a system
designed to assure that qualified personnel properly gather and evaluate the
information submitted. Based on my inquiry of the person or persons who manage
the system, or those persons directly responsible for gathering the
information, the information submitted is, to the best of my knowledge and
belief, true, accurate, and complete. I am aware that there are significant
penalties for submitting false information, including the possibility of fine
and imprisonment for knowing violations.
      3.   Upon approval of the application and payment of the required fees as
adopted by resolution of the City Council, an industrial wastewater discharge
permit will be issued and the application, plans, specifications and data (the
compliance schedule in the case of an interim permit) submitted in support will
be considered as part of the permit.
      4.   (a)   The application shall be approved if the applicant has
complied with all applicable requirements of this chapter and furnished to the
city all requested information and if the Director of Public Works determines
that there is adequate capacity in the POTW to convey, treat and dispose of the
wastewaters.
         (b)   The city may deny any application for an industrial wastewater
discharge permit.
   (C)   Duration. An industrial wastewater discharge permit shall be issued
for a specified time period, not to exceed five years from the effective date
of the permit. An industrial wastewater discharge permit may be issued for a
period less than five years, at the discretion of the Director of Public Works.
Each permit will indicate a specific date upon which it will expire.
   (D)   Change of restrictions.
      1.   The Director of Public Works may change the restrictions or
conditions of an industrial wastewater discharge permit from time to time as
circumstances may require.
      2.   The city shall allow an industrial user a reasonable period of time
to comply with any changes in the industrial wastewater discharge permit
required by the city.
   (E)   Suspension and conditions for reinstatement.
      1.   The Director of Public Works may suspend a permit for industrial
wastewater discharge when such suspension is necessary in order to stop a
discharge which presents an actual or threatened hazard to the public health,
safety or welfare, to the environment or to the city’s POTW.
      2.   Any user notified of a suspension of its permit shall immediately
cease and desist the discharge of all industrial wastewater to the POTW. In the
event of a failure of the user to comply voluntarily with the suspension order,
the Director of Public Works shall take such steps as are reasonably necessary
to ensure compliance. In the event of an emergency, the city may terminate the
discharge of all industrial wastewater to the POTW immediately. All sewer
discharges from the user may be terminated if industrial and domestic
wastewaters are combined prior to discharge to the city sewer.
      3.   The Director of Public Works shall reinstate the permit upon proof
of satisfactory compliance with all discharge requirements of the city.
   (F)   Revocation. The Director of Public Works may revoke an industrial
wastewater discharge permit for good cause, including, but not limited to, the
following reasons:
      1.   Failure to provide written notification to the Director of Public
Works of significant changes to the wastewater, at least 30 days prior to
discharge to the sewer of the changed industrial wastewater;
      2.   Failure to provide prior notification to the Director of Public
Works of changed conditions pursuant to §
9-6-19(E) of this chapter;
      3.   Misrepresentation or failure to fully disclose all relevant facts in
the industrial wastewater discharge permit application;
      4.   Falsifying self-monitoring reports;
      5.   Tampering with monitoring equipment;
      6.   Refusing to allow the Director of Public Works timely access to the
facility premises and records;
      7.   Failure to meet effluent limitations;
      8.   Failure to pay connection fees;
      9.   Failure to pay fines and/or penalties;
      10.   Failure to pay sewer charges;
      11.   Failure to meet compliance schedules;
      12.   Failure to complete an industrial wastewater survey or the
industrial wastewater discharge permit application;
      13.   Failure to provide 90 days’ prior written advance notice of the
transfer of business ownership of a permitted facility; or
      14.   Violation of any pretreatment standard or requirement, or any
provisions of:
         (a)   The industrial wastewater discharge permit;
         (b)   This chapter;
         (c)   This code; or
         (d)   Any applicable federal, state or local law, regulation, statute
or ordinance.
   (G)   Permit nontransferability. Industrial wastewater discharge permits
shall be void upon cessation of operations or transfer of business ownership or
substantially all the assets of the industrial user. All industrial wastewater
discharge permits issued to a particular user are void upon the issuance of a
new permit to that user.
(Ord. 497, passed 6-20-2000)
§ 9-6-18 WASTEWATER SAMPLING, ANALYSIS AND FLOW MEASUREMENTS.
   (A)   Periodic measurements of flow rates, flow volumes, BOD and suspended
solids for use in determining the monthly industrial wastewater treatment
service charge and such measurements of other constituents believed necessary
by the Director of Public Works shall be made by all industrial users, unless
specifically relieved of such obligation by the Director of Public Works.
   (B)   All such sampling, analyses and flow measurements of industrial
wastewaters shall be performed by a state certified independent laboratory, by
a laboratory of an industrial user approved by the Director of Public Works or
by personnel of the city. Prior to submittal to the city of data developed in
the laboratory of an industrial user, the results shall be verified by a
responsible administrative official of the industrial user under the penalty of
perjury.
   (C)   All wastewater analyses shall be conducted in accordance with the
appropriate procedure contained in the federal guidelines establishing test
procedures for the analysis of pollutants, 40 C.F.R. part 136, test procedures.
If no appropriate procedure is contained therein, a procedure judged
satisfactory by the Director of Public Works shall be used to measure indicated
wastewater constituents. Any independent laboratory or industrial user
performing tests shall furnish test data or information on the test methods or
equipment used, if requested to do so by the Director of Public Works.
   (D)   All users making periodic measurements shall furnish and install at
the control manhole or other appropriate location a calibrated flume, weir,
flow meter or similar device approved by the Director of Public Works and
suitable to measure the industrial wastewater flow rate and total volume. A
flow indicating, recording and totalizing register may be required by the
Director of Public Works. In lieu of wastewater flow measurement, the Director
of Public Works may accept records of water usage and adjust the flow volumes
by suitable factors to determine peak and average flow rates for the specific
industrial wastewater discharge.
   (E)   The minimum requirement for self-monitoring shall be at least two
times per year for significant industrial users, whether or not they are
subject to national categorical standards.
   (F)   Industrial users with large fluctuations in quantity or quality of
wastewater may be required to provide continuous sampling and analyses for
every day of operation. When required by the Director of Public Works, users
shall install and maintain automatic flow proportional sampling equipment and/
or automatic analysis and recording equipment, approved by the Director of
Public Works.
   (G)   Each industrial user, including those subject to self-monitoring and
reporting requirements, shall retain for a minimum of three years records of
monitoring activities and results and shall make such records available upon
request for inspection and copying by inspectors and other authorized personnel
of the city. Such records shall be retained during the pendency of any
litigation regarding industrial wastewater discharge or for such additional
periods as may be requested by city, state or federal entities.
   (H)   Analyses of industrial wastewater as required for the enforcement of
the provisions of this chapter and the determination of industrial user charges
will be conducted at the discretion of the Director of Public Works by either
the POTW laboratory or another laboratory approved by the Director of Public
Works. The laboratory performing the analyses shall be certified by the state
for the analyses performed.
      1.   The costs of sampling and analyses performed by the POTW laboratory
shall be paid by the industrial user when, in the opinion of the Director of
Public Works, because of the quantity or quality of the wastes discharged, a
greater number of analyses than normal are required to ensure compliance with
this chapter. The costs for sampling and analyses performed by another
laboratory shall be paid by the industrial user.
      2.   Notwithstanding subsection (H)1. of this section, costs for sampling
and analyses performed in the normal course of monitoring an industrial user,
by the POTW laboratory shall be included as part of the sewer service rates
established in the resolution of the City Council.
      3.   Charges for analyses completed by the POTW laboratory shall be
commensurate with the rates charged by private laboratories for similar
analyses.
(Ord. 497, passed 6-20-2000)
§ 9-6-19 REPORTING REQUIREMENTS FOR INDUSTRIAL USERS.
   (A)   Reporting requirements for industrial users subject to categorical
pretreatment standards.
      1.   Base line monitoring reports. Within 180 days after the effective
date of a categorical pretreatment standard, or 180 days after the final
administrative decision made upon a category determination submission under 40
C.F.R. § 403.6(a), whichever is later, existing industrial users subject to
such categorical pretreatment standards and currently discharging to or
scheduled to discharge to the POTW shall be required to submit to the city a
report which contains the information listed in subsections (A)1.(a) through
(A)1.(g) of this section. If reports containing this information already have
been submitted to the RWQCB or the regional administrator in compliance with
the requirement of 40 C.F.R. § 128.140(b), the industrial user shall not be
required to submit this information again. However, the industrial user shall
provide the city with a copy of such report along with written verification
from the RWQCB that such report items have been received by the RWQCB. At least
90 days prior to commencement of discharge, new sources and sources that become
industrial users subsequent to the promulgation of an applicable categorical
standard, shall be required to submit to the city a report which contains the
information listed in subsections (A)1.(a) through (A)1.(e) of this section.
New sources shall also be required to include in this report information on the
method of pretreatment the source intends to use to meet applicable
pretreatment standards. New sources shall give estimates of anticipated flow
and quantity of pollutants to be discharged.
         (a)   Identifying information. The user shall submit the name and
address of the facility including the name of the operator and owners.
         (b)   Permits. The user shall submit a list of any environmental
control permits held by or for the facility.
         (c)   Description of operations. The user shall submit a brief
description of the nature, average rate of production, and standard industrial
classification of the operation(s) carried out by such industrial user. This
description should include a schematic process diagram which indicates points
of discharge to the POTW from the regulated processes.
         (d)   Flow measurement. The user shall submit information showing the
measured average daily and maximum daily flow, in gallons per day, to the POTW
from each of the following:
            (1)   Regulated process streams; and
            (2)   Other streams as necessary to allow use of the combined waste
stream formula of 40 C.F.R. § 403.6(e) (see subsection (A)1.(e) of this
section). The city may allow for verifiable estimates of these flows where
justified by cost or feasibility considerations.
         (e)   Measurement of pollutants.
            (1)   The user shall identify the pretreatment standards applicable
to each regulated process.
            (2)   In addition, the user shall submit the results of sampling
and analysis identifying the nature and concentration (or mass, where required
by the standard or city) of regulated pollutants in the discharge from each
regulated process. Both daily maximum and average concentration (or mass, where
required) shall be reported. The sample shall be representative of daily
operations.
            (3)   A minimum of four grab samples must be used for pH, cyanide,
total phenols, oil and grease, sulfide and volatile organics. For all other
pollutants, 24-hour composite samples must be obtained through flow
proportional composite sampling techniques where feasible. The Director of
Public Works may waive flow proportional composite sampling for any industrial
user that demonstrates that flow proportional sampling is infeasible. In such
cases, samples may be obtained through time proportional composite sampling
techniques or through a minimum of four grab samples where the user
demonstrates and the Director of Public Works agrees that this will provide a
representative sample of the effluent being discharged.
            (4)   The user shall take a minimum of one representative sample to
compile that data necessary to comply with the requirements of this subsection
(A).
            (5)   Samples should be taken immediately downstream from
pretreatment facilities if such exist or immediately downstream from the
regulated process if no pretreatment exists. If other wastewaters are mixed
with the regulated wastewater prior to pretreatment the user should measure the
flows and concentrations necessary to allow use of the combined waste stream
formula of 40 C.F.R. § 403.6(e) in order to evaluate compliance with the
pretreatment standards. Where an alternate concentration or mass limit has been
calculated in accordance with 40 C.F.R. § 403.6(e) this adjusted limit along
with supporting data shall be submitted to the city.
            (6)   Sampling and analysis shall be performed in accordance with
the techniques prescribed in 40 C.F.R. part 136 and amendments thereto. Where
40 C.F.R. part 136 does not contain sampling or analytical techniques for the
pollutant in question, or where the regional administrator determines that the
40 C.F.R. part 136 sampling and analytical techniques are inappropriate for the
pollutant in question, sampling and analysis shall be performed by using
validated analytical methods or any other applicable sampling and analytical
procedures, including procedures suggested by the city or other parties,
approved by the regional administrator.
            (7)   The Director of Public Works may allow the submission of a
base line report which utilizes only historical data so long as the data
provides information sufficient to determine the need for industrial
pretreatment measures.
            (8)   The base line report shall indicate the time, date and place,
of sampling, and methods of analysis, and shall certify that such sampling and
analysis is representative of normal work cycles and expected pollutant
discharges to the POTW.
         (f)   Certification. The user shall submit a statement, reviewed by an
authorized representative of the industrial user and certified to by a
qualified professional, indicating whether pretreatment standards are being met
on a consistent basis, and, if not, whether additional operation and
maintenance (O&M) and/or additional pretreatment is required for the industrial
user to meet the pretreatment standards and requirements.
         (g)   Compliance schedule. If additional pretreatment and/or O&M will
be required to meet the pretreatment standards, the user shall submit the
shortest schedule by which the industrial user will provide such additional
pretreatment and/or O&M. The completion date in this schedule shall not be
later than the compliance date established for the applicable pretreatment
standard.
            (1)   Where the industrial user’s categorical pretreatment standard
has been modified by a removal allowance (40 C.F.R. § 403.7), the combined
waste stream formula (40 C.F.R. § 403.6(e)), and/or a fundamentally different
factors variance (40 C.F.R. § 403.13) at the time the user submits the report
required by subsection (A) of this section, the information required by
subsections (A)1.(f) and (A)1.(g) of this section shall pertain to the modified
limits.
            (2)   If the categorical pretreatment standards are modified by a
removal allowance (40 C.F.R. § 403.7), the combined waste stream formula (40
C.F.R. § 403.6(e)), and/or a fundamentally different factors variance (40
C.F.R. § 403.13) after the user submits the report required by subsection (A)
of this section, any necessary amendment to the information requested by
subsections (A)1.(f) and (A)1.(g) of this section shall be submitted by the
user to the city within 60 days after the modified limit is approved.
         (h)   Base line monitoring reports. All base line monitoring reports
must be signed and certified in accordance with §
9-6-17(B)2. of this chapter.
      2.   Compliance schedule progress reports. The following conditions apply
to the compliance schedule required by subsection (A)1.(g) of this section:
         (a)   The schedule shall contain progress increments in the form of
dates for the commencement and completion of major events leading to the
construction and operation of additional pretreatment required for the user to
meet the applicable pretreatment standards (such events include, but are not
limited to, hiring an engineer, completing preliminary and final plans,
executing contracts for major components, commencing and completing
construction, and beginning and conducting routine operation).
         (b)   No increment referred to above shall exceed nine months.
         (c)   The user shall submit a progress report to the Director of
Public Works no later than 14 days following each date in the schedule and the
final date of compliance including, as a minimum, whether or not it complied
with the increment of progress, the reason for any delay, and if appropriate,
the steps being taken by the user to return the established schedule; and
         (d)   In no event shall more than nine months elapse between such
progress reports to the Director of Public Works.
      3.   Report on compliance with categorical pretreatment standard
deadline.
         (a)   Within 90 days following the date for final compliance with
applicable categorical pretreatment standards or in the case of a new source
following commencement of the introduction of wastewater into the POTW, any
industrial user subject to pretreatment standards and requirements shall submit
to the city a report containing the information described in subsections (A)1.
(d) through (A)1.(f) of this section.
         (b)   For industrial users subject to equivalent mass or concentration
limits established by the city in accordance with the procedures in 40 C.F.R. §
403.6(c), this report shall contain a reasonable measure of the user’s long
term production rate.
         (c)   For all other industrial users subject to categorical
pretreatment standards expressed in terms of allowable pollutant discharge per
unit of production (or other measure of operation), this report shall include
the user’s actual production during the appropriate sampling period.
         (d)   All compliance reports must be signed and certified in
accordance with §
9-6-17(B)2. of this chapter.
      4.   Periodic reports on continued compliance.
         (a)   Any industrial user subject to a categorical pretreatment
standard, after the compliance date of such pretreatment standard, or, in the
case of a new source, after commencement of the discharge into the POTW, shall
submit to the Director of Public Works during the months of June and December
of each year, unless required more frequently in the pretreatment standard or
by the city or the approval authority, a report indicating the nature and
concentration of pollutants in the effluent which are limited by such
categorical pretreatment standards. In addition, this report shall include a
record of measured or estimated average and maximum daily flows for the
reporting period for the discharge reported in subsection (A)1.(d) of this
section except that the city may require more detailed reporting of flows. At
the discretion of the city and in consideration of such factors as local high
or low flow rates, holidays, budget cycles and the like, the Director of Public
Works may agree to alter the months during which the above reports are to be
submitted.
         (b)   Where the city has imposed mass limitations on industrial users
as provided for by 40 C.F.R. § 403.6(d), the report required by subsection
(A)3.(a) of this section shall indicate the mass of pollutants by pretreatment
standards in the discharge from the industrial user.
         (c)   For industrial users subject to equivalent mass or concentration
limits established by the city in accordance with the procedures in 40 C.F.R. §
403.6(c), the report required by subsection (A)3.(a) of this section shall
contain a reasonable measure of the user’s long term production rate. For all
other industrial users subject to categorical pretreatment standards expressed
only in terms of allowable pollutant discharge per unit of production (or other
measure of operation), the report required by subsection (A)3.(a) of this
section shall include the user’s actual average production rate for the
reporting period.
         (d)   All compliance reports must be signed and certified in
accordance with §
9-6-17(B)2 of this chapter.
   (B)   Reporting requirements for significant industrial users not subject to
categorical pretreatment standards.
      1.   The Director of Public Works shall require appropriate periodic
reporting from those significant industrial users that are not subject to
categorical pretreatment standards at least once every six months (on dates
specified by the Director of Public Works). Such periodic reporting shall
include a description of the nature, concentration and flow of the pollutants
required to be reported by the city. These reports shall be based on sampling
and analysis performed in the period covered by the report, and performed in
accordance with §
9-6-18(B) and (C) of this chapter.
      2.   This sampling and analysis may be performed by the city in lieu of
the significant noncategorical industrial user. Where the POTW itself collects
all the information required for the report, the noncategorical SIU will not be
required to submit the report.
   (C)   Notice of violation; resampling requirement. If sampling performed by
an industrial user indicates a violation, the user shall notify the city within
two hours of becoming aware of the violation. The user shall also repeat the
sampling and analysis and submit the results of the repeat analysis to the city
within 30 days after becoming aware of the violation, except the industrial
user is not required to resample if:
      1.   The city performs sampling at the industrial user’s facility at a
frequency of at least once per month; or
      2.   The city performs sampling at the industrial user’s facility between
the time when the industrial user performs its initial sampling and the time
when the industrial user receives the results of this sampling.
   (D)   Notice of potential problems, including slug discharge. In the case of
any discharge, including, but not limited to, accidental discharges, discharges
of a nonroutine, episodic nature, a noncustomary batch discharge, or a slug
load, that may cause operational problems or damage to the POTW, the industrial
user shall notify the POTW immediately by telephone, followed with a written
notification. Said written notification identifying the reasons for the
discharge and the procedures taken or to be taken to eliminate the discharge
and eliminate the chance of any reoccurrence thereof, shall be submitted to the
city within five days of the occurrence.
   (E)   Report of changed conditions. Each user must notify the city of any
planned significant changes to the user’s operations or systems which might
alter the nature, quality, or volume of its wastewater, at least 90 days before
the change. The user may be required to submit an industrial wastewater
discharge permit application, or an application for an amended permit, in
accordance with §
9-6-16 of this chapter.
   (F)   Notice of discharge of hazardous wastes.
      1.   Every industrial user shall notify the city, the EPA Regional Waste
Management Division Director, and state hazardous waste authorities in writing
of any discharge into the POTW of a substance, which, if otherwise disposed of,
would be a hazardous waste under 40 C.F.R. part 261, or Cal. Code of
Regulations Title 22. Such notification must include the name of the hazardous
waste as set forth in 40 C.F.R. part 261, the EPA hazardous waste number and
the type of discharge (continuous, batch or other). If the industrial user
discharges more than ten kilograms of such waste per calendar month to the
POTW, the notification shall also contain the following information:
         (a)   An identification of the hazardous constituents contained in the
wastes;
         (b)   An estimation of the mass and concentration of such constituents
contained in the wastes;
         (c)   An estimation of the mass and concentration of such constituents
in the waste stream discharged during that calendar month; and
         (d)   (1)   An estimation of the mass of constituents in the waste
stream expected to be discharged during the following 12 months. All
notifications must take place within ten days after the discharge commences.
Any notification under this subsection (F) need be submitted only once for each
hazardous waste discharged.
            (2)   However, notifications of changed discharges must be
submitted under subsection (E) of this section. The notification requirement in
this section does not apply to pollutants already reported under the self-
monitoring requirements of §
9-6-18 of this chapter and subsections (A) and (B) of this section.
      2.   In the case of any new regulations under § 3001 of RCRA, being 42
U.S.C. § 6921, identifying additional characteristics of hazardous waste or
listing any additional substance as a hazardous waste, the industrial user
shall notify the city, the EPA Regional Waste Management Waste Division
Director, and state hazardous waste authorities of the discharge of such
substance within 30 days of the effective date of such regulations.
      3.   In the case of any notification made under this section, the
industrial user shall certify that it has a program in place to reduce the
volume and toxicity of hazardous wastes generated to the degree it has been
determined to be economically practical.
(Ord. 497, passed 6-20-2000)
§ 9-6-20 DISCREPANCIES BETWEEN ACTUAL AND REPORTED DISCHARGE QUANTITIES.
   (A)   Should measurements or other investigations reveal that the industrial
user is discharging a flow rate, or a quantity of flow, or concentration for
any regulated constituent in excess of that stated on the industrial wastewater
discharge permit or in excess of the quantities reported to the city by the
industrial user and upon which the permit is based, the industrial user shall
apply for an amended permit and shall be assessed for all delinquent charges
together with the penalty and interest provided for in this chapter or in the
industrial wastewater discharge permit issued to the industrial user.
   (B)   1.   For the purpose of establishing the correct treatment service
charge, as required by the city’s service charge schedule, the data obtained in
these samplings along with any other relevant information obtained by the city
or presented by the industrial user, shall be used by the waste disposal
manager in determining the quantity parameters for use in the service charge
formula.
      2.   An industrial user found in violation shall, in the absence of other
evidence, be presumed to have been discharging at the determined parameter
values over the preceding three years or subsequent to the previous city
verification of quantity parameters, whichever period is shorter.
(Ord. 497, passed 6-20-2000)
§ 9-6-21 RESTRICTIONS OR REFUSAL OF SERVICE.
   (A)   The Director of Public Works determines that, if sewer capacity is not
available, the city may require the industrial user to restrict its discharge
until sufficient capacity can be made available.
   (B)   The city may refuse service to persons locating facilities in areas
where their proposed quantity or quality of industrial wastewater is
unacceptable in the available POTW.
(Ord. 497, passed 6-20-2000)
§ 9-6-22 SEPARATION OF DOMESTIC AND INDUSTRIAL WASTEWATERS.
   All domestic wastewaters from restrooms, showers, drinking fountains and the
like, shall be kept separate from all industrial wastewaters until the
industrial wastewaters have passed through any required pretreatment system or
device and the industrial wastewater monitoring facility or station.
(Ord. 497, passed 6-20-2000)
§ 9-6-23 ADMISSION OF WASTES INTO STORM SEWERS.
   (A)   Industrial cooling waters, blow down from cooling towers or
evaporative coolers, wash water wastes, or waters which are odorless, stable
and free from deleterious chemicals, may be discharged into storm sewers or
stormwater channels if the sewers are accessible and after approval of such
discharge by the Director of Public Works. For the purposes of this section,
any industrial wastewaters, waters or liquids containing less than 25 parts per
million BOD, or which meet the most recent requirement for secondary treatment
as defined by the State Water Resources Control Board, shall be deemed stable.
   (B)   The admission of such waters into the public storm sewers shall be
limited to unpolluted wastewaters provided such discharge does not violate any
provision of this chapter and provided such discharge meets all federal or
state laws and regulations which may be applicable to such discharge.
(Ord. 497, passed 6-20-2000)
§ 9-6-24 PARAMETERS ESTABLISHING INDUSTRIAL SERVICE CHARGES.
   The Director of Public Works may classify industrial users to establish an
industrial wastewater treatment service charge based upon average flow quality
and flow quantity adjusted by some commonly recognized parameter selected by
the Director of Public Works that establishes the relative size of the
industrial user being charged.
(Ord. 497, passed 6-20-2000)
§ 9-6-25 SERVICE CHARGES.
   (A)   Purpose.
      1.   The costs of operation, maintenance, debt service, equipment
replacement and any and all other costs of administration of the city
wastewater collection, treatment and disposal system shall be levied against
all users thereof in proportion to the quantity and quality of the discharge.
Such charges shall be calculated according to the regulations of the State
Water Resources Control Board (SWRCB) and shall be adopted by resolution of the
Council. Separate charges shall be established for storm sewer users.
      2.   All users shall be assigned to a classification based on the user’s
principal activity and typical wastewater constituents and characteristics. The
purpose of such classification is to facilitate the regulation of wastewater
discharges, to provide an effective means of source control and to establish a
system of user charges and fees that ensure the equitable distribution of costs
among all users. The system of charges to be established, in accordance with
the requirements of the act and the state clean water grant program shall
provide for the following items:
         (a)   Sufficient financing for an adequate operation and maintenance
program, including competent operating personnel;
         (b)   Funds to be reserved for necessary future replacement,
improvements, and expansions of the facilities; and
         (c)   The city shall adopt a schedule of charges and fees by
resolution to include:
            (1)   Sewer service charges;
            (2)   Storm sewer charges;
            (3)   Septage charges;
            (4)   Other user charges;
            (5)   Connection fees;
            (6)   Fees for monitoring; and
            (7)   Fees for permit applications.
         (d)   The schedule may be amended at any time by resolution of the
Council to reflect increases or decreases in costs.
   (B)   Sewer service charges. The structure of the charges shall be as
follows:
      1.   Single-family dwellings, multi-family dwellings and duplexes,
metered or unmetered, shall pay a flat rate sewer charge per family dwelling
unit;
      2.   Mobilehome parks; motels; public institutions; fraternal lodges;
hospitals; nursing homes; churches; restaurants; service stations; automotive
centers; car washes; retail commercial and professional buildings; laundromats;
supermarkets; grocery stores; mortuaries; and other users which shall be
designated by the Director of Public Works shall pay a user charge based on
metered water flow to the premises;
      3.   Schools shall pay a flat monthly sewer service charge based on the
average daily attendance (ADA);
      4.   All POTW users (with the exception of flat rate users) which have
unmetered water supplies shall install meters approved by the Director of
Public Works. Sewer service charges shall be levied based on the metered water
flow. The Director of Public Works, at his or her option, may estimate water
usage and set equitable charges accordingly;
      5.   Industrial users shall pay a sewer service charge based on separate
rates established for volume, mass BOD and mass suspended solids (SS)
discharged;
      6.   The city shall have the option of charging users on the basis of the
volume of wastewaters discharged into the wastewater collection and treatment
system rather than the volume of water used. In such event, the charge for such
volume shall be established by the Director of Public Works; and
      7.   A sewer service charge shall be established by the Director of
Public Works for user classes which have not been listed on the resolution
establishing the rate schedule for each class of user.
   (C)   Storm sewer charges. A charge rate based on the volume of discharge
for approved discharges of other than stormwater to the storm sewer shall be
set by resolution of the Council.
   (D)   Septage receiving station charges.
      1.   A service charge shall be established by the Council for discharging
septage at the septage receiving station.
      2.   The Director of Public Works shall have the authority to establish
additional charges for septage or other wastes discharged at the septage
receiving station which exceed average discharge values of BOD and suspended
solids (SS) concentrations discharged at the septage receiving station by 200%.
   (E)   Inapplicable measurements. For those users of the city wastewater
collection, treatment and disposal system for which the amount of water used is
not an adequate measure of the amount of wastewater disposal into the city
sewer system, the Director of Public Works shall have the authority to
establish a sewer service charge based upon the amount and strength of the
wastewaters discharged by the user.
   (F)   Sewer connection charges.
      1.   A sewer connection fee shall be charged by the city to all customers
connecting to the city sewers. The connection fees shall be used to pay the
capital costs of the city wastewater collection, treatment and disposal system
and, where applicable, recover the costs of constructing sewer mains and
service connections.
      2.   There shall be charged and collected by the city from any person
requesting or making such connection, upon or prior to the issuance of any
permit for a sewer connection or the addition of any fixture units, or for any
increase in permitted discharge strength or volume, a connection fee as
established by the Council.
      3.   Sewer connection charges shall be established by separate Council
resolution and shall be based on the volume discharged and standard strength
residential wastewater concentrations of 200 milligrams per liter for BOD and
200 milligrams per liter TSS. Payment schedules for industrial discharges shall
be established in the industrial wastewater discharge permit and based on
connection charges established by separate Council resolution. (See §9-6-9 of
this chapter for other information.)
(Ord. 497, passed 6-20-2000)
§ 9-6-26 STORM DRAINAGE CHARGES.
   (A)   Outside the original city limits.
      1.   Any person outside the city, who increases the runoff from a lot or
a subdivision by reason of his or her development or use of the land, shall be
required to pay a charge per single-family lot. Charges per single-family lot
and per acre will be set by resolution of the Council.
      2.   (a)   For other than single-family, the charge per acre, based on a
“C” factor of thirty five hundredths used in the rational method formula
described in the ASCE Manual of Practice No. 37, Chapter 4, shall be as set by
resolution of the Council.
         (b)   Any development or use of land producing a runoff factor greater
than thirty five hundredths coefficient shall pay an increased charge in direct
proportion to the increase of the coefficient as determined by the Director of
Public Works, based on the table of average coefficients listed in Chapter 4 of
the ASCE Manual of Practice No. 37.
      3.   Any person who furnishes his or her own disposal of drainage water
from a development without the need for city facilities will not be subject to
a drainage charge.
   (B)   Inside the original city limits. Any person inside the city, who
increases the runoff from a lot or a subdivision by reason of his or her
development or redevelopment of the land which raises the runoff coefficient
above the thirty five hundredths “C” factor of the rational method formula,
shall pay a charge equal to one-half the amount set forth in subsection (A) of
this section.
(Ord. 497, passed 6-20-2000)
§ 9-6-27 ENFORCEMENT.
   (A)   Collections.
      1.   Sewer service charges, permit application charges, connection fees,
septage charges, monitoring charges, storm drainage charges and other charges
identified in this chapter shall be collected by the Director of Finance.
      2.   Flat rate sewer service charges shall be paid monthly with other
city utility bills. All sewer service charges shall be earned as of the day of
each month of service, regardless of the date of the termination of sewer
service, and no rebates shall be made for mid month disconnections.
      3.   Sewer service charges based on metered water use and student average
daily attendance (ADA) shall be billed monthly with other city utility bills
following the month of use.
      4.   All other fees and charges not listed in subsections (A)2. and (A)3.
of this section shall be paid as set forth in this chapter. Fees and charges
not requiring prepayment or payment at the time of issuance shall be included
on the following monthly city utility bill to the customer, except for
industrial user connection fees, as described in §
9-6-25(F)4. of this chapter.
   (B)   Delinquencies.
      1.   Penalty fees.
         (a)   In the event any customer shall fail to pay the sewer service
charges, connection fees, monitoring fees, and other required charges and fees
by the twenty-fifth of the month following the presentation of a bill by the
city therefor, a basic penalty for the late payment in the amount of 10% shall
be added to such bill, and the Director of Finance shall collect such penalty
in addition to the delinquent charge.
         (b)   In the event a customer fails to pay the storm sewer charges and
storm drainage charges by the fifteenth of the month following presentation of
a bill by the city therefor, a basic penalty for late payment in the amount of
10% shall be added to such bill and collected as described in this subsection.
         (c)   After assessing the basic penalty, thereafter an additional
penalty of 0.5% per month shall be added to all delinquent charges and basic
penalties remaining unpaid, until the City Council requests the City Finance
Director (or equivalent) to lien the amount of all delinquencies against the
appropriate premises as set forth below.
      2.   Discontinuance of service. In the event customers shall fail to pay
any charges or fees described in this chapter, including any penalty, fees and
fines associated with violation of the discharge parameters identified in an
industrial wastewater discharge permit, by the fifteenth day of the second
month following the presentation of a bill therefor, the city, in addition to
all other remedies it may have, may discontinue furnishing sewer service and
shall not resume the same until all charges, together with any service charge
or connection fee necessitated by the resumption of sewer service, have been
fully paid.
      3.   Court action. In addition to the remedies set forth in subsection
(B)2. of this section, at the option of the city, the city may file a civil
action against the customer for the collection of any amounts due and unpaid.
Such remedy shall be cumulative and in addition to any other remedy provided in
this chapter.
      4.   Notices of liens. In the event the customer or premises shall be
three months delinquent in the payment of any charges and fees included in this
chapter, the city shall notify the owner of the real property of such
delinquency in writing and shall further notify such owner that the delinquency
shall be subject to collection pursuant to the provisions of subsection (B)5.
of this section.
      5.   Lien proceedings. All unpaid accounts at any premises shall
constitute a lien against the same and shall be subject to collection all as
provided by the Revenue Bond Law of 1941 as found in Cal. Gov’t Code Title 5,
Division 2, Part 1, Chapter 6.
      6.   Restoration of service. Water or sewer service shall not be restored
until all charges, including the expense of removal, closing and restoration,
shall have been paid.
      7.   Ownership and occupancy. Change of ownership or occupancy of
premises found delinquent shall not be cause for reducing or eliminating the
penalties set forth in this section.
(Ord. 497, passed 6-20-2000; Ord. 584, passed 8-4-2009)
§ 9-6-28 SEWER MAIN EXTENSIONS.
   (A)   The service applicant in each instance will be responsible for
constructing any needed sewer main, except that in special cases the Council
may authorize the construction of mains by the city.
   (B)   All such main extensions shall be constructed and tested in accordance
with city approved engineering designs and city specifications.
(Ord. 497, passed 6-20-2000)
§ 9-6-29 REFUND AGREEMENTS.
   (A)   Lateral connections. The City Council will approve refund agreements
to applicants who construct sewer mains which directly serve off site
properties. Such refunds will be made from service connection charges for
connections to the sewer main constructed by the applicant. The city will
require a connection charge in accordance with the rate schedule adopted by the
Council. The portion of the connection charge which will be distributed in the
refund agreement shall be adopted through a development agreement.
   (B)   Sewer main construction other than oversizing.
      1.   The Council will approve the payment of refunds to the applicant by
the city based on a front foot charge, not to exceed one-half of the original
cost to the applicant, where the applicant’s sewer main benefits other property
owners facing the subject line.
      2.   Again, approval of the amount of distribution in the refund
agreement shall be adopted through a development agreement.
   (C)   Repayment limitations.
      1.   The total repayment by the city to the applicant for:
         (a)   Lateral connections; and
         (b)   Sewer main construction other than oversizing shall not exceed
the original cost of the main construction by the applicant.
      2.   No reimbursement will be allowed for either up line or lateral main
extensions financed by the city or by others.
   (D)   Sanitary sewer lift stations. The Council must approve the payment of
refunds by the city to the applicant for the construction of sanitary sewer
lift stations. Such refunds shall be based on the percentage of the original
cost of the station charged to subsequent developers as determined by the
capacity of the station and a predetermined area of benefit as approved by the
Director of Public Works.
   (E)   Application of refund agreements. This section shall apply to new
tentative maps and existing tentative map time extensions filed and approved
after March 8, 1996. All refund agreements will be adopted through a
development agreement.
(Ord. 497, passed 6-20-2000)
§ 9-6-30 OVERSIZED LINES.
   When an applicant is required by the city to construct an oversized sewer
line, the city shall pay directly to the installing applicant or developer the
cost of the oversizing. Such payment will be made from connection fees received
by the city for lateral connections to the sewer, including the connection fees
of the applicant. Only sewers larger than six inches internal diameter shall be
considered oversized; however, if the new development requires a sewer line
larger than six inches for its own purposes, then oversizing will be considered
to be a size requirement larger than that needed to serve the development. The
Director of Public Works is empowered to make the determination as to how much,
if any, oversizing is required and is also empowered to determine the
difference in cost between the actual installation and the average cost of a
six inch (or larger) sewer line. The findings of the Director of Public Works
shall be conclusive.
(Ord. 497, passed 6-20-2000)
§ 9-6-31 OWNERSHIP OF SEWERS.
   Laterals on private property belong to the property owner. All sewers in
public streets, alleys and roads, except the lateral serving an individual
property, shall become the property of the city when the construction is
completed and accepted. Privately owned community systems serving more than one
parcel of property shall be prohibited.
(Ord. 497, passed 6-20-2000)
§ 9-6-32 MAINTENANCE.
   The property owner shall be responsible for the maintenance of the complete
lateral connection to the street sewer main, including the portion of such
lateral placed in the public right-of-way or easement. The city will maintain
all sewer mains, pump stations and treatment facilities.
(Ord. 497, passed 6-20-2000)
§ 9-6-33 DISCHARGES FROM SWIMMING POOLS.
   Backwash water from swimming pool filters shall not be connected to and
discharged into the city’s sanitary sewer system. Pool water may be drained or
pumped into either the storm sewer or gutters that drain to the storm sewer
provided the rate does not exceed 100 gallons per minute. Permission from the
Director of Public Works shall be obtained before draining or pumping to the
street gutters.
(Ord. 497, passed 6-20-2000)
§ 9-6-34 ENFORCEMENT OFFICIALS; AUTHORITY.
   The Director of Public Works is charged with the duty of enforcing this
chapter with the exception of the collection of funds. The Finance Director is
charged with the duty of enforcing all matters pertaining to fund collection.
(Ord. 497, passed 6-20-2000)
§ 9-6-35 DISPOSITION OF REVENUES.
   (A)   Wastewater Capital Improvement Fund. A special fund to be known as the
Wastewater Capital Improvement Fund is hereby established. All funds collected
for sewer connection fees and other related income shall be deposited in said
Fund. Said Fund shall be used exclusively for the payment of debt service, and
for construction, rebuilding and repair of the wastewater treatment plant and
sanitary sewers.
   (B)   Wastewater Operation Fund. A special fund to be known as the
Wastewater Operation Fund is hereby established. All funds collected for sewer
service charges, sewer permits, sewer rental, income from the rental of the
sewer farm, sale of treated effluent, septage charges, monitoring fees and
other related income shall be deposited in said Fund. Said Fund shall be used
exclusively for the payment of maintenance, operation, construction,
rebuilding, repair and debt service for the wastewater treatment plant and
sanitary sewers.
   (C)   Storm Drainage Fund. A special fund to be known as the Storm Drainage
Fund is hereby established. All funds collected for connection to existing
storm drains, storm drainage service fees and other related income shall be
deposited in said Fund. Said Fund shall be used exclusively for the payment of
storm sewer maintenance, operation, construction, rebuilding, repair and debt
service for the storm drainage collection and disposal service.
(Ord. 497, passed 6-20-2000)
§ 9-6-36 PUBLICATION OF SIGNIFICANT INDUSTRIAL USERS (SIUS) IN NONCOMPLIANCE.
   The Director of Public Works shall publish annually, in a newspaper of
general circulation in the city, a list of the SIUs which, during the previous
12 months, were in significant noncompliance with applicable pretreatment
standards and requirements. The term SIGNIFICANT NONCOMPLIANCE shall mean:
   (A)   Chronic violations of SIU permit limits, defined here as those in
which 66% or more of wastewater measurements taken during a six-month period
exceed the daily maximum limit or average limit for the same pollutant
parameter by any amount;
   (B)   Technical review criteria (TRC) violations, defined here as those in
which 33% or more of wastewater measurements taken for each pollutant parameter
during a six-month period equals or exceeds the product of the daily maximum
limit or the average limit multiplied by the applicable TRC (TRC = 1.4 for BOD,
TSS, fats, oils and grease, and 1.2 for all other pollutants except pH);
   (C)   Any other discharge violation that the Director of Public Works
believes has caused, alone or in combination with other discharges,
interference or pass-through, including endangering the health of POTW
personnel or the general public;
   (D)   Any discharge of pollutants that has caused imminent endangerment to
the public or the environment, or has resulted in the Director of Public Works’
exercise of its emergency authority to halt or prevent such a discharge;
   (E)   Failure to meet, within 90 days of the scheduled date, a compliance
schedule milestone contained in an SIU permit or enforcement order for starting
construction, completing construction, or attaining final compliance;
   (F)   Failure to provide within 30 days after the due date, any required
reports, including base line monitoring reports, reports on compliance with
categorical pretreatment standard deadlines, periodic self-monitoring reports,
and reports on compliance with compliance schedules;
   (G)   Failure to accurately report noncompliance; or
   (H)   Any other violation(s) which the Director of Public Works determines
does adversely affect the operation or implementation of the local pretreatment
program.
(Ord. 497, passed 6-20-2000)
§ 9-6-37 VIOLATION; PENALTY.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person to violate any provision of this
chapter.
   (B)   Any violation of the provisions herein shall constitute an infraction
and, upon conviction, shall be punishable in accordance with the Cal. Gov’t
Code § 36900(b).
   (C)   A person violating any provision of this chapter shall be guilty of a
separate offense for each and every day or during any portion of which any
violation of any provision of this chapter continues.
(Ord. 497, passed 6-20-2000)
§ 9-6-38 CIVIL PENALTIES.
   (A)   The city may impose civil penalties upon any industrial user who
violates any provision of this chapter. Civil penalties shall, at the city’s
option, be in an amount not to exceed $10,000 per day for each violation. The
purpose for issuing civil penalties under this chapter is to punish negligent
or willful misconduct, discourage future violations from occurring, encouraging
corrective actions and punishing repeat violators.
   (B)   Civil penalties the city may impose are as follows:
      1.   An amount which shall not exceed $1,000 for each day for failing or
refusing to furnish technical or monitoring reports;
      2.   An amount not to exceed $2,000 for each day for failing or refusing
to comply in a timely manner with any compliance schedule established by the
Director of Public Works;
      3.   An amount which shall not exceed $5,000 per violation for each day
for discharges in violation of any provision of this chapter, wastewater
discharge limitation, permit condition, or requirement issued, reissued or
adopted by the city; and
      4.   An amount which shall not exceed $10,000 per day for discharges in
violation of any suspension, cease and desist order or other orders, or
prohibition issued, reissued or adopted by the Director of Public Works.
(Ord. 497, passed 6-20-2000)
§ 9-6-39 NOTICE OF VIOLATION.
   (A)   Notice. Upon the determination by the Director of Public Works that
any person is in violation of:
      1.   Any provision of this chapter or order issued hereunder;
      2.   An industrial wastewater discharge permit; or
      3.   Any other pretreatment standard or requirement of the city, or is
found to have improperly used or maintained or discharged into the sewer, such
person shall be served by the Director of Public Works with a written notice of
violation. The notice shall describe the time, place and circumstances of each
violation charged, the amount of penalty imposed by the Director of Public
Works for each violation and the corrective measures the industrial user is
required to undertake as a condition of continuation of the industrial user’s
right to discharge into the sewer. The Director of Public Works shall have the
discretionary authority to decline to issue a notice of violation in cases
where violations are insignificantly technical in nature and the public
interest would not be served by proceeding with formal enforcement action. The
Director of Public Works shall keep a record of all such discretionary
determinations.
   (B)   Payment of penalty. The industrial user shall pay the penalty and
complete corrective action described in the notice of violation or shall
identify in writing a proposed arrangement for payment of the penalty and the
corrective action to be taken. Payment shall be made or a plan for payment and
corrective action shall be made and completed not later than 30 days after
service upon the industrial user of the notice of violation. Should the
industrial user fail to take such action within said 30 day period, the
Director of Public Works may issue an order directing the industrial user to
cease and desist discharging into the sewer until payment of penalties are made
or an arrangement for payment of penalties is presented and approved by the
Director of Public Works, and all corrective action is taken or a plan for
corrective action is submitted and approved by the Director of Public Works.
Service of the notice of violation shall be by personal service or registered
mail.
   (C)   Termination of sewer service. Notwithstanding the provisions of §
9-6-17 of this chapter, in the event an industrial user shall fail to comply
with the provisions of subsection (B) of this section, as required, the
Director of Public Works shall take such action as may be necessary to ensure
that the industrial user complies with the provisions of this section
including, without limitation, suspension of an industrial user’s industrial
wastewater discharge permit and physically blocking the industrial user’s
access to the sewer system. All such measures shall remain in effect until the
industrial user has complied with the provisions of this chapter.
(Ord. 497, passed 6-20-2000)
§ 9-6-40 CEASE AND DESIST ORDERS.
   In addition to or as an alternative to the issuance of a notice of
violation, if the Director of Public Works finds that an industrial user has
violated, or continues to violate, any provision of this chapter, an industrial
wastewater discharge permit or order issued, or any other pretreatment standard
or requirement, or that the industrial user’s past violations are likely to
recur, the Director of Public Works may issue an order to the industrial user
directing the industrial user to cease and desist all such violations and
directing the industrial user to immediately comply with all requirements and
take such appropriate remedial or preventive actions as identified in the cease
and desist order to properly address a continuing or threatened violation,
including halting operations and/or terminating the discharge.
(Ord. 497, passed 6-20-2000)
§ 9-6-41 APPEAL.
   Any person affected by any decision, action or determination by the Director
of Public Works, interpreting or implementing the provisions of this chapter,
including, without limitation, the provisions of this chapter, or any
industrial wastewater discharge permit issued hereunder by the city, may file
with the City Clerk, within ten days of the date of service of such decision,
action or determination, a notice of appeal to the City Council appealing such
decision, action or determination by the Director of Public Works. The notice
of appeal shall set forth in detail all facts supporting the industrial user’s
appeal of the decision of the Director of Public Works. The filing of the
notice of appeal shall stay all further action required under any notice of
violation or cease and desist orders and accumulation of interest upon
penalties thereon, pending final decision by the City Council on the appeal;
provided, however, that nothing stated herein shall limit the authority of the
Director of Public Works to take such action or to make such directives as the
Director of Public Works deems necessary to stop or prevent an ongoing or
threatened violation of any of the provisions of this chapter including,
actions or directives to prevent or stop:
   (A)   Threatened damage to the POTW, the sewer or the wastewater treatment
plant;
   (B)   A pass-through; or
   (C)   Threatened harm to the health or safety of the public. Such action
shall include, without limitation, continuing to physically block the
industrial user’s access to the sewer until the appeal is heard and decided by
the City Council.
(Ord. 497, passed 6-20-2000)
§ 9-6-42 AUTHORITY OF CITY COUNCIL.
   Upon an appeal brought to the City Council by the notice of appeal, the City
Council shall set the matter for hearing and after said hearing may affirm,
overrule or modify the decision, action or determination of the Director of
Public Works which is the subject of the appeal. The City Council shall have
the further authority to condition any penalties imposed or the corrective
action required or to reduce or increase the penalties imposed by the Director
of Public Works. Failure of the industrial user to comply with the City
Council’s decision or to make arrangements for compliance satisfactory to the
Director of Public Works within ten days of the date of the City Council’s
decision shall result in the termination of the industrial user’s right to
discharge into the sewer. If the industrial user is discharging pursuant to an
industrial wastewater discharge permit, such inaction shall result in the
termination of the industrial user’s permit. The Director of Public Works shall
thereupon order physical termination of the service forthwith which service
shall not be resumed until the industrial user fully complies with the City
Council’s decision.
(Ord. 497, passed 6-20-2000)
§ 9-6-43 LIEN.
   The amount of civil penalties imposed under §
9-6-38 of this chapter which have remained delinquent for a period of 30 days
shall constitute a lien against the real property of the person subject to the
penalty from which the discharge originated. After being recorded with the
County Recorder, said lien will be in effect for a period of ten years unless
sooner released and shall be renewable in accordance with the provisions of
Cal. Code of Civil Procedure §§ 683.110 to 683.220, inclusive.
(Ord. 497, passed 6-20-2000)
§ 9-6-44 SUPERIOR COURT ACTION.
   The City Council may, at its option, elect to petition the Superior Court of
Merced County to confirm any order establishing civil penalties and enter
judgment in conformity therewith in accordance with the provisions of Cal. Code
of Civil Procedure §§ 1285 through 1297.6, inclusive.
(Ord. 497, passed 6-20-2000)
§ 9-6-45 INJUNCTION.
   Whenever a discharge of wastewater is in violation of any provision of this
chapter or order issued hereunder or any industrial wastewater discharge
permit, or any other pretreatment standard or requirement of the city, or
otherwise causes or threatens to cause interference or pass-through to the
POTW, the city may petition the Superior Court of Merced County for the
issuance of a preliminary and/or permanent injunction as may be appropriate for
the purpose of restraining the continuance of such discharge.
(Ord. 497, passed 6-20-2000)
§ 9-6-46 PUBLIC NUISANCE.
   In addition to any other remedy provided by law or inequity, including
revocation of permits or permanent disconnection, violation of any provisions
of this chapter or order issued hereunder, an industrial wastewater discharge
permit, or any other pretreatment standard or requirement of the city, the
continued operation of any facility in violation of this chapter is hereby
determined and declared to be a public nuisance and may be abated and enjoined
pursuant to state law. The city may cause proceedings to be brought for the
abatement and may recover reasonable attorney fees, court costs and other
expenses associated with such action.
(Ord. 497, passed 6-20-2000)
§ 9-6-47 ATTORNEY FEES.
   The city shall have the right to recover reasonable attorney fees, court
costs and other expenses associated with any and all of the enforcement
activities identified in this chapter including sampling and monitoring
expenses in addition to the amount assessed as damages to the city.
(Ord. 497, passed 6-20-2000)
§ 9-6-48 NONEXCLUSIVE REMEDIES.
   The enforcement procedures, penalties and remedies provided in this chapter
are not exclusive, but are in addition to any other enforcement procedures,
penalties and remedies that may be provided elsewhere in this chapter or by any
federal, state or local law, regulation or rule. In addition, the Director of
Public Works may pursue any, all or any combination of these enforcement
procedures, penalties and remedies against any person who violates any
provision of this chapter.
(Ord. 497, passed 6-20-2000)
CHAPTER 7: CATV FRANCHISE
Editor’s note:
   This chapter was repealed by Ord. 618, passed 6-3-2014.
CHAPTER 8: CITY PARKS
Section
9-8-1 Park hours
9-8-2 Violation, penalty
9-8-3 Prohibiting glass beverage containers in all city parks
9-8-4 Parking restriction
§ 9-8-1 PARK HOURS.
   All city parks shall be closed during the hours of 10:00 p.m. to 6:00 a.m.
Specific exemptions may be granted by the Chief of Police by issuance of a
permit. There shall be no fee for such permit.
(Ord. 636, passed 12-4-2018)
§ 9-8-2 VIOLATION, PENALTY.
   Any person convicted of a violation of §
9-8-1 of this chapter is guilty of an infraction and shall be punished by:
   (A)   A fine not to exceed $50 for a first infraction;
   (B)   A fine not to exceed $100 for a second violation of this chapter
within one year; and
   (C)   A fine not to exceed $250 for each additional violation of the same
chapter within one year.
(Ord. 636, passed 12-4-2018)
§ 9-8-3 PROHIBITING GLASS BEVERAGE CONTAINERS IN ALL CITY PARKS.
   (A)   Prohibition. All types of glass beverage containers are prohibited in
all city parks. Prohibited glass containers shall include, but not be limited
to, glass containers of both alcoholic and nonalcoholic beverages and juices.
   (B)   Penalty. Any person violating any of the provisions of this section
shall be deemed guilty of an infraction and upon conviction thereof shall be
punished as provided in §
1-4-3(D) of this code.
(Ord. 636, passed 12-4-2018)
§ 9-8-4 PARKING RESTRICTION.
   (A)   Restriction. It shall be unlawful for any person to operate, stop,
park, or leave unattended any motor vehicle in any portion of city park
property or recreation areas during any time except in a space designated for
parking such objects, without prior written permission from the city. This
section shall not apply to city owned vehicles used for the maintenance and
upkeep of city park property or recreation areas, or any other power-driven
mobility device (“OPDMD”), as defined by the Code of Federal Regulations.
   (B)   Penalty. Any person violating any of the provisions of this section
shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof, shall be
punished as provided in §
1-4-3(C) of this code.
(Ord. 636, passed 12-4-2018)
CHAPTER 9: PARADES AND PROCESSIONS
Section
9-9-1 Permit required
9-9-2 Exceptions
9-9-3 Application for permit
9-9-4 Issuance of permit
9-9-5 Terms of permit
9-9-6 Notice of rejection
9-9-7 Appeal
9-9-8 Late applications
9-9-9 Interference with parade
9-9-10 Enforcement; penalty
§ 9-9-1 PERMIT REQUIRED.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to hold, manage, conduct, aid,
participate in, form, start or carry on, any parade, march, ceremony, show,
exhibition, pageant or procession of any kind or any other similar display, or
cause or permit the same upon any public right-of-way, including, but not
limited to, streets and sidewalks, alleys, parks or any other public grounds in
the city, unless there has first been obtained from the Chief of Police a
permit to do so, and said permit shall be carried by a person heading or
leading said activity.
(Ord. 287, passed 9-12-1985)
§ 9-9-2 EXCEPTIONS.
   The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to:
   (A)   Funeral processions;
   (B)   Students of the schools going to and from classes or when constituting
a part of their educational activities and under the immediate direction and
supervision of the proper school authorities; nor
   (C)   A governmental agency within the scope of its functions.
(Ord. 287, passed 9-12-1985)
§ 9-9-3 APPLICATION FOR PERMIT.
   Any person desiring to conduct or manage a parade shall, not less than ten
nor more than 30 days before the date on which it is proposed to conduct such
parade, file with the Chief of Police a verified application on a form
furnished by the Chief of Police, setting forth the following information:
   (A)   The name of the person or organization wishing to conduct such parade;
   (B)   If the parade is proposed to be conducted for, on behalf of, or by an
organization, the name, address and telephone number of the headquarters of the
organization and of the authorized and responsible head of such organization;
   (C)   The name, address and telephone number of the person who will be the
parade chairperson and will be responsible for its conduct;
   (D)   The name, address and telephone number of the person or organization
to whom the permit is desired to be issued;
   (E)   The date when such parade is to be conducted;
   (F)   The route to be traveled; and
   (G)   The time when such parade will start and terminate.
(Ord. 287, passed 9-12-1985)
§ 9-9-4 ISSUANCE OF PERMIT.
   (A)   Upon application made to the Chief of Police of the city and a
determination made by the Chief of Police that the parade will not unduly
disturb the convenience of the public, a permit to conduct such procession
shall be granted.
   (B)   In making the determination that the convenience of the public will
not be unduly disturbed by a procession, the Chief of Police shall consider the
following factors:
      1.   Time of the proposed procession;
      2.   Place of the proposed procession;
      3.   The manner in which the proposed procession is to be held; and
      4.   Other proper uses of the streets, such as construction or
maintenance or pedestrian traffic and construction or maintenance on the
streets involved in the proposed procession route.
(Ord. 287, passed 9-12-1985)
§ 9-9-5 TERMS OF PERMIT.
   The permit to be issued by the Chief of Police shall prescribe the
following:
   (A)   The name of the person or organization wishing to conduct such parade;
   (B)   If the parade is proposed to be conducted for on behalf of, or by an
organization, the name, address and telephone number of the headquarters of the
organization, and of the authorized and responsible head of such organization;
   (C)   The name, address and telephone number of the person who will be the
parade chairperson and will be responsible for its conduct;
   (D)   The name, address and telephone number of the person or organization
to whom the permit is desired to be issued;
   (E)   The date when such parade is to be conducted; and
   (F)   The route to be traveled, selecting from among one of the following
routes:
      1.   Third Street route between Highway 99 and Park;
      2.   Peach Street route: Park to Third, Third to Peach, Peach to Eighth,
Eighth to D, D to Seventh, Seventh to Front, Front to Third, Third to Park;
      3.   Hammett Avenue route: Third and Front to Peach, Peach to Hammett,
Hammett to F, F to Seventh, Seventh to Front, Front to Third; and
      4.   Over highway route: Park Street to Third Street, Third to
Livingston-Cressey, Livingston-Cressey to Davis Street, Davis Street to Hammett
Avenue, and return to Park Street over the same route.
(Ord. 287, passed 9-12-1985; Ord. 299, passed 5-6-1986)
§ 9-9-6 NOTICE OF REJECTION.
   The Chief of Police shall act upon the application for a parade permit
within two days after the filing thereof. If the Chief of Police disapproves
the application, he or she shall mail to the applicant within five days after
the date upon which the application was filed, a notice of his or her action,
stating the reasons for his or her denial of the permit. Such notice shall be
mailed to the applicant at his or her address given therein.
(Ord. 287, passed 9-12-1985)
§ 9-9-7 APPEAL.
   (A)   Any person who has been denied a permit by the Chief of Police may
appeal to the City Council.
   (B)   In the event any permit hereunder is denied by the City Council, the
city, acting by and through its City Attorney (or his or her designee) shall,
within five days following such denial, apply to the Superior Court of Merced
County, California, for a judicial determination as to whether the proposed
activities described in the application may be prohibited, naming the applicant
as a party defendant. The city shall exert every reasonable effort to have this
issue heard on its merits without delay, and as soon as legally possible. The
burden of showing that the proposed activities may be prohibited shall rest on
the city.
(Ord. 287, passed 9-12-1985)
§ 9-9-8 LATE APPLICATIONS.
   The Chief of Police shall have authority, in his or her discretion, to
consider any application for a permit to conduct a parade which is filed less
than 15 days before the date such parade is proposed to be conducted.
(Ord. 287, passed 9-12-1985)
§ 9-9-9 INTERFERENCE WITH PARADE.
   No person shall, without the consent of the permittee, join or participate
in a parade, nor in any manner interfere with its progress or orderly conduct.
(Ord. 287, passed 9-12-1985)
§ 9-9-10 ENFORCEMENT; PENALTY.
   Any person convicted of a violation of any section or provision of this
chapter where no other penalty is set forth is guilty of an infraction which is
punishable by:
   (A)   A fine of $50 for the first violation;
   (B)   A fine of $100 for a second violation during the same fiscal year; and
   (C)   A fine of $250 for each additional violation during the fiscal year.
(Ord. 287, passed 9-12-1985)
CHAPTER 10: GRAFFITI REMOVAL
Section
9-10-1 Intent
9-10-2 Findings
9-10-3 Definition
9-10-4 Graffiti prohibited
9-10-5 Determination of graffiti by city; notice to remove; removal
9-10-6 Removal of graffiti
9-10-7 Graffiti abatement
9-10-8 Collection of costs
9-10-9 Placement of graffiti prohibited
9-10-10 Penalty
9-10-11 Reward
§ 9-10-1 INTENT.
   It is the intent of the provisions of this chapter to provide an immediate
and practical method, to be cumulative with and in addition to any other remedy
available at law, whereby graffiti or other inscribed material may be removed
from permanent structures located on public or privately owned real property in
order to reduce blight and deterioration within the city.
(Ord. 394, passed 6-18-1991)
§ 9-10-2 FINDINGS.
   (A)   Graffiti constitutes an obnoxious public nuisance.
   (B)   The City Council finds that graffiti or other inscribed materials
placed upon any public or privately owned permanent structure located on public
or privately owned real property within the city if not removed, will add to
blight or downgrading of neighborhoods and will cause a lessening of property
values in the neighborhoods where graffiti is present. The City Council finds
that graffiti is obnoxious and is a public nuisance.
(Ord. 394, passed 6-18-1991)
§ 9-10-3 DEFINITION.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definition shall apply unless
the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   GRAFFITI. Any inscription, figure, drawing, verbal message, lettering or
symbolic message, whether in design or symbol, which can be viewed from a
public street, alley or public or private property, which has been scratched,
carved, or painted on the exterior of any real property or structure in public
or private ownership and which is not in compliance with the sign regulations
of the city’s zoning ordinance.
(Ord. 394, passed 6-18-1991)
§ 9-10-4 GRAFFITI PROHIBITED.
   No person owning or otherwise in control of any real property within the
city shall permit or allow any graffiti to be placed upon or remain on any
permanent structure located on such property when the graffiti is visible from
the street or other public or private property.
(Ord. 394, passed 6-18-1991)
§ 9-10-5 DETERMINATION OF GRAFFITI BY CITY; NOTICE TO REMOVE; REMOVAL.
   Whenever the City Manager or authorized representative determines that
graffiti exists on any structure in the city which is visible from the street
or other public or private property, the City Manager or authorized
representative shall immediately notify the owner(s) of such property, and may
notify the person(s) in possession or control of such property if different
from the owner(s), to remove or paint over the graffiti.
(Ord. 394, passed 6-18-1991)
§ 9-10-6 REMOVAL OF GRAFFITI.
   To facilitate the prompt removal of graffiti the city may appropriate money
from asset forfeiture proceeds to finance the removal of graffiti from public
or privately owned structures located on public or privately owned real
property within the city, subject to the following criteria:
   (A)   Only the graffiti itself shall be removed or painted over. Painting or
repair of a more extensive area is prohibited;
   (B)   Cleaning may be in blocks or strips where the graffiti appears and
that the cleaned or processed area may not match precisely and that some
residue of the existing graffiti may remain;
   (C)   Prior to the removal of graffiti the public entity having jurisdiction
over the structure, and, in the case of a privately owned structure, the owner
shall provide the city with an executed consent to enter and release of
liability;
   (D)   City shall request, but not require, a donation in the sum of $15 from
the property owner to defray the city’s cost of removing graffiti; and
   (E)   The graffiti is visible from the street or other public or private
property.
(Ord. 394, passed 6-18-1991)
§ 9-10-7 GRAFFITI ABATEMENT.
   (A)   Upon receipt of notice to remove graffiti the property owner(s) or
person(s) in possession or control of affected property if different from the
owner(s) shall remove graffiti or authorize the city’s removal of graffiti
within ten calendar days.
   (B)   The notice to remove and consent to enter and release of liability
shall be given by delivery of a written notice personally to the owner(s) of
the property upon which the graffiti is located, or by depositing such notice
in the United States mail, postage prepaid, and addressed to the owner(s)
thereof at the owner(s) last known address as the same appears on the last
equalized assessment roll of the county. In the event a notice to remove and
consent to enter and release of liability is also given to the person(s) in
possession or control of the property, such notice shall be given in either
manner specified in this section with respect to giving notice to the owner of
the property, and may be addressed to “occupant” or “to whom it may concern”,
if the name of such person(s) is not known.
   (C)   In the event the owner(s) of the property and/or person(s) in
possession or control of the property fail or refuse to remove the graffiti or
execute the consent to enter and release of liability within ten calendar days
the City Council at the earliest possible date shall hold a public hearing to
determine all protests and objections to the removal of the graffiti.
   (D)   If, after such public hearing the City Council shall determine that
the graffiti exists as defined in this chapter and orders its removal, such
removal shall be accomplished solely at the expense of the property owner(s)
and shall be accomplished by the property owner(s) or city forces within ten
calendar days of the completion of the City Council’s public hearing.
(Ord. 394, passed 6-18-1991)
§ 9-10-8 COLLECTION OF COSTS.
   If city forces remove graffiti because the property owner(s) fails or
refuses to abide by the City Council’s directive and such costs associated with
city cleanup are not paid, the Director of Finance shall have costs entered
upon the assessment roll under an appropriate head, to be collected at the same
time and in the same manner as ordinary municipal taxes are collected, and
shall be subject to the same penalties and the same procedure under foreclosure
for sale and in case of delinquency as provided for in ordinary municipal
taxes; or, if such costs are not paid, the Council may, at its option, by
resolution, order that all of the costs of removal, shall constitute liens upon
the property from which such removal was made, and direct the Director of
Finance to record a certified copy of such resolution in the office of the
Recorder of the County of Merced. The City Attorney shall thereupon proceed to
foreclose each of such liens and to collect all of the amounts owing to the
city in the manner provided by law.
(Ord. 394, passed 6-18-1991)
§ 9-10-9 PLACEMENT OF GRAFFITI PROHIBITED.
   No person shall place graffiti or other inscribed materials upon any public
or privately owned permanent structure located on public or privately owned
real property within the city when the graffiti is visible from the street or
other public or private property.
(Ord. 394, passed 6-18-1991)
§ 9-10-10 PENALTY.
   Any person engaged in defacing public and/or private property with graffiti
shall be referred to the County District Attorney for appropriate action.
Minors engaged in defacing public and/or private property shall be referred to
the County Probation Department for appropriate action.
(Ord. 394, passed 6-18-1991)
§ 9-10-11 REWARD.
   To assist in the apprehension and conviction of any individual(s) engaged in
defacing public and/or private property with graffiti the City Council
authorizes a reward of $100 for information leading to the arrest and
conviction of individual(s) engaged in defacing public and/or private property
with graffiti. Such reward shall be funded from asset forfeiture proceeds.
(Ord. 394, passed 6-18-1991)
CHAPTER 11: WATER EFFICIENT LANDSCAPING AND IRRIGATION
Section
9-11-1 Purpose and intent
9-11-2 Applicability
9-11-3 Standards of landscape design
9-11-4 Landscape plan specifications
9-11-5 Irrigation plan specifications
9-11-6 Inspection
9-11-7 Maintenance
9-11-8 Fees
9-11-9 Definitions
9-11-10 Validity
§ 9-11-1 PURPOSE AND INTENT.
   Landscaping under this chapter is intended to enhance the environmental
value and physical appearance of development in the city, improve the
environmental performance of development by reducing heat, glare and noise,
promote the percolation of stormwater, aid in improving air quality, buffer
potentially incompatible land uses from one another, promote the conservation
of water and preservation of water quality by requiring drought tolerant plant
material in landscaping and the retention of existing natural vegetation,
thereby reducing the need for irrigation, pesticides, herbicides and
fertilizers.
(Ord. 413, passed 1-5-1993)
§ 9-11-2 APPLICABILITY.
   Whenever landscaping or landscaping and irrigation plans are required by a
condition of approval of a development project, the following landscape and
irrigation system design and specifications shall apply. The city may require
landscape areas that exceed 10,000 square feet to conform with the water
conservation requirements in the state water efficient landscape ordinance.
(Ord. 413, passed 1-5-1993)
§ 9-11-3 STANDARDS OF LANDSCAPE DESIGN.
   (A)   Plan preparation. It is required that a licensed landscape architect
or licensed landscape contractor be employed in preparing the landscape and
irrigation plans. Prior to plan preparation, the Parks, Recreation and
Community Services Director should be contacted for street tree information.
   (B)   Plant materials. The selection of plant materials should include both
evergreen and deciduous trees, shrubs and attractive erosion preventing ground
cover. It is required that at least 90% of the plants selected in nonturf areas
be native or well suited to the climate of the region, be drought tolerant and
require minimal water once established in the landscape. Up to 10% of the
plants may be of nondrought tolerant variety as long as they are grouped
together and can be irrigated separately. Attention shall be given to the
function of the plants, their appearance, height, spread, growth rate, moisture
requirements, potential root damage, disease and pest susceptibility, climatic
adaptability, soil type, slope and degree of maintenance required.
   (C)   Plant coverage. Plants shall be properly spaced and sized that, when
mature, they will fulfill their designated function. Turf shall be limited to
30% of the total landscaped area. Shrubs shall be a minimum of one gallon in
size and trees shall be a minimum of 15 gallons. Although a reasonable number
of growing seasons will be allowed for full plant coverage to develop, interim
ground cover shall be provided during this period. Interim cover of surfacing
materials shall consist of rocks, gravel, wood mulch or chips or any other
acceptable material. Mulches must be a minimum of three inches when used as a
interim measure or in ground cover.
   (D)   Plant maintenance. Automated irrigation systems shall be provided to
assure efficient water use with a minimum of labor and water waste. Irrigation
controllers must have multiple cycle capabilities and rain sensing override
switches. Plant material must be maintained in a healthy condition. Unhealthy
plants shall be replaced. Planters shall be kept free of all weeds, debris and
trash.
   (E)   Planter construction. All planter areas shall provide positive
drainage away from paved areas. They shall have either a minimum six inch
raised concrete or treated wooden curb directly behind sidewalks and pavement
areas, or shall be recessed two inches below adjoining paved area with a
minimum four to one (4:1) slope away from paved edge to provide protection to
the landscaping and control water runoff, silt and erosion onto the pavement.
All planters constructed adjacent to buildings or structures shall be so
designed to avoid irrigation water intrusion into or on that adjacent building
or structure. The minimum width of a planter bed shall be 40 inches, with root
boxes required where trees are planted, measured from the inside of curbing or
acceptable permanent border.
   (F)   Compacted soils. Prior to the planting of any materials, the compacted
soils surrounding a building site shall be returned to a friable condition.
“Friable condition” is defined in §
9-11-9 of this chapter.
(Ord. 413, passed 1-5-1993)
§ 9-11-4 LANDSCAPE PLAN SPECIFICATIONS.
   (A)   Submittal of plans. Three copies of the landscape plan shall be
submitted for review and approval by the Parks, Recreation and Community
Services Director in accordance with the standards of landscape design set
forth in this chapter.
   (B)   Building elevation and site grading plans. One copy of all building
elevations and site grading plans or one copy of all building plans shall be
submitted together with the landscape plan. The building elevation and site
grading plans shall be in sufficient detail to permit determination of the
location, width and height of all doors and windows and roof overhangs on all
proposed buildings within or adjacent to proposed landscape areas.
   (C)   Size and scale. The landscape plans shall be legible and drawn to a
scale no smaller than one inch equals 20 feet. Maximum sheet size on all
drawings shall be 24 inches by 36 inches.
   (D)   Indication of important lines. The landscape plans shall indicate
property lines, important dimension lines, setback lines, walls and fences,
driveways, adjacent street, outline of all structures and adjacent land uses.
   (E)   Planting and soil details. The landscape plans shall indicate planting
details, preemergent soil treatment rates and materials.
   (F)   Soil tests. A soil test for horticultural suitability shall be
required to ascertain texture, infiltration rate, pH and soluble salts. The
results of soil tests shall be submitted with the landscape plan. Soils shall
be prepared and/or amended as appropriate.
   (G)   Mulching. A minimum of three inches of mulch shall be added in nonturf
areas to the soil surface after planting. Plant types that are intolerant of
mulch shall be excluded from this requirement.
   (H)   Sheet plastic. Sheet plastic and other nonporous material shall not be
placed under mulch.
   (I)   Turf areas.
      1.   The use of turf as a plant material will not be permitted in narrow
planter areas (less than ten feet in width), in traffic median strips, parking
strips, between curbs and sidewalks or on slopes that are in excess of three to
one (3:1).
      2.   On slopes exceeding 15%, a level buffer zone of 18 inches is
required between bermed turf areas and any hardscape (i.e., streets, walkways
and the like).
   (J)   Plant list required.
      1.   The landscape plans shall include a plant list giving the common and
botanical names of plants to be used, container size, spacing and quantities of
each group of plants. This plant list shall be arranged in legend form with a
key number assigned to each plant.
      2.   Each plant shall be identified by a key number on the plan. The size
of the plant, its spacing and the quantity to be used shall follow in the
legend, as the following example illustrates:
 
No. Botanical Name          Common Name        Size      Space  Quantity
1   Campanula isophylla     Italian bellflower Flat      6 in.  8
2   Eucalyptus polyanthemos Silver dollar gum  15 gallon 20 ft. 4
3   Pinus mugo mughus       Mugho pine         1 gallon  10 ft. 5
 
(Ord. 413, passed 1-5-1993)
§ 9-11-5 IRRIGATION PLAN SPECIFICATIONS.
   (A)   Submittal of plans; design considerations. Three copies of the
irrigation plans shall be submitted with the landscape plans to the Parks,
Recreation and Community Services Director for review and approval to ensure
adequate irrigation coverage and compliance with the plumbing code requirements
of the city. The irrigation system shall be designed with water conservation in
mind. Wind direction, surface drainage, soil type and application method shall
be considered.
   (B)   Points of connection.
      1.   The irrigation plan shall indicate the electrical power point of
connection, the water system point of connection and size, water pressure
available and maximum demand of the system in gallons per minute or gallons per
hour if appropriate.
      2.   Reclaimed water may also be used as an alternate irrigation water
source if it is supplied through a dual distribution system that conforms to
the Merced County Health Department standards.
   (C)   Equipment. Irrigation equipment specified must be identified by
manufacturer’s name and equipment identification number.
   (D)   Irrigation legend. Performance data for irrigation heads and emitters
including discharge rates, effective diameter and operating pressure shall be
listed in the irrigation legend.
   (E)   Location of valves, controllers and the like. All locations of
irrigation valves, controllers, hose bibs, quick coupler valves, sprinkler
heads and backflow prevention devices, valves, filters, pressure regulators,
emitters, rain switches and moisture sensors must be indicated.
   (F)   Irrigation details. Irrigation details must be provided to clarify
particular situations. Typical details should include backflow prevention
devices, valves, irrigation heads, emitters, filters, pressure regulators,
moisture sensors, rain switches, check valves, irrigation controllers and any
required enclosures. Manufacturer’s specification sheets may be substituted for
details.
   (G)   Sizing on lines. All irrigation lines must be sized.
   (H)   Piping. Schedule 40 PVC pipe is required under all paved areas. Piping
must be installed a minimum of 12 inches underground for nonpressure irrigation
lines and 18 inches underground for constant pressure irrigation lines. Emitter
distribution tubing may be located at grade.
   (I)   Water schedules. Irrigation watering schedules for the entire year
must be provided on irrigation drawings. These schedules will include an
establishment (first 12 months) and postestablishment period. Postestablishment
schedules will be divided into four quarters. Those quarters are winter,
spring, summer and fall.
   (J)   Design of system; irrigation devices.
      1.   The irrigation system must be designed by a licensed landscape
architect or licensed landscape contractor.
      2.   Pop up sprinklers in turf areas shall have minimum four inch pop up
height. Sprinkler coverage shall be 100%. Heads shall be placed at a maximum of
50% of the diameter of throw (head to head), unless specific justification is
provided for greater spacing. Sprinkler heads must have matched precipitation
rates within each control valve circuit.
      3.   Sprinklers and sprays shall not be used in areas less than eight
feet wide. Drip and bubblers that do not exceed one and one-half gallons per
minute per device shall be used.
      4.   Soil moisture sensing devices or rain sensing devices are required
on landscapes of 50,000 square feet or larger. Moisture sensing devices shall
be installed as shown on the plans or as directed by the landscape architect.
      5.   Irrigation systems shall avoid runoff, low head drainage, overspray
or similar conditions where water flows onto adjacent property, nonirrigated
areas, walks, roadways or structures.
      6.   Serviceable check valves are required where elevation differential
may cause low head drainage.
      7.   Irrigation controllers must be capable of dual or multiple
programming. Controllers must have multiple cycle start capacity and a flexible
calendar program. Controllers shall be set to operate when evaporation is at a
minimum.
      8.   Water application rates shall be less than twenty five one-
hundredths inches per cycle. A minimum of a one-hour period shall be allowed
prior to the application of additional water.
   (K)   Pressure/flow calculations. Copies of pressure/flow calculations shall
accompany the irrigation plans.
   (L)   Decorative water features. Decorative water features shall use
recirculating water systems.
(Ord. 413, passed 1-5-1993)
§ 9-11-6 INSPECTION.
   Upon installation of landscaping and irrigation system, the installer must
contact the Parks, Recreation and Community Services Department and request an
inspection. The landscape and irrigation installation must conform to the
approved plans before final inspection or issuance of a certificate of
occupancy by the building division.
(Ord. 413, passed 1-5-1993)
§ 9-11-7 MAINTENANCE.
   The landscaping and irrigation system shall be maintained in accordance with
the approved landscape and irrigation plan. Maintenance includes removal of
weeds, litter or other debris and replacement of dead plant materials.
(Ord. 413, passed 1-5-1993)
§ 9-11-8 FEES.
   A landscaping and irrigation plan review and inspection fee shall be paid to
the Planning Department when the building permit is issued. The amount of the
fee will be calculated by multiplying the total square footage of landscaped
area times a rate determined by resolution of the Council.
(Ord. 413, passed 1-5-1993)
§ 9-11-9 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   BACKFLOW PREVENTION DEVICE. A safety device used to prevent pollution or
contamination of the water supply due to the reverse flow of water from the
irrigation system.
   CHECK VALVE. A valve located under a sprinkler head to hold water in the
system so it minimizes drainage from the lower elevation sprinkler heads.
   EMITTER. Drip irrigation fittings that deliver water slowly from the system
to the soil.
   FRIABLE CONDITION. Returning the soil to an easily crumbled or loosely
compacted condition down to a minimum depth per planting material requirement,
whereby the root structure of a newly planted water conserving plant will be
allowed to spread unimpeded.
   LANDSCAPED AREA. The total area of the site not covered by buildings,
parking lots, driveways, patios, plazas, sidewalks, hard courts, swimming
pools, spas and parkway areas.
   MULCH. Any material such as bark, straw or other materials left loose and
applied to the soil surface to reduce evaporation.
   RAIN SENSING DEVICE. A system which automatically shuts off the irrigation
system when it rains.
   TURF. A single bladed grass or sod.
   WATER CONSERVING PLANT.
      1.   Any plant which exhibits drought tolerant characteristics, that is
to say, will, in designed location, survive with limited supplemental water.
Cool season grass, hybrid tall type fescues and warm season grasses, such as
hybrid Bermuda grass, shall be considered water conserving.
      2.   A list of acceptable water conserving plants will be available from
the Parks, Recreation and Community Services Department upon request.
(Ord. 413, passed 1-5-1993)
§ 9-11-10 VALIDITY.
   If any section, subsection, paragraph, sentence, clause, word or phrase of
this chapter is for any reason held to be unconstitutional or otherwise
invalid, such decision shall not affect the validity of the remainder of the
chapter. The City Council hereby declares that it would have passed Ord. 413
creating this chapter, and each section subsection, paragraph, sentence,
clause, word or phrase thereof, irrespective of the fact that any one or more
sections, subsections, paragraphs, sentences, clauses, words or phrases be
declared unconstitutional or invalid.
(Ord. 413, passed 1-5-1993)
CHAPTER 12: URBAN STORMWATER QUALITY MANAGEMENT
Section
9-12-1 Title
9-12-2 Purpose and intent
9-12-3 Definitions
9-12-4 Authority for administration and enforcement
9-12-5 Regulatory consistency/application
9-12-6 Ultimate responsibility of discharger
9-12-7 Nonstormwater discharge; prohibitions and exemptions
9-12-8 Operating facilities or activities
9-12-9 Construction sites
9-12-10 Development and redevelopment projects
9-12-11 Postconstruction operation and maintenance
9-12-12 Watercourse and irrigation canal protection
9-12-13 Cleanup and notification requirements
9-12-14 Authority to inspect, establish sampling devices and direct testing and
monitoring
9-12-15 Violation constituting misdemeanors
9-12-16 Penalties
9-12-17 Concealment
9-12-18 Violation deemed a public nuisance
9-12-19 Civil actions
9-12-20 Administrative enforcement powers
9-12-21 Appeal
9-12-22 Abatement by city
9-12-23 Charging costs of abatement/liens
9-12-24 Urgency abatements
9-12-25 Compensatory action
9-12-26 Acts potentially resulting in a violation of the Federal Clean Water
Act and/or California Porter-Cologne Act
9-12-27 Nonexclusivity of remedies
9-12-28 Conflicts with other laws
§ 9-12-1 TITLE.
   This chapter shall be known as the “Urban Stormwater Quality Management
Ordinance of the City of Livingston”.
(Ord. 625, passed 12-1-2015)
§ 9-12-2 PURPOSE AND INTENT.
   The purpose and intent of this chapter is to ensure the health, safety and
general welfare of citizens, and to protect and enhance the quality of the
city’s watercourses, water bodies, and wetlands pursuant to and consistent with
all applicable state and federal laws related to stormwater management,
including, but not limited to, the Clean Water Act (33 U.S.C. §§ 1251 et seq.),
the national pollutant discharge elimination system (NPDES) regulations (40
C.F.R. part 122 et seq.) and the city’s stormwater discharge permit for small
municipal storm sewer systems (MS4) pursuant to California State Water
Resources Control Board (SWRCB) Order 2013-0001-DWQ.
(Ord. 625, passed 12-1-2015)
§ 9-12-3 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   BEST MANAGEMENT PRACTICES (BMPs). Schedules of activities, prohibitions of
practices, general good housekeeping practices, maintenance procedures,
educational programs and other management practices to prevent or reduce the
discharge of pollutants directly or indirectly to waters of the United States.
BMPs also include treatment requirements, operating procedures and practices to
control facility nonstormwater sources, spillage or leaks, sludge or waste
disposal, drainage from raw materials storage and control of hazardous
materials. The California Stormwater Quality Association (CASQA) stormwater
best management practice handbooks for municipal, industrial/commercial and
construction activity provide a detailed discussion of BMPs. BMPs are required
to be implemented and maintained in a manner that is consistent with the CASQA
best management practice handbooks or equivalent guidelines.
   CALIFORNIA STATE WATER RESOURCES CONTROL BOARD (SWRCB). The state agency
charged with administration of the national pollutant discharge elimination
system (NPDES) permits.
   CLEAN WATER ACT. The Federal Water Pollution Control Act, as amended, 33
U.S.C. §§ 1251 et seq.
   CONTAMINATED GROUNDWATER. Groundwater mixed with a pollutant.
   DIRECTOR. The Director of Public Works, or his or her designee.
   ENFORCEMENT OFFICER. The Director, or his or her designee.
   ENVIRONMENTAL PROTECTION AGENCY (EPA). The federal agency charged with
enforcement of environmental laws and regulations.
   NATIONAL POLLUTANT DISCHARGE ELIMINATION SYSTEM (NPDES) PERMIT. Stormwater
discharge permit for small municipal storm sewer systems (MS4), construction
general permit, and industrial general permit issued by the SWRCB which
authorizes the discharge of stormwater pursuant to the Clean Water Act (33
U.S.C. § 1342).
   NONSTORMWATER DISCHARGE (NSWD). Any discharge to the storm drain system that
is not composed entirely of stormwater.
   NOTICE OF INTENT (NOI). A form submitted to the SWRCB notifying the agency
of a person’s intent to be covered under the state general permit for the
control of construction site runoff on projects that disturb one acre of land
or more, in one or more phases of construction or for industrial activities.
   PERSON. Any individual, partnership, corporation, firm, company, limited
liability company, association, joint stock company, trust, estate, government
entity or any other legal entity, or their legal representatives, agents or
assigns.
   POLLUTANT. Anything which causes deterioration of water quality such that it
impairs subsequent and/or competing uses of water. Shall have the same meaning
as defined in 40 C.F.R. part 122.2, and shall include, but not be limited to,
any solid, liquid, gas or other substance that can alter the physical or
chemical properties of water including, but not limited to, fertilizers,
solvents, sludge, petroleum or petroleum products, solid waste, garbage, sand,
dirt, animal waste, acids, bases, paints, oil and other automotive fluids,
rubbish, debris, hazardous waste, chemicals, fresh concrete, yard waste from
residential and commercial landscaping operations, fecal coliform, fecal
streptococci, enterococcus, heavy metals, materials that result from
constructing a building or structure, and nauseous or offensive matter of any
kind.
   PREMISES. Any building, lot, parcel, real estate, or land or portion of
land, whether improved or unimproved, including adjacent sidewalks and parking
strips.
   REGIONAL WATER QUALITY CONTROL BOARD (RWQCB). The state division of the
SWRCB charged with enforcement of the water quality laws and regulations in the
State of California.
   STORM DRAIN SYSTEM. All or any part of publicly or privately owned and
maintained roads, streets, catch basins, curbs, gutters, ditches, human-made
channels, canals, storm drains and dry wells located within public easements,
rights-of-way, parks, common areas, retention areas, or other publicly or
privately owned or maintained real property designed or used for collecting,
holding, or conveying stormwater to waters of the United States, or designed to
be percolated (i.e., dry well) into the groundwater system.
   STORMWATER. Any surface flow, runoff and drainage consisting entirely of
water from any form of natural precipitation, and resulting from such
precipitation.
   STORMWATER RUNOFF. Surface runoff and drainage associated with storm events.
   UNLAWFUL CONNECTION. Any physical connection to a storm drain system which
has not been permitted by the city.
   UNLAWFUL DISCHARGE. Any discharge to the storm drain system that is not
composed entirely of stormwater or stormwater discharges from private property
designed or intended to be disposed of on site. Any spilling, leaking, pumping,
pouring, emitting, emptying, ejecting, placing, releasing, leaching, dumping or
disposing into or on any land in a manner that may cause pollution.
   URBAN RUNOFF. Runoff collected by any roads with drainage systems, streets,
curbs, gutters, catch basins, natural and artificial channels, ditches,
aqueducts, storm drains, inlets, conduits or other drainage structures owned,
operated or approved by the city.
(Ord. 629, passed 2-21-2017)
§ 9-12-4 AUTHORITY FOR ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT.
   The Director or his or her designee shall have the authority to exercise the
powers and perform the duties set forth in this chapter and to administer and
enforce provisions of this chapter. The Director may designate other employees
to exercise such powers and perform such duties, as he or she deems
appropriate.
(Ord. 625, passed 12-1-2015)
§ 9-12-5 REGULATORY CONSISTENCY/APPLICATION.
   This chapter shall be construed to assure consistency with requirements of
the Federal Clean Water Act and its implemented regulations for stormwater
management, and to comply with the SWRCB’s stormwater discharge permit for
small MS4s, and shall be applicable to all stormwater generated on any
developed or undeveloped urban lands lying within the city or conveyed by the
public storm drain system.
(Ord. 625, passed 12-1-2015)
§ 9-12-6 ULTIMATE RESPONSIBILITY OF DISCHARGER.
   The standards set forth herein and promulgated pursuant to this chapter are
minimum standards; therefore, this chapter does not intend nor imply that
compliance by any person will ensure that there will be no contamination,
pollution or unauthorized discharge of pollutants into waters of the United
States caused by said person. This chapter shall not create liability on the
part of the city, or any agent or employee thereof, for any damages, claims or
liabilities that result from any dischargers, reliance on this chapter or any
administrative decision lawfully made hereunder.
(Ord. 629, passed 2-21-2017)
§ 9-12-7 NONSTORMWATER DISCHARGE; PROHIBITIONS AND EXEMPTIONS.
   (A)   Discharge of substances. Unless expressly authorized or exempted by
this chapter, no person shall cause or allow the discharge to a public right-
of-way or public storm drain system of any substance that is not composed
entirely of stormwater. Pollutant substances may include, but are not limited
to, petroleum products (oil and grease), pesticides, fertilizers, household or
industrial chemicals, industrial process wastewater, domestic sewage and animal
waste. Other potential sources of pollutants include washdown from parking
lots, private paved roads, gasoline stations, industrial facilities, business
enterprises, dwelling units and car wash fundraisers.
   (B)   Disposing of materials. Unless expressly authorized or exempted by
this chapter, no person shall use, store, spill, dump or dispose of materials
in a manner that those materials could cause or contribute to the addition of
pollutants to stormwater. Pollutant materials may include, but are not limited
to, refuse, rubbish, garbage or other discarded or abandoned objects, articles,
or other litter in or upon any street, alley, sidewalk, storm drain system,
business place, or upon any public or private plot of land in the city so that
the same can become a pollutant by entering the storm drain system except in
containers or in lawfully established waste disposal facilities.
   (C)   Exemptions. The following discharges are exempt from the prohibitions
set forth in subsections (A) and (B) of this section:
      1.   Authorized discharges. Discharges authorized by a separate NPDES or
RWQCB permit;
      2.   Permissible categories. The following categories of nonstormwater
discharges are permissible unless otherwise prohibited under subsection (C)3.,
(C)4. or (C)5. of this section:
         (a)   Water line flushing;
         (b)   “Incidental runoff” from landscaped areas defined as unintended
amounts (volume) of runoff, such as unintended, minimal overspray from
sprinklers that escapes the area of intended use;
         (c)   Diverted stream flows;
         (d)   Rising groundwaters;
         (e)   Uncontaminated groundwater infiltration as defined in 40 C.F.R.
§ 35.2005(b)(20);
         (f)   Uncontaminated pumped groundwater;
         (g)   Discharges from potable water sources;
         (h)   Foundation drains;
         (i)   Air conditioning condensation;
         (j)   Springs;
         (k)   Water from crawl space pumps;
         (l)   Footing drains;
         (m)   Individual residential car washing on private property in which
no commercial enterprise or nonprofit fundraising is being conducted in the
washing of those vehicles;
         (n)   Flows from riparian habitats and wetlands;
         (o)   Dechlorinated swimming pool discharges;
         (p)   Discharges from emergency firefighting activity;
         (q)   Any discharge that the enforcement official, the local health
officer or the Regional Water Quality Control Board determines, in writing, is
necessary for the protection of the public health and safety;
         (r)   Any discharge caused by flooding or other natural disaster,
which could not have been reasonably foreseen or mitigated for in advance by
the discharger, as determined by the enforcement official; or
         (s)   Any other activity that the Director identifies is not a
significant contributor of pollutants during the city’s NPDES stormwater
discharge permit for small MS4s’ permit term.
      3.   Written notice. No person shall discharge to public storm drain
system any exempted discharge under this subsection (C) if the Director or
assigned designee identifies and provides written notice to the person that the
discharge has the potential to be a source of pollutants to receiving waters,
waterways, or groundwater;
      4.   Unlawful discharge. No person shall discharge to the public storm
drain system anything that would result in or contribute to a violation of the
city’s NPDES stormwater discharge permit for small MS4s. Liability for any such
unlawful discharge shall be the responsibility of the person causing or
responsible for the discharge;
      5.   Unlawful connections. No person shall establish, use, maintain or
continue any unlawful connection to the public storm drain system which has
caused or is likely to cause a violation of this section. This prohibition is
retroactive and shall apply to any connection that was made in the past,
regardless of whether it was made under permit or other authorization, or
whether it was permissible under the law or practices applicable or prevailing
at the time of the connection. A person is considered to be in violation of
this chapter if the person connects a line conveying sewage to a stormwater
conveyance system, or allows such a connection to continue; and
      6.   Excess irrigation runoff prohibited. Nonstormwater runoff discharge
that is not incidental is prohibited unless otherwise specified in this
chapter. INCIDENTAL RUNOFF is defined as unintended amounts (volume) of runoff,
such as unintended, minimal overspray from sprinklers that escapes the area of
intended use. Water leaving an intended use area is not considered incidental
if it is part of the facility design, if it is due to excessive application, if
it is due to intentional overflow or application, or if it is due to
negligence. No person shall allow irrigation runoff in excess of incidental
runoff to occur. Any person responsible for controlling runoff in excess of
incidental runoff shall:
         (a)   Detect leaks (for example, from broken sprinkler heads) and
correct the leaks within 72 hours of learning of the leak;
         (b)   Properly design and aim sprinkler heads;
         (c)   Not irrigate during precipitation events; and
         (d)   Manage pond containing recycled water such that no discharge
occurs unless the discharge is a result of a 25-year, 24-hour storm event or
greater, and the appropriate regional water board is notified by e-mail no
later than 24 hours after the discharge. The notification is to include
identifying information, including the permittee’s name and permit
identification number.
(Ord. 629, passed 2-21-2017)
§ 9-12-8 OPERATING FACILITIES OR ACTIVITIES.
   (A)   Proof of permit coverage, stormwater pollution prevention plan
required.
      1.   All persons owning or operating premises or engaged in activities
who are required by federal or state law to submit to SWRCB an NOI to comply
with an NPDES stormwater discharge permit shall provide proof of permit
coverage and the stormwater pollution prevention plan (SWPPP) to the Director
upon request.
      2.   Facilities required to apply for a stormwater discharge permit are
identified in attachment A of the state’s industrial general permit (IGP) and
may include, but are not limited to, maintenance operations, storage
facilities, manufacturing activity, assembly operations, equipment operations,
vehicle loading or fueling, food processing, trucking or cleanup procedures
which are carried out partially or wholly out of doors.
   (B)   Authorization to adopt and impose best management practices (BMPs).
Every person or entity, including the categories listed below, undertaking any
activity or use of premises that may cause or contribute to stormwater
pollution or contamination or illicit discharges shall comply with best
management practice (BMPs) consistent with the California Stormwater Quality
Association (CASQA) best management practice handbooks or equivalent
guidelines.
   (C)   Business related activities.
      1.   Stormwater pollution prevention plan. The enforcement official may
require any business in the city engaged in activities that may result in
pollutant discharges to develop and implement a stormwater pollution prevention
plan, which shall include an employee training program. An employee training
program is a documented employee training program that may be required to be
implemented by a business pursuant to a stormwater pollution prevention plan,
for the purpose of educating its employees on methods of reducing discharge of
pollutants to the stormwater conveyance system. Business activities that may
require a stormwater pollution prevention plan include, but are not limited to,
maintenance, storage, manufacturing, assembly, equipment operations, vehicle
loading or fueling, or cleanup procedures carried out partially or wholly out
of doors.
      2.   Coordination with hazardous materials release response plans and
inventory. Any business requiring a hazardous materials release response and
inventory plan, under the Cal. Health and Safety Code Division 20, Chapter
6.95,(commencing with § 25500) shall include in that plan provisions for
compliance with this chapter, including the provisions prohibiting
nonstormwater discharges and illegal discharges, and requiring the release of
pollutants to be reduced to the maximum extent practicable.
      3.   Coordination with hazardous waste generator contingency plan and
emergency procedures. Any business requiring a hazardous waste generator
contingency plan and emergency procedures, pursuant to Cal. Code of Regulations
Title 22, Division 4.5, Chapter 15, Article 4, §§ 66265.51 to 66265.56, shall
include in that plan provisions for compliance with this chapter, including the
provisions prohibiting nonstormwater discharge and illegal discharges, and
requiring the release of pollutants to be reduced to the maximum extent
practicable.
      4.   Petition for reconsideration.
         (a)   If a BMP is required by the Director or City Engineer to prevent
a pollutant from entering the public storm drain system, the person receiving
the notice of such a requirement may petition the City Council of the city to
reconsider the application of the BMPs to the premises or activity.
         (b)   The written petition must be received by the City Clerk within
ten working days of the notice issued by the Director or City Engineer. The
petition shall set forth any reasons as to why application of BMPs to the
premises or activity should not be required and any proposed alternatives to
such requirement. The City Council will act within 30 calendar days of the
filing of the petition.
(Ord. 629, passed 2-21-2017)
§ 9-12-9 CONSTRUCTION SITES.
   (A)   Construction.
      1.   Any person performing construction activities in the city shall
prevent pollutants from entering the stormwater conveyance system and comply
with all applicable federal, state and local laws, ordinances or regulations,
including, but not limited to, the current California NPDES general permit for
stormwater discharges associated with construction activity (construction
general permit) and the city’s urban stormwater quality management and
discharge control ordinance. All construction projects, regardless of size,
having soil disturbance or activities exposed to stormwater must, at a minimum,
implement BMPs for erosion and sediment controls, soil stabilization,
dewatering, source controls, pollution prevention measures and prohibited
discharges.
      2.   Any person subject to a construction activity NPDES stormwater
discharge permit shall comply with all provisions of such permit. Proof of
compliance with said permit may be required in a form acceptable to the
enforcement official prior to, or as a condition of, a subdivision map, site
plan, building permit, grading permit, or development or improvement plan, upon
inspection of the facility, during any enforcement proceeding or action, or for
any other reasonable cause. Prior to issuance of a construction permit or
approval of the proposed improvement plans, for projects subject to the state’s
current construction NPDES general permit, the WDID number and the SWPPP shall
be submitted to the city. For projects with less than an acre of soil
disturbance or not subject to the construction general permit, an erosion and
sediment control plan (ESCP) and the ESCP worksheet must be submitted to the
city.
      3.   (a)   As required by its phase II MS4 NPDES permit, the city will
conduct stormwater compliance inspections at applicable construction sites that
have areas of soil disturbance exposed to stormwater. The inspection will be
conducted by a city inspector or agent working for the city who is a qualified
SWPPP practitioner (QSP) or is supervised by a QSP. The inspection will
evaluate the construction site’s compliance to the city’s stormwater
ordinances. Inspections will be billed by the city to the project owner. The
following is the risk rating system and inspection frequency the city will use,
which is analogous to the risk rating used by the California construction
general permit:
            (1)   Projects not subject to the CGP or that have an erosivity
waiver will have a presoil disturbance inspection and a project completion
inspection;
            (2)   Projects that are risk 1/LUP type 1 or risk 2/LUP type 2 will
have a presoil disturbance inspection, monthly inspections, and a project
completion inspection; and
            (3)   Projects that are risk 3/LUP type 3 will have a presoil
disturbance inspection, bimonthly (twice per month) inspections, and a project
completion inspection.
         (b)   If a project has been issued two consecutive notices of
violation or does not correct a previously issued notice of violation by the
due date set by the inspector, the project’s “threat to water quality” will be
elevated by the city to the next highest category. This elevation of risk will
not affect the risk rating for the construction general permit.
   (B)   Violation; liability. Any person performing construction shall not
cause or contribute to a violation of the NPDES stormwater discharge permit
issued by the SWRCB to the city. Liability for any such discharge shall be the
responsibility of the person causing or responsible for the discharge. Any
person performing construction shall undertake BMPs to minimize pollutants
(including sediments) from leaving the construction site, provide protection
from accidental discharge of pollutants to the public storm drain system, and
comply with the cleanup and notification requirements of this chapter. The site
operator shall ensure erosion and sediment control and control of waste and
properly dispose of waste, such as discarded building materials, concrete truck
washout, chemicals, litter and sanitary waste at the construction site that may
cause adverse impacts to water quality. Such measures shall include the
requirements imposed by federal, state, county or local authorities. BMPs are
site specific and are consistent with the California Stormwater Quality
Association (CASQA) best management practice handbooks or equivalent
guidelines.
   (C)   Petition for reconsideration of BMP requirement. If a BMP is required
by the Director or City Engineer to prevent a pollutant from entering the
public storm drain system, the person receiving the notice of such a
requirement may petition the City Council of the city to reconsider the
application of the BMPs to the premises or activity. The written petition must
be received within ten working days at the issuance of the notice by the
Director or City Engineer and shall set forth any reasons as to why application
of BMPs to the premises or activity should not be required and any proposed
alternatives to such a requirement. The City Council will act within 30
calendar days of the filing of the petition.
(Ord. 629, passed 2-21-2017)
§ 9-12-10 DEVELOPMENT AND REDEVELOPMENT PROJECTS.
   To reduce the volume of stormwater runoff and minimize typical pollutants
associated with stormwater runoff from development or redevelopment projects,
the city requires that the following measures be implemented as part of the
project for compliance with the NPDES stormwater permit.
   (A)   Site design measures for small development projects.
      1.   Projects that create and/or replace (including projects with no net
increase in impervious footprint) between 2,500 square feet and 5,000 square
feet of impervious surface, including detached single-family homes that create
and/or replace 2,500 square feet or more of impervious surface and are not part
of a larger plan of development shall implement one or more of the following
site design measures to reduce project site runoff and minimize associated
pollutants:
         (a)   Stream setbacks and buffers. A vegetated area including trees,
shrubs, and herbaceous vegetation shall be retained (if existing) or
established to protect a stream system or lake reservoir;
         (b)   Soil quality improvement and maintenance. Improve and/or
maintain the soil through the incorporation of soil amendments and creation of
microbial community;
         (c)   Tree planting and preservation. Plant and/or preserve healthy
established trees including evergreens and deciduous varieties, as applicable;
         (d)   Rooftop and impervious area disconnection. Reroute rooftop
drainage pipes to drain rainwater to rain barrels, cisterns or on site
permeable areas instead of the storm drain system;
         (e)   Porous pavement. Incorporate use of porous pavement, porous
concrete and/or other permeable materials for on site flat work (driveways,
walkways, patios, parking areas and the like) instead of traditional pavement
or concrete;
         (f)   Green roofs. Incorporate use of a vegetative layer grown on a
roof (rooftop garden); and
         (g)   Vegetated swales. Construct an on site vegetated, open channel
swale designed specifically to treat and attenuate stormwater runoff.
      2.   Project proponents shall quantify the runoff reduction resulting
from implementation of one or more of the above site design measures using the
State Water Board stormwater multiple application and report tracking system
(SMARTS) postconstruction calculator or another methodology determined to be
acceptable by the city.
   (B)   Regulated projects. Projects that create and/or replace 5,000 square
feet or more of impervious surface.
      1.   Regulated projects shall implement site design measures, source
control measures, low impact development (LID) standards, and baseline
hydromodification management described in this chapter to effectively reduce
runoff and pollutants associated with runoff. Proponents of regulated projects
shall quantify the runoff reduction resulting from implementation of these
measures.
      2.   Redevelopment projects, road projects, and linear underground/
overhead projects (LUPs) are a special class of regulated project: These
projects shall implement the following special requirements:
         (a)   Increase of more than 50%. Where a redevelopment project results
in an increase of more than 50% of the impervious surface of a previously
existing development, runoff from the entire project (including the existing,
new and replaced impervious area) is regulated; in this case, the entire
project site is considered to be part of the regulated project;
         (b)   Increase of less than 50%. Where a redevelopment project results
in an increase of less than 50% of the impervious surface of a previously
existing development, only runoff from the new and/or replaced impervious
surface of the project is considered part of the regulated project;
         (c)   Road projects and LUPs. Any of the following types of road
projects and LUPs that create 5,000 square feet or more of newly constructed
contiguous impervious surface (either a newly constructed public road project
or new private development projects that fall under the authority of the city),
shall be considered a regulated project; however, treatment of runoff of the
eighty-fifth percentile that cannot feasibly be infiltrated on site shall
follow U.S. EPA guidance regarding green infrastructure to the extent possible.
An LUP that is a discreet location that has 5,000 square feet or more of newly
constructed impervious service shall be considered a regulated project. Types
of projects include:
            (1)   Construction of new streets or roads, including sidewalks and
bicycle lanes built as part of the new streets or roads; and
            (2)   Widening of existing streets or roads with additional traffic
lanes.
               A.   Where the addition of traffic lanes results in an
alteration of more than 50% of the impervious surface of an existing street or
road, runoff from the entire project (including the existing, new, and/or
replaced impervious surfaces) is considered to be part of the regulated
project.
               B.   Where the addition of traffic lanes results in an
alteration of less than 50% of the impervious surface of an existing street or
road, only the runoff from new and/or replaced impervious surface of the
project is considered to be part of the regulated project.
         (d)   Construction. Construction of LUPs;
         (e)   Exclusions. Specific exclusions are:
            (1)   Sidewalks built as part of new streets or roads and built to
direct stormwater runoff to adjacent vegetated areas;
            (2)   Bicycle lanes that are built as part of new streets or roads
that direct stormwater runoff to adjacent vegetated areas;
            (3)   Impervious trails built to direct stormwater runoff to
adjacent vegetated areas, or other nonerodible permeable areas, preferably away
from creeks or toward the outboard side of levees;
            (4)   Sidewalks, bicycle lanes or trails constructed with permeable
surfaces; and
            (5)   Trenching, excavation and resurfacing associated with LUPs;
pavement grinding and resurfacing of existing roadways and parking lots;
construction of new sidewalks, pedestrian ramps or bike lanes on existing
roadways; or routine replacement of damaged pavement such as pothole repair or
replacement of short, noncontiguous sections of roadway. Where pavement is
removed and base rock or soil is exposed, if more than 5,000 square feet is
replaced it is a regulated project and not routine maintenance.
   (C)   Source control measures. Operators of regulated projects with
pollutant generating activities and sources shall implement permanent and/or
operation source control measures, as applicable. Source control measures
consistent with the recommendations from the CASQA stormwater BMP handbook for
new development and redevelopment or equivalent manual, shall be implemented
for the following pollutant generating activities and sources:
      1.   Accidental spills or leaks;
      2.   Interior floor drains;
      3.   Parking/storage areas and maintenance;
      4.   Indoor and structural pest control;
      5.   Landscape/outdoor pesticide use;
      6.   Pools, spas, ponds, decorative fountains and other water features;
      7.   Restaurants, grocery stores, and other food service operations;
      8.   Refuse areas;
      9.   Industrial processes;
      10.   Outdoor storage of equipment or materials;
      11.   Vehicle and equipment cleaning;
      12.   Vehicle and equipment repair and maintenance;
      13.   Fuel dispensing areas;
      14.   Loading docks;
      15.   Fire sprinkler test water;
      16.   Drain or wash water from boiler drain lines, condensate drain
lines, rooftop equipment, drainage sumps and other sources;
      17.   Unauthorized nonstormwater discharges; and
      18.   Building and grounds maintenance.
   (D)   Low impact development (LID) standards. All regulated projects shall
implement low impact development standards designed to reduce runoff and treat
stormwater conforming to the following criteria.
      1.   Site assessment. Developers of regulated projects shall assess and
evaluate how site conditions (i.e., soils, vegetation and flow paths) will
influence the placement of buildings and paved surfaces; this evaluation shall
be used to satisfy the goals of capturing and treating runoff and assuring the
goals of LID are incorporated into the project design. The following methods
shall be used to optimize the site layout:
         (a)   Define the development envelope and protected areas, identifying
areas that are most suitable for development and areas to be left undisturbed;
         (b)   Concentrate development on portions of the site with less
permeable soils and preserve areas that can promote infiltration;
         (c)   Limit overall impervious coverage of the site with paving and
roofs;
         (d)   Set back development from creeks, wetlands and riparian
habitats;
         (e)   Preserve significant trees;
         (f)   Conform the site layout along natural landforms;
         (g)   Avoid excessive grading and disturbance of vegetation and soils;
         (h)   Replicate the site’s natural drainage patterns; and
         (i)   Detain and retain runoff throughout the site.
      2.   Drainage management areas (DMAs). As part of the design, the project
site shall be divided into discrete DMAs. Each DMA shall manage runoff using
site design measures, source controls and/or stormwater treatment and baseline
hydromodification measures.
      3.   Numeric sizing criteria for stormwater retention and treatment.
Regulated projects shall be designed to evapotranspire, infiltrate, harvest/
use, and/or biotreat stormwater to satisfy at least one of the following
hydraulic sizing design criteria.
         (a)   Volumetric criteria.
            (1)   The stormwater runoff volume determined using the formula and
volume capture coefficients in Urban Runoff Quality Management, Water
Environment Federation (WEF) Manual of Practice No. 23/ASCE Manual of Practice
No. 87 (1998); or
            (2)   The volume of annual runoff required to achieve 80% or more
capture, determined in accordance with the methodology in Section 5 of the
CASQA’s Stormwater Best Management Practice Handbook, New Development and
Redevelopment (2003), using local rainfall data;
         (b)   Flow based criteria.
            (1)   The flow of runoff produced from a rain event equal to at
least 0.2 inch per hour intensity; or
            (2)   The flow of runoff produced from a rain event equal to at
least two times the eighty-fifth percentile hourly rainfall intensity as
determined from local rainfall records.
      4.   Site design measures. Site design measures as described in this
chapter shall be used to reduce the amount of runoff, to the extent technically
feasible, to achieve the infiltration, evapotranspiration and/or harvesting/
reuse of the eighty-fifth percentile 24-hour storm runoff event; any remaining
runoff from impervious DMAs may then be directed to one or more bioretention
facilities.
      5.   Source controls. Permanent and/or operation source control measures
as described in this chapter shall be incorporated into the project design.
      6.   Stormwater treatment measures and baseline hydromodification
management measures. After implementation of site design measures, remaining
runoff from impervious DMAs must be directed to one or more facilities designed
to infiltrate, evapotranspire, and/or bioretain the amount of runoff determined
from numeric sizing criteria for stormwater retention and treatment. The
facilities must be demonstrated to be at least as effective as a bioretention
system with the following design parameters:
         (a)   Maximum surface loading rate of five inches per hour, based on
the flow rates calculated. A sizing factor of 4% of tributary impervious area
may be used;
         (b)   Minimum surface reservoir volume equal to surface area times a
depth of six inches;
         (c)   Minimum planting medium depth of 18 inches. The planting medium
must sustain a minimum infiltration rate of five inches per hour throughout the
life of the project and must maximize runoff retention and pollutant removal. A
mixture of sand (60% to 70%) meeting the specifications of American Society For
Testing And Materials (ASTM) C33 and compost (30% to 40%) may be used;
         (d)   Subsurface drainage/storage (gravel) layer with an area equal to
the surface area and having a minimum depth of 12 inches;
         (e)   Underdrain with discharge elevation at top of gravel layer;
         (f)   No compaction of soils beneath the facility, or ripping/
loosening of soils if compacted;
         (g)   No liners or other barriers interfering with infiltration; and
         (h)   Appropriate plant palette for the specified soil mix and maximum
available water use.
      7.   Alternative designs. Facilities, or a combination of facilities, of
a different design than described in subsection (D)6. of this section may be
permitted if all of the following measures of equivalent effectiveness are
demonstrated:
         (a)   Equal or greater amount of runoff infiltrated or
evapotranspired;
         (b)   Equal or lower pollutant concentrations in runoff that is
discharged after biotreatment;
         (c)   Equal or greater protection against shock loadings and spills;
and
         (d) Equal or greater accessibility and ease of inspection and
maintenance.
      8.   Allowed variations for special site conditions. The bioretention
system design parameters in subsection (D)6. of this section may be adjusted
for the following special site conditions:
         (a)   Facilities located within ten feet of structures or other
potential geotechnical hazards established by the geotechnical expert for the
project may incorporate an impervious cutoff wall between the bioretention
facility and the structure or other geotechnical hazard;
         (b)   Facilities with documented high concentrations of pollutants in
underlying soil or groundwater, facilities located where infiltration could
contribute to a geotechnical hazard, and facilities located on elevated plazas
or other structures may incorporate an impervious liner and may locate the
underdrain discharge at the bottom of the subsurface drainage/storage layer
(this configuration is commonly known as a “flow through planter”);
         (c)   Facilities located in areas of high groundwater, highly
infiltrative soils or where connection of underdrain to a surface drain or to a
subsurface storm drain are infeasible, may omit the underdrain; and
         (d)   Facilities serving high risk areas such as fueling stations,
truck stops, auto repairs and heavy industrial sites may be required to provide
additional treatment to address pollutants of concern unless these high risk
areas are isolated from stormwater runoff or bioretention areas with little
chance of spill migration.
      9.   Exceptions to requirements for bioretention facilities. If the use
of bioretention or a facility of equivalent effectiveness is infeasible (due to
construction constraints, not financial constraints), other types of
biotreatment or media filters (such as tree box type biofilters or in-vault
media filters) may be used for the following categories of regulated projects:
         (a)   Projects creating or replacing an acre or less of impervious
area, and located in a designated pedestrian oriented commercial district
(i.e., smart growth projects), and having at least 85% of the entire project
site covered by permanent structures;
         (b)   Facilities receiving runoff solely from existing (preproject)
impervious areas; and
         (c)   Historic sites, structures or landscapes that cannot alter their
original configuration in order to maintain their historic integrity.
   (E)   Hydromodification management.
      1.   Projects that create and/or replace one acre or more of impervious
surface are considered to be hydromodification management projects. A project
that does not increase impervious surface area over the preproject condition is
not a hydromodification management project.
      2.   The postproject runoff from a hydromodification management project
shall not exceed the estimated preproject flow rate for the two-year, 24-hour
storm.
(Ord. 629, passed 2-21-2017)
§ 9-12-11 POSTCONSTRUCTION OPERATION AND MAINTENANCE.
   (A)   Maintenance responsibility.
      1.   Owners of property on which a regulated project has been developed
shall agree to accept responsibility for the operation and maintenance of the
on site installed source control measures, treatment systems and
hydromodification controls. This agreement shall be in the form of a signed and
notarized operation and maintenance agreement to be recorded in the Merced
County Recorder’s office; responsibility shall transfer to any successors in
interest of the property.
      2.   Multi-parcel or multiowner projects (gated communities, condominiums
and the like) shall operate and maintain any commonly owned source control
measures, treatment systems, and hydromodification controls either through a
homeowners’ association, through a condominium agreement, or other legally
enforceable agreement or mechanism.
      3.   Source control measures, treatment systems or hydromodification
controls that are publicly owned or built within the public rights-of-way shall
be operated and/or maintained by the city or other public agency using funds
levied on the development or redevelopment project in the form of assessment
districts or other acceptable collection mechanism for the purpose of reducing
runoff and mitigating pollutants as described in this chapter.
      4.   Owners of property on which a regulated project has been developed
shall agree to and consent to these assessment fees as determined by the city
at its sole discretion. This assessment district shall be recorded in the
Merced County Recorder’s office; responsibility shall transfer to any
successors in interest of the property.
   (B)   Inspection authorization. The recorded operation and maintenance
agreement shall include a provision authorizing the city to access the project
site for the sole purpose of performing inspections of the installed treatment
systems and hydromodification controls.
(Ord. 629, passed 2-21-2017)
§ 9-12-12 WATERCOURSE AND IRRIGATION CANAL PROTECTION.
   (A)   Every person owning, leasing property or otherwise controlling
property (“owner”) through which a watercourse or publicly owned irrigation
and/or stormwater canal or channel (“watercourse”) originates or passes shall
keep and maintain that part of the watercourse within the property free of
trash, debris and other obstacles that would pollute, contaminate or
significantly retard the flow of water through the watercourse. The owner shall
not remove healthy bank vegetation beyond that actually necessary for
maintenance, nor perform vegetation management in such a manner as to increase
the vulnerability of the watercourse to erosion. The owner shall be responsible
for maintaining and stabilizing that portion of the watercourse that is within
that owner’s property, within regulatory frameworks, to a reasonable standard
as determined by the Director, in order to protect against erosion and
degradation of the watercourse originating or passing through the property.
   (B)   Every owner of property through which a watercourse originates or
passes shall maintain existing privately owned structures within or adjacent to
a watercourse, so that such structures will not become a hazard to the use,
function or physical integrity of the watercourse.
   (C)   Every owner is responsible to comply with all laws, rules and
regulations of state or federal agencies that may have jurisdiction over
wetlands and waterways. Maintenance must be done in a manner that does not
adversely impact waterway species.
(Ord. 625, passed 12-1-2015)
§ 9-12-13 CLEANUP AND NOTIFICATION REQUIREMENTS.
   (A)   All persons in charge of a facility, activity or development or
responsible for emergency response shall have personal responsibility to train
the premises’ personnel and maintain notification procedures to assure
immediate notification is provided to the city of any suspected, confirmed, or
unconfirmed release of material, pollutants or waste creating a risk of
discharge into the city’s storm drain system. As soon as any owner or operator
has actual or constructive knowledge of any discharge which may result in
pollutants entering the public storm drain system, such person shall promptly
take all necessary steps to ensure the discovery of the source and the extent
and proceed with containment and cleanup of such discharge.
   (B)   The owner or operator shall notify the Director or the City Engineer
of the discharge in both of the following manners:
      1.   By telephone as soon as practical or by calling 9-1-1, if hazardous
materials are involved; and
      2.   By written report identifying the discharge source, extent,
pollutant, measures taken to mitigate the discharge and preventative measures
put into place to prevent a subsequent discharge.
(Ord. 625, passed 12-1-2015)
§ 9-12-14 AUTHORITY TO INSPECT, ESTABLISH SAMPLING DEVICES AND DIRECT TESTING
AND MONITORING.
   (A)   Authority to conduct inspections. The Director shall have the
authority to conduct reasonable inspections of facilities, activities or
developments described in this chapter as may be deemed necessary to carry out
the purpose of this chapter. Such inspections shall be conducted with the
consent of the property owner and/or the person possessing or controlling the
property. If such consent cannot be obtained, an inspection shall be conducted
pursuant to a court issued inspection warrant. Such inspections may also be
done in conjunction with routine inspections conducted by other public agencies
such as Emergency Services or Health Department.
   (B)   Authority to sample and establish sampling devices. With the consent
of the owner or occupant or pursuant to an inspection warrant, any authorized
enforcement officer may establish on any property such devices as are necessary
to aid in the pursuit of the inquiry or in the recordation of the activities on
site.
   (C)   Requirement to test or monitor. Any authorized enforcement officer may
require that any person engaged in any activity and/or owning or operating any
facility which has been determined to cause or contribute to stormwater
pollution or contamination, unlawful discharge and/or discharge of
nonstormwater to the storm drain system, undertake such monitoring activities
and/or analysis and furnish such reports as the officer may specify. The costs
of these activities, analysis and reports required shall be borne by the owner/
operator of the facility and/or activity.
(Ord. 625, passed 12-1-2015)
§ 9-12-15 VIOLATION CONSTITUTING MISDEMEANORS.
   Unless otherwise specified by this chapter, the violation of the provisions
of this chapter shall constitute a misdemeanor. Any such violation constituting
a misdemeanor, at the discretion of the authorized enforcement officer, may be
charged and prosecuted as an infraction.
(Ord. 625, passed 12-1-2015)
§ 9-12-16 PENALTIES.
   Upon conviction of a misdemeanor or an infraction, a person shall be subject
to payment of a fine or imprisonment, or both.
   (A)   Civil penalties. In addition to any other enforcement authority
contained in this chapter, the Director or City Engineer shall issue a civil
citation to any person who has violated, or continues to violate, any provision
of this chapter or any related laws or regulations. A person who violates any
requirement of this chapter or any applicable NPDES stormwater discharge permit
condition shall be civilly liable to the city for a sum not to exceed $10,000
per day per violation.
   (B)   Criminal penalties. A person who willfully or negligently violates any
provision of this chapter, or any related laws or regulations shall, upon
conviction, be guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction thereof shall be
punished by a fine not to exceed $15,000 per day per violation and/or
imprisonment for a period not to exceed six months.
(Ord. 625, passed 12-1-2015)
§ 9-12-17 CONCEALMENT.
   Causing, permitting, aiding, abetting or concealing a violation of any
provision of this chapter shall be unlawful and punishable as a misdemeanor.
(Ord. 625, passed 12-1-2015)
§ 9-12-18 VIOLATION DEEMED A PUBLIC NUISANCE.
   (A)   In addition to the penalties hereinbefore provided, any condition
caused or permitted to exist in violation of any of the provisions of this
chapter is a threat to the public health, safety and welfare, and is declared
and deemed a nuisance, and may be summarily abated and/or restored by any
authorized enforcement officer, and/or civil action to abate, enjoin or
otherwise compel the cessation of such nuisance may be taken by legal counsel.
   (B)   The cost of such abatement and restoration shall be borne by the
property owner and/or operator committing the violation, and the cost thereof
shall be a lien upon and against any such property and such lien shall continue
in existence until the same shall be paid. If the lien is not satisfied by the
owner of the property within three months, the property may be sold in
satisfaction thereof in a like manner as other real property is sold under
execution. In any administrative or civil proceeding under this chapter in
which the city prevails, the city shall be awarded all costs of suit and
reasonable attorney fees.
(Ord. 625, passed 12-1-2015)
§ 9-12-19 CIVIL ACTIONS.
   In addition to any other remedies provided in this section, this chapter may
be enforced by civil action brought by the city. In any such action, the court
may grant, as appropriate, any or all of the following remedies:
   (A)   A temporary and/or permanent injunction;
   (B)   Assessment of the violator/parcel owner for the costs of any
investigation, inspection, or monitoring survey which led to the establishment
of the violation, and for the reasonable costs of preparing and bringing legal
action under this subsection (B);
   (C)   Costs incurred in removing, correcting, or terminating the adverse
effects resulting from the violation; and
   (D)   Compensatory damages for loss or destruction to water quality,
wildlife, fish, and aquatic life. Assessments under this subsection (D) shall
be paid to the city to be used exclusively for costs associated with monitoring
and establishing stormwater discharge control systems and/or implementing or
enforcing the provisions of this chapter.
(Ord. 625, passed 12-1-2015)
§ 9-12-20 ADMINISTRATIVE ENFORCEMENT POWERS.
   (A)   Notice of violation. Whenever the Director finds that a person has
violated a prohibition or failed to meet a requirement of this chapter, the
Director may order compliance by written notice of violation to the responsible
person. Such notice may require without limitation:
      1.   The performance of monitoring, analyses and reporting;
      2.   The elimination of illicit connections or discharges;
      3.   That violating discharges, practices or operations shall cease and
desist;
      4.   The abatement or remediation of stormwater pollution or
contamination hazards and the restoration of any affected property; and
      5.   The implementation of source control or treatment BMPs.
   (B)   Completion deadline. If abatement of a violation and/or restoration of
affected property is required, the notice shall set forth a deadline within
which such remediation or restoration must be completed. Said notice shall
further advise that, should the violator fail to remediate or restore within
established deadlines, the work will be done by the city or a contractor
designated by the Director and the expense thereof shall be charged to the
violator.
   (C)   Abatement. Upon a cease and desist order to stop, clean up and abate a
discharge:
      1.   A violator shall abate and clean up their discharge, spill or
pollutant release within 72 hours of notification; high risk spill should be
cleaned up as soon as possible;
      2.   A violator shall complete abatement within 30 days of notification,
for uncontrolled sources of pollutants that could pose an environmental threat;
      3.   If violator does not complete abatement within the required
deadline, the Director shall provide a new deadline and notify the appropriate
regional water board when all parties agree that cleanup activities cannot be
completed within the original time frame and notify the appropriate regional
water board in writing within five business days of the determination that the
time frame requires revision.
(Ord. 625, passed 12-1-2015)
§ 9-12-21 APPEAL.
   (A)   Notwithstanding the provisions of urgency abatement, any person
receiving a notice of violation may appeal the determination of the director to
the City Manager.
   (B)   The notice of appeal must be received by the City Manager within 15
days from the date of the notice of violation.
   (C)   Hearing on the appeal before the City Manager or his or her designee
shall take place within 15 days from the date of the city’s receipt of the
notice of appeal. The decision of the City Manager shall be final.
(Ord. 625, passed 12-1-2015)
§ 9-12-22 ABATEMENT BY CITY.
   If the violation has not been corrected pursuant to the requirements set
forth in the notice of violation, or, in the event of an appeal, within ten
days of the decision of the City Manager upholding the decision of the
director, then the city or a contractor designated by the Director shall,
pursuant to a warrant issued by a court of competent jurisdiction, enter upon
the subject’s private property and take any and all measures reasonably
necessary to abate the violation and/or restore the property. It shall be
unlawful for any person, owner, agent or person in possession of any premises
to refuse to allow the city or designated contractor to enter upon the premises
for the purposes set forth above.
(Ord. 625, passed 12-1-2015)
§ 9-12-23 CHARGING COSTS OF ABATEMENT/LIENS.
   (A)   Within 30 days after abatement of the nuisance by city, the Director
shall notify the property owner of the property of the cost of abatement,
including administrative costs, investigative costs, cost of testing, hearing
costs and the like. The property owner may file a written protest objecting to
the amount of the assessment with the City Clerk within 15 days. The City Clerk
shall set the matter for public hearing by the City Council. The decision of
the City Council shall be final.
   (B)   If the amount due is not paid within ten days of the decision of the
City Council or the expiration of the time in which to file an appeal under
this section, the charges shall become a special assessment against the
property and shall constitute a lien on the property for the amount of the
assessment. A copy of the resolution shall be turned over to the County Auditor
so that the Auditor may enter the amount of the assessments against the parcel
as it appears on the current assessment roll, and the tax collector shall
include the amount of the assessment on the bill for taxes against the parcel
of land.
(Ord. 625, passed 12-1-2015)
§ 9-12-24 URGENCY ABATEMENTS.
   (A)   The Director is authorized to require immediate abatement of any
violation of this chapter which constitutes an immediate threat to the health,
safety or well being of the public. If any such violation is not abated
immediately as directed by the Director, the city is authorized to enter onto
private property and to take any and all measures required to remediate the
violation.
   (B)   Any expense related to such remediation undertaken by the city shall
be fully reimbursed by the property owner and/or responsible party.
   (C)   Any relief obtained under this section shall not prevent city from
seeking other and further relief authorized under this chapter.
(Ord. 625, passed 12-1-2015)
§ 9-12-25 COMPENSATORY ACTION.
   In lieu of enforcement proceedings, penalties and remedies authorized by
this chapter, the Director may impose upon a violator alternative compensatory
actions, such as storm drain stenciling, attendance at compliance workshops,
creek cleanup and the like.
(Ord. 625, passed 12-1-2015)
§ 9-12-26 ACTS POTENTIALLY RESULTING IN A VIOLATION OF THE FEDERAL CLEAN WATER
ACT AND/OR CALIFORNIA PORTER-COLOGNE ACT.
   Any person who violates any provision of this chapter or any rule or
regulation issued pursuant to this chapter may also be in violation of the
Clean Water Act and/or Porter-Cologne Act, being Cal. Water Code §§ 13000 et
seq., and may be subject to the sanctions of those acts including civil and
criminal penalties. Any enforcement action authorized under this chapter shall
also include written notice to the violator of this potential liability.
(Ord. 625, passed 12-1-2015)
§ 9-12-27 NONEXCLUSIVITY OF REMEDIES.
   Remedies under this chapter are in addition to and do not supersede or limit
any and all other remedies, civil or criminal. The remedies provided for herein
shall be cumulative and not exclusive.
(Ord. 625, passed 12-1-2015)
§ 9-12-28 CONFLICTS WITH OTHER LAWS.
   In the event of any conflict between this chapter and any federal or state
law, regulation, permit or other ordinance of the city, the requirement which
establishes the stricter standard shall govern. To the extent permitted by law,
nothing in this chapter shall preclude enforcement of any other applicable law.
(Ord. 625, passed 12-1-2015)
TITLE 10: POLICE REGULATIONS
CHAPTER 1: GENERAL OFFENSES
Section
10-1-1 Gambling (Rep. by Ord. 283, passed 4-11-1985)
10-1-2 Intoxication
10-1-3 Drinking in specific areas of the city prohibited
10-1-4 Firearms, discharge restricted
10-1-5 Posting advertisements to trees, poles
10-1-6 Expectorating
10-1-7 Disturbances affecting labor and business activities
10-1-8 Emergency suspension, authority of Chief of Police
§ 10-1-1 GAMBLING.
Editor’s note:
   This section was repealed by Ord. 283, passed 4-11-1985.
§ 10-1-2 INTOXICATION.
   It shall be unlawful for any person in an intoxicated condition or under the
influence of any intoxicating liquor or drugs to be in any public place or upon
any street, alley or roadway or to be in any vehicle in any public place or
upon any street, alley or roadway within the corporate limits of the city. Any
person violating any of the provisions of this section shall be guilty of a
misdemeanor, and upon conviction thereof shall be punished by a fine of not
more than $250 or by imprisonment in the county jail for not more than six
months, or by both such fine and imprisonment.
(Ord. 37, passed 4-1-1935)
§ 10-1-3 DRINKING IN SPECIFIC AREAS OF THE CITY PROHIBITED.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to serve, drink, consume or possess an
open container of any spirituous, vinous, malt or other alcoholic beverage or
intoxicating liquors in or upon any of the following:
   (A)   Any street;
   (B)   Any sidewalk;
   (C)   Any alley;
   (D)   Lucero Park (being the city park located at the intersection of Celia
Drive and Hickory Lane);
   (E)   Peach Street Park (being the city park located at the intersection of
Seventh Street and Peach Street);
   (F)   Any city parking lot or any outside area of any city owned or
controlled building;
   (G)   Any private property into or upon which the public is admitted by
easement or license, except that this subsection (G) shall not apply to the
following:
      1.   Any private residence or apartment, including surrounding yard and
private parking areas;
      2.   Any fully enclosed commercial building, such as a store, office
building, motel, hotel or commercial garage; and
      3.   Any fully fenced or otherwise fully enclosed outside area of any
commercial or noncommercial building.
   (H)   Any private property, including, but not limited to, residential or
commercial property without the consent of the owner;
   (I)   Arakelian Park (being the city park located on J Street west of Prusso
Street) except by permit obtained from the Police Department;
   (J)   Any portion of Alvernaz Park (being the city ball field located on
Park Street south of Fourth Street) playing field, including dugouts and the
bleacher area;
   (K)   Memorial Park (being the city park located at the intersection of Main
Street and Park Street) except by permit obtained from the Police Department.
There shall be no fee for such permit;
   (L)   All city parks shall be closed during the hours of 10:00 p.m. to 6:00
a.m. Specific exemptions may be granted by the Chief of Police by issuance of a
permit. There shall be no fee for such permit; and
   (M)   City of Livingston Sports Complex located at the southwest corner of
Dwight Way and Walnut Avenue.
(Ord. 225, passed 4-23-1981; Ord. 314, passed 12-16-1986; Ord. 436, passed 8-
16-1994; Ord. 488, passed 9-7-1999)
§ 10-1-4 FIREARMS, DISCHARGE RESTRICTED.
   Every person, other than a peace officer in the performance of his or her
duty, who discharges any cannon, gun, pistol, bow or slingshot, however
powered, in this city, including, without limitation thereby, firearms, air
rifles, BB guns and pneumatic arms of all types, but excluding toy weapons
incapable of harming either person or property, such as water pistols and
popguns, is guilty of a misdemeanor, and upon conviction thereof shall be
penalized by a fine not exceeding $500 or by imprisonment in the county jail
for a period not exceeding 30 days.
(Ord. 311, passed 2-17-1987)
§ 10-1-5 POSTING ADVERTISEMENTS TO TREES, POLES.
   (A)   It is hereby declared unlawful for any person to post, stick, stamp,
print or otherwise affix or cause to be posted, stuck, stamped, printed or
otherwise affixed any bills, posters, advertisements or notices upon any tree,
telegraph pole, telephone pole, fire alarm pole, electric light pole or awning
in any public street or alley in the city, or upon the curbing or sidewalk of
any public street or alley therein, or to mar, deface or otherwise injure any
such pole.
   (B)   Any person violating any of the provisions of this section, or doing
any of the acts herein declared to be unlawful shall be guilty of a
misdemeanor, and upon conviction thereof shall be punished by a fine not
exceeding $100 or by imprisonment in the county jail for a period not exceeding
50 days.
(Ord. 3, passed 2-20-1923)
§ 10-1-6 EXPECTORATING.
   Any person who shall expectorate upon any sidewalk, or upon the floor or
wall of any theater, hall or other public place in the city shall be guilty of
a misdemeanor, and upon conviction thereof shall be punished by a fine not
exceeding $100 or by imprisonment in the county jail for a period not exceeding
50 days.
(Ord. 3, passed 2-20-1923)
§ 10-1-7 DISTURBANCES AFFECTING LABOR AND BUSINESS ACTIVITIES.
   (A)   Loud noises; interfere with labor. It shall be unlawful for any person
in or upon any public road, street, highway, sidewalk, alley or other public
place within the corporate limits of the city to make any loud or unusual noise
or to speak in a loud or unusual tone or to cry out or proclaim for the purpose
of inducing, influencing or attempting to induce or influence any person to
refrain from entering any works, plant, packing plant, cannery, factory or any
place or site of business or employment, or for the purpose of inducing or
influencing, or attempting to induce or influence any person to refrain from
purchasing or using any goods, wares, merchandise or other article or articles,
or for the purpose of inducing or influencing, or attempting to induce or
influence, any person from doing or performing any service of labor in any
works, plant, packing plant, cannery, factory, place or site of business or
employment, or for the purpose of intimidating, threatening or coercing, or
attempting to intimidate, threaten or coerce, any person who is performing,
seeking or obtaining service or labor in any works, plant, packing plant,
cannery, factory, place or site of business or employment.
   (B)   Picketing. It shall be unlawful for any person in or upon any public
road, street, highway, sidewalk, alley or other public place within the
corporate limits of the city to loiter in front of or in the vicinity of, or to
picket in front of, or in the vicinity of, or to carry, show or display any
banner, transparency, badge or sign in front of, or in the vicinity of, or to
ride in any parade or procession of two or more motor or other vehicles in
front of, or in the vicinity of any works, plant, packing plant, cannery,
factory or any other place or site of business or employment for the purpose of
inducing or influencing or attempting to induce or influence any person to
refrain from entering any such works, plant, packing plant, cannery, factory or
place or site of business or employment, or for the purpose of inducing or
influencing, or attempting to induce or influence, any person to refrain from
purchasing or using any goods, wares, merchandise or other articles
manufactured, grown, made or kept for sale therein, or for the purpose of
inducing or influencing, or attempting to induce or influence any person to
refrain from doing or performing any service or labor in any works, plant,
packing plant, cannery, factory, place or site of business or employment, or
for the purpose of intimidating, threatening or coercing, or attempting to
intimidate, threaten or coerce any person performing, seeking or obtaining
service or labor in any such works, plant, packing plant, cannery, factory,
place or site of business or employment.
   (C)   Penalty. Any person violating any of the provisions of this section
shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction thereof shall be
punished as provided in §
1-4-1 of this code.
(Ord. 44, passed 5-10-1937)
§ 10-1-8 EMERGENCY SUSPENSION, AUTHORITY OF CHIEF OF POLICE.
   The Chief of Police shall have the authority to suspend serving, drinking or
consumption of any spirituous, vinous, malt or other alcoholic beverages or
intoxicating liquors in, on or at any city park or property during any
emergency for up to 72 hours by approval of the City Council.
(Ord. 222, passed 1-22-1981)
CHAPTER 2: CURFEW
Section
10-2-1 Purpose and intent
10-2-2 Definitions
10-2-3 Offenses
10-2-4 Defenses
10-2-5 Enforcement
10-2-6 Penalties
10-2-7 Severability
§ 10-2-1 PURPOSE AND INTENT.
   The City Council finds that a juvenile curfew ordinance is necessary and
desirable because the protection of minors warrants a higher degree of
governmental regulation. This higher degree of regulation is premised upon the
peculiar vulnerability of children and minors’ inability to make critical
decisions in an informed and mature manner. The City Council recognizes a
compelling interest in preserving the safety of the community generally and
providing a higher degree of protection for its minors specifically during
nighttime hours.
(Ord. 469, passed 9-2-1997)
§ 10-2-2 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   CURFEW HOURS. The period from 10:00 p.m. any night until 6:00 a.m. the
following morning.
   EMERGENCY. Unforeseen circumstances or a situation that calls for immediate
action. The term includes, but is not limited to, an automobile accident, fire
or explosion, natural disaster or any condition requiring immediate action to
prevent bodily injury or loss of life.
   ESTABLISHMENT. Any privately owned place of business operated for profit to
which the public is invited including, but not limited to, any place of
amusement or entertainment.
   GUARDIAN.
      1.   A person who, under court order, is the guardian of the minor; or
      2.   A public or private agency with whom a minor has been placed by a
court.
   MINOR. Any person under 18 years of age.
   OPERATOR. Any individual, firm, association, partnership or corporation
operating, managing or conducting any establishment.
   PARENT. A person who is a natural parent, adoptive parent or stepparent of a
minor.
   PUBLIC PLACE. Any place the public or a substantial group of the public has
access and includes, but is not limited to, streets, highways, common areas of
schools, hospitals, apartment houses, office buildings, transport facilities
and shops.
   REMAIN. To:
      1.   Linger, stay or be present; or
      2.   Fail to leave the premises when requested to do so by a peace
officer, the owner, operator or other person in control of the premises.
   RESPONSIBLE ADULT. A person at least 18 years of age and authorized by a
parent or guardian to have the care and custody of a minor.
(Ord. 469, passed 9-2-1997)
§ 10-2-3 OFFENSES.
   It is unlawful for:
   (A)   Any minor to remain in any public place or on the premises of any
establishment within the city during curfew hours;
   (B)   Any parent or guardian of a minor to knowingly permit, or by
insufficient control allow, the minor to remain in any public place or on the
premises of any establishment within the city during curfew hours; or
   (C)   Any owner, operator or employee of an establishment to knowingly
permit a minor to remain in or upon the premises of an establishment during
curfew hours.
(Ord. 469, passed 9-2-1997)
§ 10-2-4 DEFENSES.
   (A)   It is a defense to prosecution of the above offenses that the minor
was:
      1.   Accompanied by the minor’s parent or guardian or by a responsible
adult;
      2.   On an errand at the direction of the minor’s parent or guardian or
responsible adult, without detour or delay;
      3.   In a motor vehicle involved in intrastate or interstate travel;
      4.   Engaged in employment, or going to or returning home from
employment, without detour or delay;
      5.   Involved in an emergency;
      6.   On the sidewalk adjacent to the minor’s residence, providing the
minor is not otherwise violating the law;
      7.   Attending an official school, religious or other adult supervised
recreational activity sponsored by the city, a civic organization or other
similar entity that takes responsibility for the safety of the minor, or going
to or returning home from such an activity, without detour or delay;
      8.   Exercising first amendment rights protected by the United States
Constitution, such as the free exercise of religion, freedom of speech and the
right of assembly; and
      9.   Emancipated pursuant to law.
   (B)   It is a defense to prosecution under the offense set forth in §
10-2-3(C) of this chapter, that the owner, operator or employee of an
establishment promptly notified the Police Department that a minor was present
on the premises of the establishment during curfew hours and refused to leave.
(Ord. 469, passed 9-2-1997)
§ 10-2-5 ENFORCEMENT.
   (A)   Before taking any enforcement action under this chapter, a peace
officer shall ask the apparent offender’s age and reason for being in a public
place or on the premises of an establishment during curfew hours.
   (B)   The officer shall not issue a citation or detain a minor under this
chapter unless the officer reasonably believes an offense has occurred and
based upon the minor’s response(s) and other circumstances, no defense under
this chapter appears present or applicable.
(Ord. 469, passed 9-2-1997)
§ 10-2-6 PENALTIES.
   Any person who violates a provision of this chapter is guilty of a separate
offense for each day or part of a day during which the violation is committed
or permitted. Any person who violates the offenses described in this chapter
shall be guilty of an infraction and shall be punishable by a fine not to
exceed $25. Minors shall be dealt with in accordance with juvenile court law
and procedure.
(Ord. 469, passed 9-2-1997)
§ 10-2-7 SEVERABILITY.
   If any section, subsection, sentence, clause, phrase or portion of this
chapter is for any reason deemed or held to be invalid or unconstitutional by
the decision of any court of competent jurisdiction, such decision shall not
affect the validity of the remaining portion of this chapter. The City Council
hereby declares that it would have adopted this chapter and each section,
subsection, sentence, clause, phrase or portion thereof, irrespective of the
fact any one or more sections, subsections, sentences, clauses, phrases or
other portions might subsequently be declared invalid or unconstitutional.
(Ord. 469, passed 9-2-1997)
CHAPTER 3: ANIMAL CONTROL REGULATIONS
Section
10-3-1 Definitions
10-3-2 Purpose
10-3-3 Regulations and fees
10-3-4 Animal control officer duties and authority
10-3-5 Peace officers to assist animal control officers
10-3-6 Interference and obstruction of animal control officers
10-3-7 Mutual aid authority
10-3-8 Applicability of state laws
10-3-9 Duty to care for animals
10-3-10 Abuse, inhumane treatment and cruelty to animals
10-3-11 Authorization to remove animal if abuse, inhumane treatment or cruelty
is found
10-3-12 Limitation on the number of animals in a residential setting
10-3-13 Sale of animals
10-3-14 Wild, exotic or dangerous animals
10-3-15 Animals prohibited within city limits
10-3-16 Livestock
10-3-17 Slaughter of animals prohibited; permitted conditions
10-3-18 Dead animals
10-3-19 Animal abandonment prohibited
10-3-20 Strays
10-3-21 Removal of animal excreta
10-3-22 Public nuisances
10-3-23 Animals at large
10-3-24 Animals in mobilehome parks
10-3-25 Control of unspayed and unaltered cats
10-3-26 Animals running at large may be impounded
10-3-27 Female dogs in heat
10-3-28 Restraints and animals on private premises prohibited
10-3-29 Prohibited places
10-3-30 Prohibition of sales or giving away of dogs and cats on public property
10-3-31 Interference and mistreatment of police dogs
10-3-32 Animal impoundment
10-3-33 Returning animals where the owner is known
10-3-34 Voluntary surrender of animals to animal control officer
10-3-35 Removal of animal from animal shelter
10-3-36 Dog licenses required
10-3-37 Procedures for issuance of dog license
10-3-38 Wearing dog license tag required
10-3-39 Tagging a dog not described in the application
10-3-40 Lost and destroyed tags to be replaced immediately
10-3-41 Stolen, counterfeit or unauthorized tags and licenses
10-3-42 Presentation of valid rabies certificate, and license tag
10-3-43 Transfer of ownership
10-3-44 Rabies suppression, control and quarantine
10-3-45 Attacking dogs
10-3-46 Vicious, dangerous or fierce animals
10-3-47 Determination, seizure, impoundment and disposition of vicious,
dangerous or fierce animals
10-3-48 Special animal permits
10-3-49 Standards for special animal permit establishments
10-3-50 Zoning
10-3-51 Suspension or revocation
10-3-52 Enforcement
10-3-53 Severability
§ 10-3-1 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   ADEQUATE FOOD. The kind, type and quantity of food appropriate and suitable
for the age and species to provide a reasonable level of nutrition, and which
is provided at regular intervals in a sanitary container, dish or receptacle,
but in no event longer than 24-hour intervals.
   ADEQUATE WATER. Continuous access to fresh potable water in a clean and
sanitary receptacle or container.
   AMBIENT TEMPERATURE. Air temperature in the immediate vicinity of the
animal.
   ANIMAL. Any animal that may be wild or legally kept as a domestic pet
including cats, dogs, birds, reptiles, horses, ponies, mules, burros, sheep,
goats, swine, bird, fish, poultry, fowl or any domestic bovine animal or any
other wild or domestic animal. ANIMAL does not include rodents.
   ANIMAL CONTROL OFFICER. Any city police officer or other person appointed or
designated an animal control officer by the City Manager, Chief of Police or
any officer or employee of another local government agency acting pursuant to a
contract or under the authority of the city.
   ANIMAL SHELTER. A facility designated by the Police Department for the
impoundment of animals and authorized by the City Manager or City Council.
   ANIMAL UNDER RESTRAINT. Any animal under the control of its owner or person
having charge, care, custody or control, except that a dog shall not be
considered under control of the owner unless on a leash or lead, confined
within a vehicle, or confined within the real property limits of the owner
either behind a secure fence structure or securely restrained by a leash or
lead.
   AT LARGE. Any animal that is off the premises of its owner, custodian or
caretaker and which is not under physical restraint by a leash, lead, halter,
rope and the like, of a size and material appropriate to the size and
temperament of the animal and which is held by a person capable of restraining
such animal, or is not otherwise physically restrained by some other device or
instrumentality, except that such device or instrumentality shall not include
voice control, eye control or signal control of the animal by any person,
device or instrumentality.
   BITE. An actual puncture, tear or abrasion of the skin inflicted by the
teeth of an animal.
   CAT. Any member of the feline species (Felis catus) customarily confined by
or bred by humans as a pet.
   CATTERY. An establishment for boarding, breeding, buying, grooming or
selling cats for profit or any building, structure, enclosure or premises
whereupon, or within which ten or more cats, four months of age or older, are
kept or maintained in a manner consistent with the zoning ordinance.
   COOP. A covered enclosure for housing fowl.
   DOG. Any member of the canine family (Canis familiaris), and shall also
include both male and female gender, whether neutered or spayed.
   DOG LICENSE. Any license required by this chapter that is issued every one
to three years depending on the rabies vaccinations for each individual dog.
   DOMESTIC BIRD. Includes, but is not limited to, budgies, canaries,
cardinals, cockatiels, cockatoos, doves, finches, lories, lorikeets, lovebirds,
macaws, parakeets, parrots, sparrows, toucans and weavers.
   DOMESTICATED ANIMAL. Any animal accustomed to living in or about the
habitation of humans, including, but not limited to, cats, dogs, birds, fowl,
horses, rabbits, swine and goats.
   EUTHANASIA. The humane destruction of an animal accomplished by a method
that involves instantaneous unconsciousness and immediate death, such as lethal
injection, or by a method that involves anesthesia, produced by an agent which
causes the painless loss of consciousness and death during such loss of
consciousness.
   FOWL. Any larger domestic bird such as a domesticated chicken, duck, goose,
guinea fowl, peafowl, peacock, turkey, dove, pigeon, game bird or similar bird
intended for human consumption or for the production of eggs for human
consumption.
   GROOMING SALON. A licensed commercial establishment or any building,
structure, enclosure or premises having three or more dogs or cats for the
purpose of bathing, brushing, clipping, manicuring or other related services
and where there is no overnight boarding or breeding.
   GUIDE DOG. Any dog trained and used for the purpose of guiding a blind
person.
   HARBOR. Includes any act of sheltering or providing a home for an animal, or
two or more acts of feeding an animal.
   HOUSEHOLD PETS. Domestic animals ordinarily permitted in a place of
residence, kept for company and pleasure, such as dogs, cats, domestic birds,
guinea pigs, white rats, rabbits, mice and other similar animals generally
considered by the public to be kept as pets, excluding fowl.
   IMPOUNDED. Having been received into the custody of any animal control
center, animal control officer, animal control vehicle or peace officer duly
authorized by the city to receive such animal.
   INHUMANE TREATMENT. Physical and/or emotional mistreatment of an animal
including, but not limited to:
      1.   Burdening the animal with heavy chains or leashes, padlocks or
weights around any part of the body of the animal;
      2.   Exposure to extreme temperature (whether in an unattended vehicle or
without adequate ventilation); or
      3.   Inadequate food, water or shelter.
   KENNEL. A licensed commercial establishment or any building, structure,
enclosure or premises having three or more dogs or cats for the purpose of
boarding, breeding, buying, selling, training and letting for hire for a fee.
   LEASH. Any chain, rope, leather strap or material not to exceed six feet in
length being held in the hand of a person that is capable of controlling and
actually controlling the animal to which it is attached.
   LIVESTOCK. Animals kept for use on a farm and includes, but is not limited
to, any swine, sheep, goat, horse, cattle, equine or bovine animal.
   LOT. A single parcel of land for which a legal description is filed on
record or the boundaries of which are shown on a subdivision map or record of
survey filed with the Merced County Recorder.
   OWNER. Any person, firm or corporation owning, having an interest in or
having ownership, control or custody or possession of any animal. In the case
of a minor, the parents or guardians of the minor shall be deemed the OWNER.
   OWNERSHIP. Any person keeping, harboring, having custody of, or possessing
one or more animals.
   PERSON. Any individual, firm, partnership, joint venture, corporation,
association, trust, club, fraternal society, cooperative or organization.
   PERSON RESPONSIBLE FOR AN ANIMAL. Includes:
      1.   Any person harboring an animal on a constant or continuous basis for
one week or more;
      2.   Any agent of the owner charged with the care of the animal;
      3.   Any person residing with the owner and present at a time when the
owner is absent and the animal commits a violation of this chapter; and
      4.   Any person voluntarily acknowledging responsibility for the animal.
   PET. Any animal kept for pleasure rather than utility.
   PET SHOP. Any establishment containing cages or exhibition pens, not part of
a kennel or cattery, wherein dogs, cats, birds or other pets for sale are kept
or displayed.
   PHYSICAL CONTROL. Any animal confined by a leash, chain, rope or lead or
within the real property limits of its owner.
   POTBELLIED PIG. Purebred pigs which are registered through a potbellied pig
registry.
   POTENTIALLY FIERCE, DANGEROUS OR VICIOUS DOG. Any of the following:
      1.   Any dog which, when unprovoked, on two separate occasions within the
prior 24-month period, engages in any behavior that requires a defensive action
by any person to prevent bodily injury when the person and the dog are off the
property of the owner or keeper of the dog;
      2.   Any dog which, when unprovoked, bites a person causing a less severe
injury than as defined in the Cal. Food and Agriculture Code § 31604; or
      3.   Any dog which, when unprovoked, on two separate occasions within the
prior 24-month period, has killed, seriously bitten, inflicted injury or
otherwise caused injury attacking a domestic animal off the property of the
owner or keeper of the dog.
   PREMISES. Any lot or parcel of land owned, leased or rented by a person.
   PUBLIC ENTITY. Any federal, state or public subdivision, municipal
corporation or agency thereof.
   QUARANTINE. The isolation of an animal in a substantial enclosure so that
the animal is not subject to contact with other animals or unauthorized
persons.
   SANITIZE. To make physically clean and remove and destroy agents.
   SERVICE DOG. Any dog trained and used for purposes of fulfilling the
particular requirements of a physically disabled person including, but not
limited to, minimal protection work, rescue work, pulling a wheelchair or
fetching dropped items.
   SEVERE INJURY. Any physical injury to a human being that results in muscle
tears or disfiguring lacerations or requires multiple sutures or corrective or
cosmetic surgery.
   SIGNAL DOG. Any dog trained and used for the purpose of alerting a deaf
person or a person whose hearing is impaired, to intruders or sounds.
   STRAY. Any animal not under the control of its owner or the keeper of a
“wild animal” species as defined in this section and which is by and large not
domesticated, regardless of whether, in a specific case, a particular animal of
the species is or is not domesticated. Such animals include, among others:
      1.   Alligators and crocodiles;
      2.   Bears (Ursidae);
      3.   All cats except the commonly accepted domesticated cats, and
including cheetah, cougars, leopards, lions, lynx, panthers, mountain lions,
tigers, wildcats and the like;
      4.   All dogs except domesticated dogs, including wolf, fox, coyote,
dingo and the like;
      5.   Porcupine (Erethizontidae); and
      6.   All raccoons including eastern raccoon, desert raccoon, ringtailed
cat and the like.
   UNALTERED AND UNSPAYED. A condition that exists in an animal which permits
the producing of offspring. A dog or cat that has not been spayed or neutered.
   UNLICENSED DOG. Any dog for which no valid license is currently in force and
to which the dog license tag provided for in this chapter is not properly
attached.
   VACCINATION. Inoculation against rabies of any dog or cat, four months of
age or older, with any vaccine prescribed for the purpose by the Merced County
Health Department and the California Department of Health Services.
   VETERINARY HOSPITAL. Any establishment maintained and operated by a licensed
veterinarian for surgery, diagnosis and treatment of disease and injuries of
animals.
   VICIOUS ANIMAL or DANGEROUS ANIMAL or FIERCE ANIMAL.
      1.   Any dog seized under the Cal. Penal Code § 599aa and upon the
sustaining of a conviction of the owner or keeper under the Cal. Penal Code §
597.5(a);
      2.   Any dog which, when unprovoked, in an aggressive manner, inflicts
severe injury on or kills a human being; and
      3.   Any dog previously determined to be and currently listed as a
potentially vicious, dangerous or fierce dog which, after its owner or keeper
has been notified of this determination, continues the behavior described in
this chapter or is maintained in violation of the Cal. Food and Agriculture
Code §§ 31641, 31642 or 31643.
   WILD ANIMAL. Any wild, exotic, dangerous or venomous animal, including, but
not limited to, mammals, fowl, fish or reptiles. WILD ANIMAL also means any of
the following:
      1.   Any animal described in Cal. Fish and Game Code §§ 2116 and 2118;
      2.   Any animal described in Cal. Fish and Game Code § 2118 (j) and (k);
      3.   Members of the class Reptilia order Ophidia including, but not
limited to, racers, boas, water snakes and pythons over four feet in length;
      4.   Members of the class Reptilia order Loricata such as, but not
limited to, alligators, caymans and crocodiles over three feet in length;
      5.   Members of the class Reptilia order Sauria, excepting iguanas over
three feet in length;
      6.   Members of:
         (a)   The class Aves order Falconiformes including, but not limited
to, hawks, eagles and vultures; and
         (b)   Subdivision Ratitae including, but not limited to, ostriches,
rheas, cassowaries and emus.
      7.   Members of the class Mammalia order Carnivore, expressly excepting
the domestic dog (Canis familiaris) and the domestic cat (Felis catus),
including, but not limited to, the family Felidae such as ocelots, margays,
tigers, jaguars, leopards and cougars;
      8.   Members of the class Mammalia order Carnivore family Canidae such as
wolves, dingoes, coyotes and jackals;
      9.   Members of the class Mammalia order Marsupialia such as kangaroos
and opossums;
      10.   Members of the class Mammalia order Chiroptera such as bats;
      11.   Members of the class Mammalia order Edentata such as sloths,
anteaters and armadillos;
      12.   Members of the class Mammalia order Proboscidea including
elephants;
      13.   Members of the class Mammalia order Primata including, but not
limited to, monkeys, chimpanzees and gorillas and other ungulate including, but
not limited to, antelopes, deer and bison;
      14.   Any nondomestic species when kept, maintained or harbored in such
numbers or in such a manner as to constitute the likelihood of danger to
animals themselves or human beings or the property of human beings;
      15.   Any species of animals which are venomous to human beings whether
its venom is transmitted by bite, sting, touch or other means;
      16.   Any hybrid animal which is part wild animal and is capable of
transmitting rabies, except livestock hybrids, and for which no rabies
prophylaxis is recognized or authorized by the state; and
      17.   A potentially dangerous animal over which the owner has evidenced a
failure to maintain control.
(Ord. 540, passed 4-18-2006)
§ 10-3-2 PURPOSE.
   This chapter establishes regulations regarding animals within the city and
for the formation, function and penalties associated with animal control
services.
(Ord. 604, passed 4-16-2013)
§ 10-3-3 REGULATIONS AND FEES.
   A schedule of fees for licenses and services provided in accordance with
this chapter shall be established by resolution of the City Council.
(Ord. 604, passed 4-16-2013)
§ 10-3-4 ANIMAL CONTROL OFFICER DUTIES AND AUTHORITY.
   (A)   Duties. Animal control officers shall be empowered to:
      1.   Impoundment. Receive, take up and impound:
         (a)   Any animal found running at large on any highway, street,
sidewalk, lane, alley or other public place or upon any private property in
violation of this chapter or of any law of the state;
         (b)   Any animal which, without provocation or direction, is molesting
any person;
         (c)   Any animal which, without provocation or direction, is molesting
or harassing animals, birds or pets upon the premises of any person; and
         (d)   Any animal which the officer has reasonable grounds to believe
that very prompt action is required to protect the health or safety of the
animal and others.
      2.   Animal care. Regularly and adequately feed, water and otherwise care
for all dogs, cats and other animals impounded under the provisions of this
chapter, or to provide for such feeding, watering and care. The animal control
officer may also take charge of any animal, including dog or cat, that reason
of lameness, sickness, feebleness or neglect, is unfit for the labor it is
performing, or that in any other manner is being cruelly or inhumanely treated,
and provide care and treatment for the animal until, it is deemed to be in a
suitable condition to be returned to the owner. The cost of caring for and
treating any animal seized under this chapter shall constitute a lien on the
animal and the animal shall not be returned to its owner until the charges are
paid;
      3.   Investigations. Investigate the condition and behavior of any animal
which he or she has reason to believe is vicious, dangerous or fierce; and
      4.   Animal destruction. Humanely destroy or give emergency care to sick
or injured animals including dogs and cats.
   (B)   Authority to enter onto private property. The animal control officer
shall have the right, and is hereby authorized, to enter onto private property
for the purpose of enforcing the provisions of this title. The animal control
officer or his or her designee shall be given prompt access to the property
upon exhibiting suitable evidence of his or her identity. When entry is not
granted after orally requesting such and exhibiting adequate identification,
the animal control officer shall obtain an inspection warrant pursuant to Cal.
Code of Civil Procedure §§ 1822.50 et seq. An inspection warrant is not
required in emergency situations.
   (C)   Authority to arrest and issue notices to appear. The animal control
officer has the authority and duty, under Cal. Penal Code §§ 836.5 and 830.9,
to investigate complaints and violations of the provisions of this title and
may arrest a person without a warrant whenever he or she has reasonable cause
to believe that the person to be arrested has violated this title. In the
alternative the animal control officer may issue a citation to any person
violating the provisions of this title ordering such person to appear in court
to answer such charges.
   (D)   Warrants not required. The animal control officer may enter onto
private property without a warrant in the following situations:
      1.   When entering is expressly permitted by the property owner;
      2.   When he or she has probable cause to believe that a rabid, injured,
sick abandoned or mistreated animal is present; and
      3.   When in pursuit of an animal that is unlicensed; has been running at
large upon any public property, including any road or highway; or has been
trespassing on private property and the owner of such property has requested
that such animal be apprehended; when he or she has probable cause to believe
that a violation of this title exists in any building or upon the premises.
   (E)   Equipment to impound and firearms authorization. The animal control
officer is authorized to employ the use of a tranquilizer gun and any animal
control equipment or devices ordinarily used within the state of animal control
or to impound an animal. If in the opinion of the Chief of Police, it is
advisable that the animal control officer carry a firearm or other weapon, then
the animal control officer shall be entitled to carry such firearm or weapons.
(Ord. 540, passed 4-18-2006; Ord. 604, passed 4-16-2013)
§ 10-3-5 PEACE OFFICERS TO ASSIST ANIMAL CONTROL OFFICERS.
   It shall be the duty of all peace officers to cooperate with and assist the
animal control officers in the enforcement of the provisions of this chapter.
(Ord. 540, passed 4-18-2006; Ord. 604, passed 4-16-2013)
§ 10-3-6 INTERFERENCE AND OBSTRUCTION OF ANIMAL CONTROL OFFICERS.
   Any person who resists, delays, obstructs or interferes with an animal
control officer while said officer is performing his or her duties as an animal
control officer shall be guilty of the Cal. Penal Code § 148.
(Ord. 540, passed 4-18-2006; Ord. 604, passed 4-16-2013)
§ 10-3-7 MUTUAL AID AUTHORITY.
   The animal control officer may assist other animal control officers, other
animal control departments, peace officers or public officials within the state
when requested to do so when such requests are related to animal control and
impoundment.
(Ord. 540, passed 4-18-2006; Ord. 604, passed 4-16-2013)
§ 10-3-8 APPLICABILITY OF STATE LAWS.
   Notwithstanding the provisions of this title, the provisions of the
California Health And Safety Code, the California Penal Code and the California
Code of Regulations relating to animal health, control and care and rabies
control shall apply when such provisions are more stringent than those provided
for in this title.
(Ord. 540, passed 4-18-2006; Ord. 604, passed 4-16-2013)
§ 10-3-9 DUTY TO CARE FOR ANIMALS.
   (A)   Proper care. Humane care and treatment of all animals shall be
maintained at all times. Every owner, driver or keeper of any animal who
permits the animal to be in any building, enclosure, lane, street, square or
lot within the city, without proper care and attention is guilty of a
misdemeanor.
   (B)   Food, water and veterinarian care. Every owner shall provide his or
her animals with adequate food and water. Every owner or animal keeper shall
supply each animal with adequate food and water daily. The food shall be free
from contamination, wholesome, palatable and of sufficient quantity and
nutritive value to meet the normal daily requirements for the condition and
size of the animal as specified by a veterinarian. Proper veterinary care shall
be administered when needed to prevent suffering.
   (C)   Living space requirements. Each animal shall be housed in a proper,
clean and sanitary shelter which protects the animal from weather. Every person
who keeps an animal in an enclosed area shall provide it with an adequate
exercise area. If the animal is restricted by a leash, rope or chain, it shall
be affixed in such a manner that the animal will not become entangled and has
access to food, water and shelter.
   (D)   Cage, coop and pen requirements. Any and all cages, pens, coops,
hutches, yards or spaces used for housing any animal must be at least three
times as large in floor space and twice the height as the total size of all
live animals kept therein. No animal may be kept in any cage, coop, pen, hutch,
yard or space which does not permit the animal to stand in a naturally erect
position, except that a veterinarian, a person showing the animal or an animal
groomer may temporarily confine an animal in a smaller container for medical,
showing or grooming purposes.
   (E)   Sanitary enclosures. No person shall at any time maintain any lot or
other premises, or any portion thereof, whereupon an animal is kept, in an
unsanitary condition, or in a condition which attracts flies or other insects
or creates noxious or offensive odors.
(Ord. 540, passed 4-18-2006; Ord. 604, passed 4-16-2013)
§ 10-3-10 ABUSE, INHUMANE TREATMENT AND CRUELTY TO ANIMALS.
   (A)   Physical and emotional abuse.
      1.   It is unlawful:
         (a)   To willfully or maliciously kill, maim, disfigure, torture,
beat, mutilate, burn, scald, overdrive, physically or emotionally mistreat or
otherwise treat cruelly any animal;
         (b)   To burden the animal with heavy chains or leashes, padlocks or
weights around any part of the body of the animal; or
         (c)   To expose the animal to extreme temperatures.
      2.   Every parent or legal guardian shall supervise his or her minor
child or children to ensure that such child or children do not mistreat any
animal.
   (B)   Care and maintenance. It shall be the duty of any person to provide
any animal in his or her charge or custody, as owner or otherwise, with
adequate food, drink, care and shelter.
   (C)   Animals in vehicles. It shall be unlawful to carry or confine any
animal in or upon any vehicle in a cruel or inhumane manner, including, but not
limited to, carrying or confining such animal without adequate ventilation, or
in such a way as to subject the animal to temperatures sufficiently above the
ambient air temperature to affect the animal’s health and welfare. Any animal
found in violation of this section may be impounded for the safety and
protection of the animal and the public by the animal control officer. In the
event any animal is so confined, authority is given to the animal control
officer or any other enforcing authority, to release the animal without any
resulting liability to the city or the enforcing authority for the resulting
damages.
   (D)   Abandonment of animals. It shall be unlawful for any person to abandon
any animal within the city. ABANDONMENT includes neglect, whether intentional
or otherwise, whereby an animal becomes a stray.
   (E)   Animal poisoning. Except as otherwise provided herein for the
destruction of animals, it shall be unlawful to make accessible to any animal,
with intent to cause harm or death, any substance which has in any manner been
treated or prepared with any harmful or poisonous substance. This provision
shall not be interpreted so as to prohibit the use of poisonous substances for
the control of vermin in furtherance of the public health when applied in such
a manner as to reasonably prohibit access to other animals.
   (F)   Injury to animals by motorists.
      1.   Aid. Every operator of a vehicle upon the streets of the
jurisdiction shall immediately upon injuring, striking, maiming or running down
any domestic animal give such aid as can reasonably be rendered. In the absence
of the owner, he or she shall immediately notify the City Police Department,
furnishing requested facts relative to such injury.
      2.   Remaining at scene.
         (a)   It shall be the duty of such operator to remain at or near the
scene until such time as the appropriate authorities arrive, and upon the
arrival of such authorities, the operator shall immediately identify himself or
herself to such authorities.
         (b)   Alternatively, in the absence of the owner, a person may give
aid by taking the animal to the animal control facility or other appropriate
facility and notifying the City Police Department. Such animal may be taken in
by the animal control facility and dealt with as deemed appropriate under the
circumstances.
      3.   Emergency vehicles. Emergency vehicles are exempted from the
requirements of this provision.
      4.   Violation. Violation of this section is an infraction. Each such act
or repetition thereof shall constitute a separate violation.
   (G)   Animals for fighting. It shall be unlawful to raise, train, keep or
use any animal, fowl or bird for the purpose of fighting or baiting; and for
any person to be a party to or be present as a spectator at any such fighting
or baiting of any animal or fowl; to knowingly rent any building, shed, room,
yard, ground or premises for any such purposes as aforesaid, or to knowingly
suffer or permit the use of his or her buildings, sheds, rooms, yards, grounds
or premises for the purposes aforesaid.
   (H)   Killing of birds. It shall be unlawful to kill any bird(s), or to rob
or destroy any nest, egg or young of any bird in violation of the laws of the
state.
   (I)   Malicious impounding. It shall be unlawful for anyone not authorized
by the city to hide or impound the animal of another person.
(Ord. 540, passed 4-18-2006; Ord. 604, passed 4-16-2013)
§ 10-3-11 AUTHORIZATION TO REMOVE ANIMAL IF ABUSE, INHUMANE TREATMENT OR
CRUELTY IS FOUND.
   The animal control officer may remove any animal or fowl from any place,
dwelling, lot, house or parcel if he or she finds that the animal is not being
cared for in a proper and humane manner.
(Ord. 540, passed 4-18-2006; Ord. 604, passed 4-16-2013)
§ 10-3-12 LIMITATION ON THE NUMBER OF ANIMALS IN A RESIDENTIAL SETTING.
   (A)   Single-family dwellings.
      1.   No more than a combination of a maximum of three dogs and cats; two
rabbits; three domestic birds or fowl, guinea pigs or any other rodent species;
and, no more than two snakes or other similar animals are permitted.
      2.   Notwithstanding the foregoing, no more than five animals are
permitted for each single-family residence.
   (B)   Multiple-family dwellings.
      1.   For multiple-family residences, including mobilehomes in mobilehome
parks, no more than one dog, one rabbit, two cats, two domestic birds, two
guinea pigs or other rodents, two snakes or other reptiles are permitted.
      2.   The total number of animals in one multiple-family residence may not
exceed four animals.
(Ord. 540, passed 4-18-2006; Ord. 604, passed 4-16-2013)
§ 10-3-13 SALE OF ANIMALS.
   (A)   Sale or gift of animals. No person under the age of 18 shall place any
dog, cat, puppy, or kitten on public display for the purpose of sale, offer for
sale, barter, or give away upon any street, sidewalk, parking lot, shopping
center walkway, or other public place. No transfer shall be made to any person
under the age of 18.
   (B)   Sale of animals for experimentation. Neither the animal control
officer nor any employee thereof shall knowingly sell or give any impounded
animal to any person, firm, corporation, association or school for the purpose
of animal experimentation.
   (C)   Rabbits or fowl. Rabbits or fowl under two months of age shall not be
sold if artificially dyed or colored. Nothing in this provision shall be
construed or prohibit the raising of such rabbits and fowl by a private
individual for his or her personal use and consumption, provided that he or she
shall maintain proper brooders and other facilities for the care and
containment of such animals while they are in his or her possession.
   (D)   Premiums and novelties. It shall be unlawful for any person to offer
as a premium, prize, award, novelty or incentive to purchase merchandise, any
live animal.
   (E)   Pet turtles. It shall be unlawful for any pet shop to raise or sell
any Pseudemys scripta elegans, or P. Troostii family Testudinidae, “pet
turtles”.
(Ord. 540, passed 4-18-2006; Ord. 604, passed 4-16-2013)
§ 10-3-14 WILD, EXOTIC OR DANGEROUS ANIMALS.
   (A)   Ownership or possession. It shall be unlawful for any person to own,
possess or maintain the custody, charge or control of any wild, exotic,
dangerous or nondomestic or venomous reptile or any animal known by such person
to be dangerous or wild as regulated by Cal. Code of Regulations, Title 14, §
671 as such animals are defined in Cal. Fish and Game Code Article 1 of Chapter
2 of Division 3.
   (B)   Sale prohibited. It shall be unlawful to sell, offer for sale, barter,
give away, keep or purchase any “wild animal”, exotic animal or dangerous
animal as defined herein or any animal which is wild, fierce, dangerous,
noxious or naturally inclined to do harm, except the animal shelter, a
zoological park, veterinary hospital, humane society shelter, public
laboratory, circus, sideshow, amusement show or facility for education or
scientific purposes may keep such an animal if protective devices adequate to
prevent such animal from escaping or injuring the public are provided.
   (C)   Protected species. It shall be unlawful to keep an animal of a species
prohibited or protected by C.F.R. Title 50 or by the California Endangered
Species Act, being Cal. Fish and Game Code, Division 3, Chapter 1.5, §§2050 et
seq.
(Ord. 540, passed 4-18-2006; Ord. 604, passed 4-16-2013)
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see Cal. Fish and Game Code §§ 2050 et seq. and 2116 et
seq.
§ 10-3-15 ANIMALS PROHIBITED WITHIN CITY LIMITS.
   It is unlawful for any person, party, firm or corporation to keep, possess,
harbor or maintain within the city limits any of the following animals:
   (A)   Dogs. Any dog for which a license has not been obtained for that year,
excepting those which are currently licensed by other public entities which
also require effective rabies vaccinations, and which will be kept within the
city for a period not exceeding seven days;
   (B)   Fowl. Any larger domestic fowl including roosters, chickens, geese,
pigeons, ducks, turkeys, guinea fowl, peafowl, peacocks, game birds or other
domestic fowl or fowl intended for human consumption or for the production of
eggs, except this prohibition shall not apply to:
      1.   A place of business of any commercial business duly licensed by the
city to process domestic fowl;
      2.   Licensed veterinary hospital, animal clinic, animal shelter or
exhibition area maintained by any public authority for which a permit has been
first obtained for the keeping of the animals from the city; and
      3.   Domestic birds including budgies, canaries, cardinals, cockatiels,
cockatoos, doves, finches, lories, lorikeets, lovebirds, macaws, parakeets,
parrots, sparrows, toucans and weavers.
   (C)   Pigs and hogs. Any hog, swine or pig, including potbellied pig;
   (D)   Other animals. Any other animals including:
      1.   Any stand or hive of bees;
      2.   Any rabbit, except the raising of a maximum of five rabbits may be
allowed as part of a recognized 4-H or Future Farmers of America project. Such
exception may be granted in the following manner:
         (a)   Persons requesting the exception must file a formal application
with the city stating the location of the project, the number of animals in the
project and length of the project. Said application must be signed by the
authorized 4-H or Future Farmers of America (FFA) group leader prior to
approval by the city;
         (b)   During the term of the project, the animal control officer or
his or her designee has the right to inspect the project location at reasonable
intervals and at reasonable times to ensure the project meets all of the
requirements of this section; and
         (c)   During the term of the project, the project animal and location
surrounding the project will be kept clean and free from odor, insects and
other objectionable materials which could constitute a public nuisance.
   (E)   Exceptions.
      1.   Animals brought into the city for any regularly scheduled authorized
parade or public exhibition, but only for the time reasonably required for the
parade or exhibition; and
      2.   Animals located on property owned by Merced Union High School
District as part of an animal education program offered by the school district
or animal program affiliated with the school district.
(Ord. 540, passed 4-18-2006; Ord. 604, passed 4-16-2013)
§ 10-3-16 LIVESTOCK.
   The keeping of livestock including any horse, mule, ass, goat, sheep, hog,
bull, ox, cow or other livestock is prohibited within the city limits of the
city, unless the provisions of subsections (B) and (C) of this section apply:
   (A)   Annexed areas. As to areas which have been annexed to the city, the
then current owners of properties so annexed, but not their successors in
interest, shall be permitted to keep any livestock held as of the date of such
annexation, but shall not be permitted to increase the number of livestock held
as of the date of annexation;
   (B)   Zoning. The property is not located in any residential, commercial or
industrial zone within the city;
   (C)   Minimum lot size. The animal is located on property owned by the
animal owner and is a minimum of five acres;
   (D)   Maximum number of animals. A maximum of two animals per acre of land
is provided, excluding homes, shops, hay/grain storage area and the like; and
   (E)   Exceptions.
      1.   Animals brought into the city for any regularly scheduled authorized
parade or public exhibition, but only for the time reasonably required for the
parade or exhibition; and
      2.   Animals located on property owned by Merced Union High School
District as part of an animal education program offered by the school district
or animal program affiliated with the school district.
(Ord. 540, passed 4-18-2006; Ord. 604, passed 4-16-2013)
§ 10-3-17 SLAUGHTER OF ANIMALS PROHIBITED; PERMITTED CONDITIONS.
   The slaughter of any animal is prohibited within the city limits except
under the following conditions:
   (A)   Zoning. The property is not located in any residential or commercial
zone within the city;
   (B)   Minimum lot size. The animal is located on property owned by the
animal owner and is a minimum of five acres; and
   (C)   Qualifications. The animal is slaughtered by a licensed professional
or the property owner.
(Ord. 540, passed 4-18-2006; Ord. 604, passed 4-16-2013)
§ 10-3-18 DEAD ANIMALS.
   (A) Dead animal removal. The animal control officer shall remove and dispose
of all dead animals found on any street or other public place.
   (B)   Dead animal notification. It shall be the duty of every owner of any
animal found dead within the city to immediately notify the city’s Police
Department of the location of such animal, so that the same may be removed as
speedily as possible. It shall be unlawful for any person knowingly to permit
any dead animal to remain upon the premises of such person, or for the owner of
any dead animal knowingly to permit the same to remain upon any public street
or other public property or upon any premises within the city, for more than
three hours without notifying the Police Department of the location of the
same. If the owner of such dead animal does not remove it himself or herself or
cause it to be properly removed, the city may cause it to be removed and
thereupon assess the costs of such against the owner, and may avail itself of
all remedies in law and equity to enforce such removal and recover the costs
thereof.
   (C)   Voluntary release of dead animal. Any owner of a dead animal who
voluntarily releases such animal to the animal control officer shall be subject
to a disposal fee; or if a dead animal is taken into custody by the animal
control officer and the ownership can be determined, the owner shall be
responsible for disposal fees.
   (D)   Violation. Any person violating the provisions of this section either
by failing to do those acts required herein or by doing any act prohibited
herein, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. Each day such violation is committed
or permitted to continue shall constitute a separate offense and shall be
punishable as such.
(Ord. 540, passed 4-18-2006; Ord. 604, passed 4-16-2013)
§ 10-3-19 ANIMAL ABANDONMENT PROHIBITED.
   No owner of any live animal shall abandon it upon any public or private
place or premises.
(Ord. 540, passed 4-18-2006; Ord. 604, passed 4-16-2013)
§ 10-3-20 STRAYS.
   No person, except a society incorporated within the state for the primary
purpose of preventing cruelty to animals, shall harbor any lost or strayed dog,
cat or other animal. Whenever any such animal shall be found which appears to
be lost, stray or feral, the person finding it shall notify an animal control
officer within 36 hours so that the animal may be impounded. Retaining a stray
animal after notifying an animal control officer shall not constitute a
violation of this section.
(Ord. 540, passed 4-18-2006; Ord. 604, passed 4-16-2013)
§ 10-3-21 REMOVAL OF ANIMAL EXCRETA.
   It is unlawful and a public nuisance for any owner, keeper or walker of any
animal to permit such animal to discharge excreta upon any public or private
property, other than the property of the owner of such animal, within the city
if such owner, keeper or walker does not immediately thereafter remove and
clean up such animal’s excreta from the public or private property.
(Ord. 540, passed 4-18-2006; Ord. 604, passed 4-16-2013)
§ 10-3-22 PUBLIC NUISANCES.
   (A)   Declaration. The following animals are hereby declared to be
nuisances:
      1.   An animal causing significant damage to the property of a person
other than its owner;
      2.   A fierce, dangerous or vicious animal which, in the opinion of the
enforcing animal control officer, cannot be restrained so as to remove all
substantial risk of personal injury or substantial property damage;
      3.   An animal which causes unreasonable fouling of the air by odors;
      4.   An animal which causes seriously unsanitary conditions in enclosures
or surroundings;
      5.   A dog, cat or animal of similar or greater size which urinates or
defecates on any public sidewalk, park or building, or on any private property
without the consent of the owner of such private property, unless the owner of
or person responsible for such animal shall immediately and properly dispose of
the defecation;
      6.   An animal or combination of animals which bark, whine, howl, cry or
makes other loud and disturbing noises in an excessive and continuous manner
for at least ten minutes, or in an untimely fashion as to disturb the peace and
quiet of the neighbors surrounding or in the vicinity of such premises, or
whose barking whining, howling, crying or other sound or cry interferes with
any person of ordinary sensitivity in a reasonable comfortable enjoyment of
life and property;
      7.   An animal which attacks or molests pedestrians or chases passing
vehicles;
      8.   An animal which habitually or frequently attacks persons or other
domestic animals;
      9.   A “wild animal” as defined in this chapter, if said wild animal is
kept or harbored in an area of the city zoned for residential use;
      10.   An animal that damages public or private property;
      11.   An animal which is determined by the city’s Police Department or
County Health Department to be a public nuisance by virtue of being offensive
or dangerous to the public health, welfare, or safety;
      12.   Public nuisances defined in Cal. Penal Code § 370; and
      13.   The possession or maintenance of any dog, cat or other animal or
the allowing of any dog, cat or other animal to be in violation of this
chapter, in addition to a violation of this chapter, is hereby declared to be a
public nuisance. The animal control officer or any city peace officer is hereby
directed and empowered to summarily abate any such public nuisance independent
of any criminal prosecution or the results thereof, by any means reasonably
necessary to accomplish said abatement including, but not limited to, issuing
of citations, issuing of administrative citations pursuant to Title 1, Chapter
18 of this code and this chapter, the destruction of the dog, cat or other
animal involved, or by the imposition of specific reasonable conditions and
restrictions for the maintenance of such dog or cat. Failure to comply with
such conditions and restrictions is a misdemeanor. The owner or keeper of such
dog or cat shall reimburse the city for all costs incurred in enforcing
compliance with the provisions of this section. The city, by and through the
Police Department, may also commence appropriate proceedings in a court of
competent jurisdiction as are appropriate under the laws and regulations of the
state for the abatement and redress of public nuisances.
   (B)   Abatement. In the case of a fierce, dangerous or vicious animal
described in subsection (A)2. of this section, an animal control officer may
follow the procedures outlined in §
10-3-46 of this chapter. In all other cases described in subsection (A) of this
section, the animal is subject to immediate impoundment, and to license
revocation or suspension.
   (C)   Violation. The owner of or person responsible for an animal committing
any of the acts named in subsection (A) of this section is guilty of an
infraction, unless the violation results in an administrative citation, or
unless otherwise stated in this chapter.
   (D)   Strict liability. The owner or person responsible for an animal
declared to be a public nuisance shall be strictly liable for any personal
injury or damage caused by such animal.
   (E)   Administrative citation fine schedule. Any administrative citations
issued for violations of this chapter shall be issued pursuant to the following
fine schedule:
      1.   A fine not exceeding $50 per day for a first violation;
      2.   A fine not exceeding $100 per day for a second violation of the same
code provision or permit under this chapter within the previous 12 months; and
      3.   A fine not exceeding $200 per day for each additional violation of
the same code provision or permit under this chapter within the previous 12
months.
(Ord. 604, passed 4-16-2013)
§ 10-3-23 ANIMALS AT LARGE.
   (A)   Prohibition. No person owning or having the care, custody, control or
possession of any animal shall allow or permit such animal to run, be or remain
at large within the corporate limits of the city upon any public street, alley,
park, school or other public place or upon any private property without the
consent of the owner of such property. Such animal shall be presumed to be
running at large within the meaning of this section unless:
      1.   If on the animal owner’s or custodian’s property, effectively
restrained within a cage, pen or other suitable enclosure, or effectively tied
and restrained by chain, strip or chord attached around such animal’s neck or
to the animal’s collar or other device worn by the animal and held by a
responsible person or fastened on such owner’s or custodian’s property in such
a manner as will not permit such animal to reach the front sidewalk, the side
or rear lot line or the rear alley of such owner’s or custodian’s property;
      2.   If not on the animal owner’s or custodian’s property, effectively
tied and restrained by chain, strap or chord, eight feet or less in length,
attached around such animal’s neck or to the animal’s collar or other device
worn by the animal and held by a responsible person. Any such restraining
device shall be of sufficient strength as to prevent being broken; and
      3.   Effectively restrained within an automobile or any other vehicle. No
dog, except a dog assisting a peace officer engaged in law enforcement duties,
or any other animal shall be transported on any public thoroughfare in any
vehicle unless such animal is totally enclosed within such vehicle, or within a
secured container carried upon such vehicle, or securely cross tethered to such
vehicle in such a way as to prevent falling out of such vehicle and to prevent
injury to the animal or others.
   (B)   Owner liability.
      1.   A person who owns or is in charge of, controls or who possesses a
dog or other animal who permits, allows or causes the dog or other animal to
run, stray, be uncontrolled, or in any manner be in, upon, or at large, upon a
public street, sidewalk, park or public property, or upon the premises or
private property of another person shall be guilty of a misdemeanor if such dog
or other animal bites, attacks or causes injury to any human being or other
animal.
      2.   Any person convicted pursuant to this section shall not own,
possess, control or be in charge of any animal of the type which caused the
bite, attack or injury for a period of three years after the date of
conviction. The city shall not issue or renew any license or permit for such
type of animal for the person so convicted.
   (C)   Citizen assistance. In the interest of public safety, it shall be
lawful for any person to take up, in a humane manner, any dog, cat or other
animal running at large in violation of this chapter and promptly deliver it to
the animal control officer.
(Ord. 540, passed 4-18-2006; Ord. 604, passed 4-16-2013)
§ 10-3-24 ANIMALS IN MOBILEHOME PARKS.
   Dogs and other domestic animals shall not be permitted to run at large in
any mobilehome park.
(Ord. 540, passed 4-18-2006; Ord. 604, passed 4-16-2013)
§ 10-3-25 CONTROL OF UNSPAYED AND UNALTERED CATS.
   It shall be unlawful for any person who owns, harbors or keeps any unspayed
or unaltered cat four months of age or older within the city to allow or permit
such unspayed or unaltered cat to be or remain outdoors.
(Ord. 540, passed 4-18-2006; Ord. 604, passed 4-16-2013)
§ 10-3-26 ANIMALS RUNNING AT LARGE MAY BE IMPOUNDED.
   The animal control officer may seize and impound every dog or other animal
found running at large or found to be in violation of this chapter. Animals
seized will be impounded at the animal shelter.
(Ord. 540, passed 4-18-2006; Ord. 604, passed 4-16-2013)
§ 10-3-27 FEMALE DOGS IN HEAT.
   Any owner of or person responsible for any female dog or cat in heat, in
addition to restraining such animal shall cause such dog or cat to be
constantly confined in a building so as to prevent it from attracting by scent
or coming into contact with other dogs or cats, unless the owner of such dog or
cat thereafter finds responsible owners for any resulting litter.
(Ord. 540, passed 4-18-2006; Ord. 604, passed 4-16-2013)
§ 10-3-28 RESTRAINTS AND ANIMALS ON PRIVATE PREMISES PROHIBITED.
   (A)   The owner of or person responsible for a dog shall restrain said dog
either by suitable leash, rope, impenetrable wall, fence or other barrier, or
by constant supervision, such that the animal is prevented from leaving the
owner’s or responsible person’s property or supervision.
   (B)   No owner or keeper of an animal, whether licensed, or unlicensed, even
though not at large, shall allow or permit such animal to be in or upon any
private place or premises other than those of the owner or keeper, except with
consent of the person in charge of the private place or premises.
   (C)   The owner of an animal not restrained as provided in this section
shall be strictly liable for any damage caused by such animal.
(Ord. 540, passed 4-18-2006; Ord. 604, passed 4-16-2013)
§ 10-3-29 PROHIBITED PLACES.
   (A)   No owner or person responsible for a dog shall take or permit such
dog, whether loose or on a leash or in arms, in or about:
      1.   Any establishment or place of business where food or food products
are sold or displayed, including, but not limited to, restaurants, grocery
stores, meat markets, and fruit or vegetable stores;
      2.   Any place of worship during public services; or
      3.   In any public school building while school is in session, except for
purposes of instruction when authorized by a teacher at said school directly
involved in such instruction.
   (B)   This section shall not apply to police dogs or dogs specially trained
for and actually assisting a deaf, blind or disabled person.
(Ord. 540, passed 4-18-2006; Ord. 604, passed 4-16-2013)
§ 10-3-30 PROHIBITION OF SALES OR GIVING AWAY OF DOGS AND CATS ON PUBLIC
PROPERTY.
   No person in the city shall offer for sale or sell or give away or transfer
for adoption any cat, kitten, dog, puppy or any other animal on any public
street, public sidewalk or public park.
(Ord. 540, passed 4-18-2006; Ord. 604, passed 4-16-2013)
§ 10-3-31 INTERFERENCE AND MISTREATMENT OF POLICE DOGS.
   No person shall willfully or maliciously torture, torment, beat, kick,
strike, mutilate, injure, disable or kill any dog used by any government police
agency or private patrol service in the performance of the functions and duties
of such department, or interfere with or meddle with any such dog while being
used by said department or any member thereof in the performance of any
functions or duties of said department or such officer or member.
(Ord. 540, passed 4-18-2006; Ord. 604, passed 4-16-2013)
§ 10-3-32 ANIMAL IMPOUNDMENT.
   (A)   Impoundable animals. The following animals may be impounded by the
animal control officer:
      1.   Any animal being kept, maintained or harbored contrary to the
provisions of this chapter;
      2.   Any sick or injured animals found in a public place and whose owner
cannot be located;
      3.   Any stray or abandoned animal;
      4.   Any animal which is not vaccinated for rabies in accordance with the
requirements of this chapter;
      5.   Any animal being abused, cruelly or inhumanely treated as defined in
this chapter;
      6.   Any animal found in the act of killing, wounding or persistently
pursuing livestock or fowl on land or premises which are not owned or possessed
by the owner of the animal; and
      7.   Any animal at the owner’s expense while the owner or keeper is
improving the enclosure so that the animal can be kept confined to its
property.
   (B)   Care of impounded animals. The animal control officer shall ensure
that all animals impounded are provided with adequate food and water, and are
treated in a humane and proper manner.
   (C)   Records to be kept.
      1.   The city’s Police Department shall keep accurate records which shall
include:
         (a)   A complete description of the animal, including any tag numbers;
         (b)   The date the animal was taken up, medically treated, euthanized
or impounded;
         (c)   The location and circumstances that the animal was taken up,
medically treated, euthanized or impounded;
         (d)   The names of the personnel who took up, medically treated,
euthanized or impounded the animal;
         (e)   A description of the personnel who took up, medically treated,
euthanized or impounded the animal;
         (f)   The manner, date of disposal and final disposition of the
animal, including the name of the person who euthanized the animal or the name
and address of the adopting party;
         (g)   The name and address of the redeemer or purchaser;
         (h)   The name and address of any person relinquishing an animal to
the impound facility;
         (i)   All fees received; and
         (j)   All expenses accrued during impoundment.
      2.   In accordance with state law, these records shall be maintained for
three years after the date the animal’s impoundment ends.
   (D)   Disposition of animals.
      1.   Transfer to facility. All impounded animals shall be promptly
transferred to the county animal shelter.
      2.   Minimum stay. Animals shall be impounded for a minimum of three days
(not including the day of impoundment), before further disposition, except as
otherwise provided herein. Reasonable effort shall be made to notify the owner
of any animal wearing a license or other identification during that time. Any
animal relinquished by the purported owner shall be held for two full business
days, not including the day of impoundment. The animal shall be available for
owner redemption for the first day, not including the day of impoundment, and
shall be available for owner redemption or adoption as provided in this section
for the second day. Any rabbit, guinea pig, hamster, bird, lizard, snake,
turtle or tortoise legally allowed as personal property impounded in a public
or private shelter shall be held for the same period of time as provided for in
this subsection (D).
      3.   Further disposition. All dogs, cats or other animals except for
those required to be quarantined or confined, which have been held longer than
the minimum impound period, and all dogs, cats or other animals voluntarily
relinquished to the animal shelter may be destroyed or sold as the city’s
Police Chief may direct. Upon destruction of an animal, the owner or person
responsible for the animal shall pay the animal destruction fee set by
resolution of the City Council. Bovine livestock such as horses, mules or
burros shall be turned over to the Bureau of Livestock for identification by
that office. Any other livestock shall be disposed of in accordance with the
provisions of the Cal. Food and Agriculture Code §§ 17063 to 17095.
      4.   Sale and adoption. Any healthy dog, cat or other animal not redeemed
by the owner or keeper after three days (not including the day of impoundment),
may be sold at auction or to any responsible person desiring to purchase such
animal for a price to be determined by an animal control officer but not to
exceed $100 per animal, plus license fees, veterinary charges, spay or neuter
charges and rabies vaccination charges, if required. No person shall be
permitted to adopt or purchase any dog or cat which has not been spayed or
neutered, from any public pound, any animal shelter, society or organization.
      5.   Veterinary services. Any licensed animal impounded and having or
suspected of having a serious physical injury or contagious disease requiring
veterinary attention, may, in the discretion of the city’s Police Chief, be
released to the care of a veterinarian with the consent of the owner or keeper.
Upon release from veterinary treatment, such animal shall return to
impoundment, unless redeemed or purchased. If the animal requires veterinary
care and the city is not assured, within 14 days of the seizure of the animal,
that the owner will provide the necessary care, the animal shall not be
returned to its owner and shall be deemed to have been abandoned and may be
disposed of by the city in accordance with this chapter. The owner shall be
responsible for the costs of treatment of a veterinarian regardless of whether
it is redeemed by him or her or not.
      6.   Emergency animal destruction.
         (a)   When, in the judgment of the city’s animal control officer,
police officer, Police Chief or Police Chief’s designee, it is determined that
an animal should be destroyed where the animal is too severely injured to move,
is incurably crippled, or is suffering from any incurable, dangerous or
contagious disease; or is an unlicensed vicious, dangerous or fierce animal; or
for any other humane reason; or to protect the public from imminent danger to
persons or property, such animal may be destroyed without regard to any time
limitations otherwise established herein, and without court order.
         (b)   A veterinarian also may immediately humanely destroy an
impounded animal afflicted with a serious contagious disease unless the owner
or his or her agent immediately authorizes treatment of the animal by a
veterinarian at the expense of the owner or agent.
   (E)   Redemption. The owner of any impounded animal or his or her authorized
representative may redeem such animal before disposition provided he or she
pays:
      1.   The pick-up fee to city;
      2.   The daily boarding fee charged by the facility having charge of the
animal;
      3.   Redemption fee to the city;
      4.   Any veterinary costs incurred during the impound period, including a
reasonable fee for any required rabies vaccination;
      5.   Cost of rabies vaccination, if required;
      6.   License fee, if a license is required; and
      7.   Actual cost of any extraordinary measures required in or for the
handling and maintenance of the animal while impounded. A person convicted of a
violation of this chapter shall be personally liable to the city for all costs
of impoundment from the time of seizure to the time of proper disposition.
   (F)   Redemption fees. No animal shall be released until redemption fees,
costs of care and feeding, veterinary fees incurred, if any, and any fees and
penalties provided by this title have been paid. Redemption fees shall be
established from time to time by the City Council. In addition to redemption
fees provided for during regular business hours, the owner of any animal which
was impounded as a result of an after business hours call to the animal control
officer shall be an additional fee, as established by the City Council by
resolution, for the service of impounding the animal after regular business
hours.
   (G)   Redemption exceptions. The animal control officer, at his or her
discretion may refuse to permit the redemption of any animal impounded pursuant
to the provisions of this chapter, or any other county, state or municipal law,
until the need for retention of such animal no longer exists. The cost of
continued retention shall be borne by the owner.
(Ord. 540, passed 4-18-2006; Ord. 604, passed 4-16-2013)
§ 10-3-33 RETURNING ANIMALS WHERE THE OWNER IS KNOWN.
   When any animal is seized, and its ownership is known to the animal control
officer, such animal need not be impounded. Instead, the animal control officer
may return the animal to its rightful owner and may cite the owner of the
animal to appear in court to answer charges of violations of the provisions of
this chapter.
(Ord. 540, passed 4-18-2006; Ord. 604, passed 4-16-2013)
§ 10-3-34 VOLUNTARY SURRENDER OF ANIMALS TO ANIMAL CONTROL OFFICER.
   (A)   Voluntary surrender permitted. Upon request, an owner may surrender an
animal to the animal control officer for adoption placement. Any animal which
is voluntarily surrendered to or deposited with the animal control officer by
the owner shall immediately thereafter become property of the city. It shall be
understood that no guarantee of placement will be made, and humane disposal
will be a discretionary option of the animal control officer.
   (B)   Required fees. Any owner of an animal who voluntarily surrenders an
animal to the animal control officer shall be subject to a fee for each animal.
Litters of unweaned animals or animals less than four months of age shall be
considered as one animal. The surrender of an animal by an owner to the animal
control officer, subsequent to impoundment due to a violation of this or any
provisions of state law, shall not relieve the owner of the obligation to pay
all fees and charges set forth in this chapter prior to such surrender,
including accumulated boarding charges, veterinary charges or any other charges
related to the impounding and keeping of the animal.
(Ord. 540, passed 4-18-2006; Ord. 604, passed 4-16-2013)
§ 10-3-35 REMOVAL OF ANIMAL FROM ANIMAL SHELTER.
   No person shall remove any animal from the custody of the animal control
officer or from the animal shelter without permission from the animal control
officer.
(Ord. 540, passed 4-18-2006; Ord. 604, passed 4-16-2013)
§ 10-3-36 DOG LICENSES REQUIRED.
   (A)   License and fee required. Every person owning, possessing, keeping,
harboring or having custody of any dog over four months old shall obtain a
license for each dog and appropriate fees shall be paid. Fees and charges shall
be established from time to time by resolution by the City Council.
   (B)   License and fees due date. All fees shall be paid within 30 days after
the dog is four months old, or within 30 days after acquisition of the dog, or
within 30 days of moving into the city.
   (C)   Exemptions.
      1.   The preceding subsections of this section shall not apply to:
         (a)   Dogs whose owners have been present in the city for 30 days or
less, but only so long as said dogs remain in the care and custody of a
responsible person;
         (b)   Dogs which are held for sale as the inventory of or patients in
a properly licensed kennel, pet store, dog dealer, or veterinary hospital or
clinic;
         (c)   Guide dogs properly trained to assist blind persons if such dogs
are actually being used by blind persons to assist them in moving from place to
place;
         (d)   Signal dogs properly trained to assist deaf persons if such dogs
are actually used by deaf persons to aid them in responding to sounds;
         (e)   Service dogs trained to assist in fulfilling the particular
requirements of a physically disabled person including, but not limited to,
minimal protection work, rescue work, pulling a wheelchair or fetching dropped
items; and
         (f)   Dogs especially trained to assist officials or government
agencies in performance of their duties and which are owned by such agencies.
      2.   Nothing in this subsection (C) shall be considered so as to exempt
any dog from having a current rabies vaccination.
(Ord. 540, passed 4-18-2006; Ord. 604, passed 4-16-2013)
§ 10-3-37 PROCEDURES FOR ISSUANCE OF DOG LICENSE.
   The city shall issue a license for a dog located in the city upon
satisfaction of the following conditions.
   (A)   Application. The owner of the dog to be licensed completes an
application prepared by the city. The application may include, but not be
limited to, the name and address of the owner; address where the dog is kept;
name, breed, age, sex, color and description of the animal; and current rabies
vaccination certificate issued by a licensed veterinarian.
   (B)   Fee. The owner of the dog to be licensed pays the fee required for a
license, which fee shall be set by resolution of the City Council.
   (C)   Rabies vaccination. Satisfactory proof is provided that the dog has
been effectively vaccinated for rabies.
      1.   Vaccination records. Each veterinarian after vaccinating any dog
shall sign a certificate of vaccination in duplicate in the form required by
the Police Chief. The veterinarian shall keep one copy and shall give one copy
to the owner of the vaccinated dog and the owner shall retain such copy in his
or her possession.
      2.   Vaccination exception.
         (a)   In the event that a dog has a short term illness, is pregnant or
suffers from a long term debilitating illness which in the opinion of a
veterinarian contradicts vaccination for rabies, such dog shall not be required
to undergo vaccination during the period of such illness or pregnancy where a
request for vaccination deferral has been approved by the animal control
officer and the Police Chief. Such request shall specify the duration of the
requested deferral, and shall be signed by a veterinarian.
         (b)   The animal control officer shall issue a license for such dog
upon approval of the request for vaccination deferral and payment for the
application license fee determined by resolution of the City Council. The owner
or person having custody of such dog shall confine and shall keep such dog
confined, for the duration of the deferral. Within 14 days after the expiration
of the deferral, the owner or person having custody of such dog shall present
the animal control officer or the Police Chief’s designee a certificate of
vaccination in accordance with the provisions of this section.
   (D)   Certificate and tag. Upon issuing a license, the city shall give to
the owner of the licensed dog a certificate and tag evidencing issuance of the
license and showing for reference the number of the license. A license shall be
valid for the period determined by the city’s Police Department and indicated
on the license certificate. The Police Department may upon request of the owner
or custodian of such dog backdate such license so that its expiration date
occurs concurrently with or prior to the expiration date of the vaccination;
provided however, that where such backdating is performed, there shall be no
reduction or discount of the license fee applicable to the license applied for,
and such license shall be renewed within 30 days after its expiration.
(Ord. 540, passed 4-18-2006; Ord. 604, passed 4-16-2013)
§ 10-3-38 WEARING DOG LICENSE TAG REQUIRED.
   Every owner or keeper of a licensed dog shall at all times cause the dog to
wear the license tag on a collar or other means of attaching the tag to the
dog. Violation of this section is an infraction. The animal control officer may
presume that a dog not wearing a license tag is unlicensed.
(Ord. 540, passed 4-18-2006; Ord. 604, passed 4-16-2013)
§ 10-3-39 TAGGING A DOG NOT DESCRIBED IN THE APPLICATION.
   It is unlawful for any person to attach a license tag to the collar of any
dog except the dog which is described in the application for license.
(Ord. 540, passed 4-18-2006; Ord. 604, passed 4-16-2013)
§ 10-3-40 LOST AND DESTROYED TAGS TO BE REPLACED IMMEDIATELY.
   If the dog license tag is lost or destroyed, a duplicate tag shall be
obtained from the Police Department within seven days, upon paying a fee in the
amount specified by resolution of the City Council and either surrendering the
receipt for the lost tag or certifying under penalty of perjury that a tag was
obtained and that the receipt cannot be found.
(Ord. 540, passed 4-18-2006; Ord. 604, passed 4-16-2013)
§ 10-3-41 STOLEN, COUNTERFEIT OR UNAUTHORIZED TAGS AND LICENSES.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to make use of a stolen, counterfeit or
unauthorized license, tag, certificate or any other document or thing for the
purpose of evading the provisions of this chapter.
(Ord. 540, passed 4-18-2006; Ord. 604, passed 4-16-2013)
§ 10-3-42 PRESENTATION OF VALID RABIES CERTIFICATE, AND LICENSE TAG.
   Upon request of the animal control officer, police officer or other
authorized city representative, any owner or keeper of a dog for which a
license is required under the provisions of this chapter shall present a
currently valid certificate of rabies vaccination, or license tag.
(Ord. 540, passed 4-18-2006; Ord. 604, passed 4-16-2013)
§ 10-3-43 TRANSFER OF OWNERSHIP.
   Upon transfer of ownership of any dog validly licensed under this chapter,
the new owner shall fill out an application as required in this chapter and
submit it to the Police Department accompanied by a license transfer fee as set
by the City Council by resolution. The transfer, sale or destruction and the
new location of a dog with a “fierce, dangerous or vicious designation” or
“potentially vicious, dangerous or fierce designation” shall be reported in
writing pursuant to Cal. Food and Agriculture Code § 31643.
(Ord. 540, passed 4-18-2006; Ord. 604, passed 4-16-2013)
§ 10-3-44 RABIES SUPPRESSION, CONTROL AND QUARANTINE.
   (A)   Rabies reports. Rabies is declared to be a reportable disease. Every
veterinarian practicing in this city and every person providing professional
medical treatment for animal bites and scratches by an animal of a species
subject to rabies shall immediately notify the Police Department within the
proper jurisdiction.
   (B)   Rabies immunization certificates. Every veterinarian, practicing
within this city or having vaccinated animals residing within the city limits,
shall provide the city with a copy of every rabies immunization certificate
which he or she issues for all animals immunized within the jurisdiction of
such.
   (C)   Reporting bites and scratches. Any person having been bitten or
scratched or having knowledge of any individual or animal having been bitten or
scratched by an animal of a species subject to rabies shall report the
occurrence of the bite immediately to the Police Department or an animal
control officer. If the bite victim is a minor or is otherwise incapable for
making such a report, the parent or guardian of the minor, or owner of the
animal shall immediately report the incident.
   (D)   Vaccination required. The owner of or person responsible for a dog or
cat four months old or older shall have said animal vaccinated against rabies
within 30 days after it reaches said age or is acquired by its owner or moved
into the city. Any person harboring any such animal shall be responsible for
said vaccination. A vaccinated animal must be revaccinated against rabies at
least every 24 months. This section shall not apply to veterinarian, grooming
salons or kennel operators temporarily maintaining on their premises animals
owned by others, or to an animal in the city for a period of 30 days or less,
provided such animal is restrained and supervised as required by this chapter.
   (E)   Rabies certificate.
      1.   When vaccinating any animal for rabies, the veterinarian shall
complete a certificate of rabies vaccination (in duplicate) which includes, but
is not limited to, the following information:
         (a)   Owner’s name and address;
         (b)   Description of animal (breed, sex, markings, age, name);
         (c)   Date of vaccination;
         (d)   Type of rabies vaccine administered; and
         (e)   Manufacturer’s serial number of vaccine.
      2.   A copy of the certificate shall be distributed to the veterinarian
and the original retained by the owner. The veterinarian and owner shall retain
copies of the certificate for the interval between vaccinations specified in
this section.
   (F)   Reporting and confinement. An animal that has rabies or shows signs of
having rabies, and every animal bitten by another animal showing symptoms of
rabies or that has been exposed to rabies shall be reported by the owner to the
Police Department or animal control officer and shall immediately be confined
in a secure place by the animal control officer. A guide dog serving a blind
master shall be quarantined only in the event that the owner is incapable of
keeping the dog confined to the owner’s premises, or in the event that the
animal poses a serious threat to health and safety.
   (G)   Killing of suspected rabid animals. No person shall kill or cause to
be killed any rabid animal, unless in self-defense. If it becomes necessary to
destroy the animal, the animal control officer shall see that the animal is
euthanized in the most humane manner possible.
   (H)   Rabies control. If it shall appear to the animal control officer that
any animal has rabies, the animal control officer may destroy such animal
forthwith, or may hold such animal for further examination or observation for
such time as the animal control officer may determine to be appropriate.
   (I)   Quarantine. Any animal of a species susceptible to rabies that bites a
person or animal or is suspected of having rabies may be seized and quarantined
for observation for a period of not less than ten days by an animal control
officer. The owner of the animal shall bear the cost of confinement. An animal
shelter authorized by the city shall be the normal place of quarantine, but
other arrangements, including confinement by the owner, may be made by the City
Police Department if the animal had a current rabies vaccination at the time
the bite was inflicted or if there are other special circumstances justifying
an exception. A person who has custody of an animal under quarantine shall
immediately notify the City Police Department if the animal shows any signs of
sickness or abnormal behavior, or if the animal escapes confinement. It shall
be unlawful for any person who has custody of a quarantined animal to fail or
refuse to allow an animal control officer to make an inspection or examination
during the period of quarantine. If the animal dies within ten days from the
date of the bite, the person having custody shall immediately notify the Police
Department or city designated laboratory to be examined for rabies. If, at the
end of the ten-day period, the animal control officer examines the animal and
finds no signs of rabies, the animal may be released to the owner or in the
case of a stray, it shall be disposed of as provided in this chapter. Animals
quarantined pursuant to this section shall remain under quarantine until notice
is given the animal control officer that such quarantine is terminated.
   (J)   Animals dying while under isolation. The intact body or portion
thereof, as specified by the Merced County Health Department laboratory or
other laboratory designated by the city, shall be submitted in the manner
prescribed by the laboratory for examination for rabies.
   (K)   Rabies epidemic. Whenever the Police Chief shall determine that an
epidemic of rabies exists or is threatened, the Police Chief shall have the
authority to take such measures as may be reasonably necessary to prevent the
spread of the disease, including, but not limited to, the declaration of
quarantine against any or all animals in any area of the city as the Police
Chief may determine and define, for a period of not more than 120 days. An
additional or extended quarantine period may also be declared if such
additional or extended quarantine period shall be deemed necessary by the
Police Chief for the protection and preservation of the public health, peace
and safety. Any quarantine declared pursuant to this subsection (K), other than
as restricted herein, shall be upon such conditions as the Police Chief may
determine and declare.
   (L)   Quarantine signs. The animal control officer may, in his or her
discretion, post or cause to be posted an appropriate sign on any premises
where an animal is quarantined pursuant to this chapter, for the purpose of
warning the public of the fact of such quarantine. It shall be unlawful for any
person to remove a sign on any premises where an animal is quarantined pursuant
to this chapter, for the purpose of warning the public of the fact of such
quarantine. It shall be unlawful for any person to remove a sign posted
pursuant to this subsection (L) without the permission of the animal control
officer or Police Department.
   (M)   Unvaccinated bitten or exposed animals. If an animal is not vaccinated
against rabies but of a species subject to rabies is known to have been bitten
or exposed by a known rabid animal, then said bitten or exposed animal shall be
immediately destroyed.
   (N)   Skunks. In order to protect the public health from the hazard of
rabies which has been found to exist in skunks, a quarantine is hereby imposed
to continue until released by the Police Chief, whereby it is prohibited to
trap or capture skunks for pets; to trap, capture or hold skunks in captivity
for any reason; to transport skunks from or into the city except pursuant to a
permit issued by the California Department of Health Services pursuant to the
Cal. Code of Regulations Title 17, § 2606.8.
   (O)   Vaccinated bitten animals, or exposed animals. If the bitten or
exposed animal has been vaccinated, the animal shall be revaccinated within 24
hours and quarantined for a period of 30 days following revaccination; or if
the animal is not revaccinated within 24 hours, the animal shall be isolated
and quarantined under veterinary supervision for six months, the animal shall
be destroyed if the owner does not comply with this subsection (O).
   (P)   Removal of animal. It shall be unlawful for any person to remove or
release any quarantined or confined animal from quarantine or confinement
without written permission of the City Police Department.
   (Q)   Violation. Violation of any subsection of this section is a
misdemeanor.
(Ord. 540, passed 4-18-2006; Ord. 604, passed 4-16-2013)
§ 10-3-45 ATTACKING DOGS.
   (A)   Prohibited. No owner of or person responsible for a dog shall permit
such dog to attack, chase or harass any person, or any domestic animal having a
commercial value, such that injury occurs or, in the case of a person,
substantial fear of a significant injury is caused.
   (B)   Physicians to report animal bite cases. All cases of animal bites
treated by any physician shall be reported by the physician to the animal
control officer or Police Department. The report shall contain the name and
address of the person bitten; the time and place where such person was bitten;
and the name and address of the owner of the biting animal, if known; and any
other pertinent information requested by the animal control officer or police
officer.
   (C)   Violation. The violation of subsection (A) of this section shall be a
misdemeanor according to the state statutes, and the owner of and/or person
responsible for such a dog shall be strictly liable for any injury or damage
caused by such dog.
   (D)   Mitigation. The following shall be considered in mitigating the
penalties or damages or in dismissing the charge:
      1.   The dog was properly confined on the premises; and
      2.   The dog was deliberately or maliciously provoked.
(Ord. 540, passed 4-18-2006; Ord. 604, passed 4-16-2013)
§ 10-3-46 VICIOUS, DANGEROUS OR FIERCE ANIMALS.
   (A)   Definition. The definition of a vicious, dangerous or fierce animal is
contained in §
10-3-1 of this chapter. No animal shall be declared vicious, dangerous or
fierce if:
      1.   It is owned by a public entity or a governmental or law enforcement
unit used primarily to guard public or private property; and
      2.   The threat, injury or damage was sustained by a person who, at the
time, was committing a willful trespass or other tort upon the premises
occupied by the owner or keeper of the animal, or was teasing, tormenting,
abusing or assaulting the animal or has in the past, been observed or reported
to have teased, tormented, abused or assaulted the animal, or was committing or
attempting to commit a crime.
   (B)   Confinement on premises. No person owning or harboring or having the
care of a fierce, dangerous or vicious animal shall suffer or permit such
animal to go unconfined on the premises of such person. A fierce, dangerous or
vicious animal is “unconfined” as the term is used in this section if such
animal is not securely confined indoors, or confined in a securely enclosed and
locked pen or structure upon the premises of the registered owner or caretaker
of the animal. Such pen or structure must have secure sides and a secure top.
If the pen or structure has no bottom secured to the sides, the sides must be
imbedded in the ground no less than two feet. An animal that is securely and
humanely locked in a motor vehicle belonging to the owner or caretaker shall be
considered confined for purposes of this section.
   (C)   Control off premises. No person owning or harboring or having the care
of a fierce, dangerous or vicious animal shall suffer or permit such animal to
go beyond the premises of such person unless such animal is securely leashed
with a leash not exceeding three feet in length, and muzzled, except that a
dangerous dog shall not be required to be muzzled when either shown in a
sanctioned American Kennel Club show or upon prior written approval of the
city’s Chief of Police.
   (D)   Public notification. The owner or caretaker of any vicious, dangerous
or fierce animal shall display on his or her premises a warning sign that there
is a vicious, dangerous or fierce animal on the property. This sign shall be
capable of being read from the public street or highway. The sign must have
letters at least two inches in width and two inches in height and reading
“Beware Of Vicious Dog”, or “Beware Of Dangerous Dog” or “Beware Of Fierce Dog”
or as otherwise determined by the city.
   (E)   Registering vicious, dangerous or fierce animals. Any owner or
caretaker of a vicious, dangerous, or fierce animal shall register with the
city’s Police Department with the following minimal information: name; address;
telephone number (including work phone numbers), of all responsible parties
relating to the animal, to be updated at the renewal of each license. This will
also include breed, sex, color, weight, age of animal, tattoo number or
embedded chip number, license number and rabies information.
   (F)   Four digit tattoo or microchip identification technology. The owner,
keeper or caretaker shall, at his or her own expense, have a unique
identifying, four digit number tattooed on the inner thigh or a microchip
embedded between the shoulders of the vicious, dangerous or fierce animal. This
number is to be assigned by the city’s Police Department or any person
designated by the city’s Police Department. The tattoo or embedded chip may be
applied by a licensed veterinarian or person trained as a tattooist and
authorized as such by a state, county, city, town or other law enforcement
department. A tattoo shall be applied with an indelible or permanent ink. The
tattoo number or embedded chip number shall be recorded on the license of the
tattooed animal.
   (G)   Police Department notification. The owner, keeper or caretaker shall
notify the city’s Police Department or its designated authority within three
hours if a fierce, dangerous or vicious animal is loose, unconfined, has
attacked another animal or has attacked a human being. If a fierce, dangerous
or vicious animal has died, been sold or has been given away, the owner, keeper
or caretaker must give notice to the city’s Police Department within two
working days.
   (H)   Insurance requirements. The owner or caretaker of a fierce, dangerous
or vicious animal shall present to the city’s Police Department or its
designated authority, proof that the owner or caretaker has procured liability
insurance in the amount of at least $100,000, covering any damage or injury
which may be caused by such fierce, dangerous or vicious animal during the 12-
month period for which licensing is sought, which policy shall contain a
provision requiring the city’s Police Department to be notified by the
insurance company of any cancellation, termination, or expiration of the
liability insurance policy.
   (I)   Strict liability. In the event that a minor is the owner, keeper or
caretaker of a fierce, dangerous or vicious animal, the parent or guardian of
that minor shall be responsible for compliance with the specifications of this
chapter for the care and housing of the animal and shall also be strictly
liable for all injuries and property damage sustained by any person or domestic
animal caused by an unprovoked attack by the animal.
   (J)   Vaccinations. All vicious, dangerous and fierce animals shall obtain
all appropriate vaccinations for the particular species as it relates to the
health, safety and welfare of the citizens of the city.
   (K)   Damage by vicious, dangerous or fierce animal. If any vicious,
dangerous or fierce animal shall, when unprovoked, kill or wound, or assist in
killing or wounding any domestic animal, or shall, when unprovoked, attack,
assault, bite or otherwise injure any human being or assist in attacking,
assaulting, biting or otherwise injuring any human being while out of or within
the enclosure of the owner or keeper of such animal, or while otherwise, on or
off the property of the owner or keeper whether or not such dog was on a leash
and securely muzzled or whether the animal escaped without fault of the owner
or keeper, the owner or keeper of such animal shall be strictly liable to the
person aggrieved as aforesaid, for all damage sustained. It is rebuttably
presumed as a matter of law that the owning, keeping or harboring of a vicious,
dangerous or fierce animal, in violation of this chapter is a nuisance. It
shall not be necessary, in order to sustain any such action, to prove that the
owner or keeper of such vicious, dangerous or fierce dog possessed the
propensity to cause such damage or that the vicious animal had a vicious,
dangerous or fierce nature. Upon such attack or assault, the animal control
officer or Police Department is hereby empowered to immediately impound the
vicious, dangerous or fierce animal.
   (L)   Enforcement. The animal control officer is hereby empowered to make
whatever inquiry is deemed necessary to ensure compliance with the provisions
of this chapter, and any police officer or peace officer is hereby empowered to
seize and impound any vicious, dangerous or fierce animal whose owner or
caretaker fails to comply with the provisions hereof.
   (M)   Penalties. In the event that the owner or caretaker fails to comply
with the specifications of this code which include, but are not limited to, any
vicious, dangerous or fierce animal which does not have a valid license in
accordance with the provisions of this chapter; or whose owner or caretaker
does not secure the liability insurance coverage required in accordance with
this chapter; or which is not maintained on property with an enclosure; or
which is found to be outside of the dwelling of the owner or caretaker, or
outside of an enclosure except as provided in this chapter; or which is not
tattooed; shall be impounded by the animal control officer or police officer
and the owner or caretaker is guilty of a misdemeanor.
(Ord. 540, passed 4-18-2006; Ord. 604, passed 4-16-2013)
§ 10-3-47 DETERMINATION, SEIZURE, IMPOUNDMENT AND DISPOSITION OF VICIOUS,
DANGEROUS OR FIERCE ANIMALS.
   (A)   Notice and hearing. The animal control officer, police officer or the
Police Chief’s designee, in their discretion or upon receipt of a complaint
alleging that a particular dog is a vicious, dangerous or fierce animal, as
defined in this chapter, may initiate proceedings to declare such dog a
vicious, dangerous or fierce animal. In determining whether or not an animal
shall be declared a vicious, dangerous or fierce animal, the animal control
officer, police officer or Police Chief’s designee may consider, as a
mitigating factor, that the actions of the animal were provoked, as defined in
this chapter. A hearing on the matter shall be conducted by the Police Chief,
which shall serve as the administrative agency set up by the city. The person
owning, keeping, sheltering or harboring the animal in question shall be given
not less than 72 hours’ written notice of the time and place of the hearing.
Said notice shall set forth the description of the animal in question and the
basis for the allegation of viciousness, dangerousness or fierceness. The
notice shall also set forth that if the animal is determined to be vicious, the
owner will be required to register and restrain it in accordance with this
chapter, remove it from the city, or allow it to be destroyed. The notice shall
be served upon any adult residing at the premises where the animal is located,
or may be posted on those premises if no adult is present to accept service.
   (B)   Decision and order. If, after the hearing, the Police Chief determines
that an animal is vicious, dangerous or fierce as defined in this chapter, the
Police Chief shall order the person owning, sheltering, harboring or keeping
the animal to register the animal in compliance with this chapter or remove it
from the city, or to cause it to be destroyed in a humane manner. The order
shall immediately be served upon the individual or entity against whom issued
in the same manner as the notice of hearing. If the order is not complied with
in three days of its issuance, the Police Chief is authorized to order the
seizure and impoundment of the animal. An animal so seized shall be impounded
for a period of six days (not including the day of impoundment), from the date
the order is served upon the owner or keeper. If, at the end of the impoundment
period, the person against whom the order of the Police Chief was issued has
not appealed such order to the City Manager, the Police Chief shall cause the
animal to be destroyed.
   (C)   Appeal to City Manager. The order to register, remove or destroy a
vicious, dangerous or fierce animal issued by the Police Chief may be appealed
to the City Manager. To appeal the order, written notice of appeal must be
filed with the City Manager within three days after receipt of the order to
remove, register or destroy the vicious animal. Failure to file such written
notice of appeal shall constitute a waiver of the right to appeal the order of
the Police Chief. The notice of appeal shall state the grounds for such appeal
and shall be delivered personally or by certified mail to the City Manager. The
hearing of the appeal shall be held by the City Manager within five days after
receipt of the notice of appeal. The hearing may be continued for good cause.
After such hearing, the City Manager may affirm, reverse, or modify the order
of the Police Chief. Such determination shall be contained in a written
decision and shall be made within three days after the hearing, or any
continued session thereof.
   (D)   Decision and order. If, after the hearing, the City Manager determines
that an animal is vicious, dangerous or fierce as defined in this chapter, the
City Manager shall order the person owning, sheltering, harboring or keeping
the animal to register the animal in compliance with this chapter or remove the
animal from the city or cause that the animal be destroyed in a humane manner.
The order shall immediately be served upon the individual or entity against
whom issued in the same manner as notice of hearing. If the order is not
complied with within three days of issuance, the City Manager is authorized to
order the seizure and impoundment of the animal. An animal so seized shall be
held impounded for a period of six days (not including the day of impoundment),
from the date the order is served upon the owner or keeper. If, at the end of
the impoundment period, the person against whom the order of the City Manager
was issued has not appealed such order to the City Council, the City Manager
shall cause the animal to be destroyed.
   (E)   Appeal to the City Council. The order to register, remove or destroy a
vicious, dangerous or fierce animal issued by the City Manager or his or her
designee may be appealed to the City Council. In order to appeal the order,
written notice of appeal must be filed with the Mayor within three days after
receipt of the order to register, remove or destroy a vicious, dangerous or
fierce animal. Failure to file such written order of appeal shall constitute a
waiver. The notice of appeal shall state the grounds for such appeal and shall
be delivered personally. The hearing shall be held within five days after
receipt of the notice to appeal. The hearing may be continued for good cause.
After such hearing, the City Council may affirm, reverse or modify the order of
the Police Chief or City Manager. Such determination shall be contained in a
written decision and shall be made within three days after the hearing or any
continued session thereof.
   (F)   Decision and order. If the City Council affirms the action of the
Police Chief or City Manager, the City Council shall order in its written
decision that the person owning, sheltering, harboring or keeping such vicious,
dangerous or fierce animal, shall comply with the requirements of this chapter
or remove such animal from the city, or cause it to be destroyed in a humane
manner. The decision and order shall immediately be served upon the person or
entity against whom rendered in the same manner as the order to remove or
destroy. If the order of the City Council, after appeal is not complied with
within three days of its issuance, the animal control officer or a police
officer is authorized to seize and impound such vicious, dangerous or fierce
animal. Any animal so seized shall be impounded for a period of six days (not
including the day of impoundment), from the date the order is served upon the
owner, keeper or caretaker. If at the end of the impoundment period, the
individual or entity against whom the decision and order of the Chief of Police
was issued has not complied with the order the animal control officer shall
cause the animal to be destroyed in a humane manner.
   (G)   Violation. Failure to comply with an order of the animal control
officer or police officer or their designee issued pursuant hereto and not
appealed, or of the Police Chief, City Manager or City Council after appeal,
shall constitute a misdemeanor.
   (H)   Vicious, dangerous or fierce animals at large. Any animal found at
large which displays vicious, dangerous or fierce tendencies may be processed
as a vicious, dangerous or fierce animal pursuant to the foregoing.
   (I)   Vicious, dangerous or fierce animals impounded. Any animal which is
alleged to be vicious, dangerous or fierce and which is under impoundment or
quarantine at the animal shelter shall not be released to the owner, but shall
continue to be held at the expense of the owner pending the outcome of the
hearing and all appeals. All costs of such impoundment or quarantine shall be
paid by the owner if the animal is determined to be vicious, dangerous or
fierce. If collection of expenses is pursued through the court, the city shall
file suit and receive a judgment for all expenses, together with reasonable
attorney fees, interest and court costs. If the animal is not determined to be
vicious, all costs of such impoundment or quarantine shall be paid by the city.
(Ord. 540, passed 4-18-2006; Ord. 604, passed 4-16-2013)
§ 10-3-48 SPECIAL ANIMAL PERMITS.
   (A)   When required. No person shall own or harbor more than the maximum
number of dogs, cats or other animals including persons operating catteries,
kennels or animal rescue facilities without obtaining a valid special animal
permit pursuant to this section. For purposes of this section, the maximum
number is outlined in §
10-3-12 of this chapter. In calculating the maximum number or the number of
animals permitted by an issued permit, one litter shall not be counted until
the dogs or cats of the litter reach four months of age. Violation of this
subsection (A) shall be a misdemeanor.
   (B)   Issuance.
      1.   A person may apply for a special animal permit by:
         (a)   Paying the required and nonrefundable application fee set by
City Council resolution; and
         (b)   Furnishing the information requested by the staff of the
Planning Commission.
      2.   The application is then reviewed:
         (a)   By the Merced County Health Department;
         (b)   If approved by the Health Department, by the Planning
Commission; and
         (c)   By the City Council.
      3.   The Planning Commission shall recommend denying or granting the
application to the City Council; the City Council may thereupon finally grant
or deny the application. No permit will be issued unless the uses disclosed in
applying for the permit conform to applicable zoning ordinances, and until the
permit fee, in addition to the application fee, is paid in the amount set by
resolution of the City Council.
   (C)   Nontransferability. A permit shall not be valid in relation to a
person to whom it was not issued or to premises not named in the permit. The
permittee shall immediately notify the Community Development Director of any
change which may affect the status of his or her permit.
   (D)   Renewal of permit. Any permit issued pursuant to this section shall
expire on each December 31 following the date of issue. Within two months prior
to the expiration of the permit, the permittee may apply for a renewal of the
permit and pay the required fee established by the City Council by resolution.
Any application made after December 31, shall be accompanied by a late
application fee in addition to the regular permit fee established by resolution
of the City Council.
   (E)   Exemptions. Animal establishments operated by state or local
government or which are licensed by federal law or licensed veterinary
facilities or licensed grooming salons or a facility operated by a nonprofit
society incorporated in California for the primary purpose of preventing
cruelty to animals are excluded from the licensing requirements of this
chapter.
   (F)   Inspections.
      1.   All establishments required to obtain a permit under this section
shall be subject to periodic inspections. The inspector shall make a report of
such inspection with a copy to be filed with the city’s Police Department and
the Community Development Department. The animal control officer, police
officer or other authorized city employee is hereby authorized to enter and
inspect the premises of any holder of a special animal permit for the purpose
of determining whether such special animal permit holder is in compliance with
the provisions of city ordinances and the conditions of the special animal
permit.
      2.   As a condition of issuance of a special animal permit, each permit
holder shall agree to allow such entry and inspection. Such agreement shall be
made a part of the license application. Inspections shall be made during
reasonable hours when the special animal permit holder is present, and such
inspections may be made without prior notice to the permit holder.
      3.   Willful refusal on the part of a special animal permit holder to
allow such inspection shall be grounds for summary denial of an application for
a special animal permit or for summary suspension or revocation of a special
animal permit.
   (G)   License. Nothing in this section exempts any animal from the license
requirements of this chapter.
(Ord. 540, passed 4-18-2006; Ord. 604, passed 4-16-2013)
§ 10-3-49 STANDARDS FOR SPECIAL ANIMAL PERMIT ESTABLISHMENTS.
   (A)   The City Council, the City Manager or Community Development Department
may promulgate rules and regulations governing the operation of kennels,
catteries, and groomeries, pet shops, riding stables, animal rescue facilities,
veterinary clinics or hospitals.
   (B)   Such rules and regulations shall provide for the type of structures,
buildings, pens, cages, runways or yards required for the animal sought to be
kept, harbored or confined on such premises; the manner in which food, water
and sanitation facilities will be provided to such animals; measures relating
to the health of said animals, the control of noise and odors, and the
protection of persons or property on adjacent premises; and other such matters
as the City Council or City Manager shall deem necessary.
   (C)   Such rules and regulations shall have the effect of law, and violation
of such rules and regulations shall be deemed a violation of this chapter and
grounds for revocation of a special animal permit issued by the city.
(Ord. 540, passed 4-18-2006; Ord. 604, passed 4-16-2013)
§ 10-3-50 ZONING.
   The requirements of this chapter shall be deemed to be in addition to, and
not in limitation of, the requirements of any applicable zoning laws or
ordinances.
(Ord. 540, passed 4-18-2006; Ord. 604, passed 4-16-2013)
§ 10-3-51 SUSPENSION OR REVOCATION.
   (A)   Grounds. A permit or license issued under this chapter may be
suspended or revoked by the Police Chief or City Manager or a permit
application or license application rejected on any one or more of the following
grounds:
      1.   Falsification of facts in a license or permit application;
      2.   Violations of any of the provisions of this chapter or any other
applicable law or regulation including noise, building and zoning ordinances;
and
      3.   Conviction on a charge of cruelty or inhumane treatment of animals.
   (B)   Notice. Upon learning of a violation of this chapter, the enforcing
animal control officer prior to a suspension or revocation, shall notify the
permit or license holder of such violation in writing. The notification shall:
      1.   Set forth the specific violation(s) found;
      2.   State that failure to comply with any notice issued in accordance
with the provisions of this chapter may result in suspension or revocation of
the license or permit after a specified time period which shall not be less
than three days; and
      3.   State that an opportunity for appeal from any notice or inspection
findings will be provided if a written request for a hearing is filed with the
City Police Department within three days of the date of the notice.
   (C)   Authorized revocation. Any license or permit granted under this
chapter may be suspended or revoked by the Police Chief or City Manager for
violations listed in subsection (A) of this section, after and in accordance
with notice given in the preceding section.
   (D)   Appeal. If an appeal is requested for any revocation or suspension,
the matter shall be placed on the agenda for the next City Council meeting. The
owner of the licensed animal and the enforcing animal control officer may
appear before the City Council at the scheduled time and place to present
arguments regarding the revocation or suspension. The City Council shall
thereupon render a decision revoking, suspending or continuing the license or
permit.
   (E)   Emergency. Notwithstanding the other provisions of this section, any
animal control officer may, without notice or opportunity for a hearing,
suspend any license or permit for five days and impound any animal(s) kept or
harbored with such a suspended license, upon finding that the health, safety
and welfare of the animal or community is substantially endangered.
   (F)   Delivery of notice. Notice provided for under this section shall be
deemed to have been properly served when a manually signed original or copy has
been delivered personally to the permit or license holder or person in charge,
or such notice has been sent certified mail to the last known address of the
permit or license holder. For notice sent by mail, the above minimum time
period is extended to five days.
(Ord. 540, passed 4-18-2006; Ord. 604, passed 4-16-2013)
§ 10-3-52 ENFORCEMENT.
   (A)   Responsibility. The Police Department under the direction of the City
Manager shall supervise the administration and enforcement of this chapter and
of the laws of the state pertaining to the control of animals and shall have
charge of the city’s animal shelter, employees and facilities.
   (B)   Agreements.
      1.   The City Council may enter into written agreements with any
veterinarian or any organized humane society or association, which will
undertake to carry out the provisions of this chapter and maintain and operate
an animal shelter, and which will license, take up, impound and dispose of
animals.
      2.   Any such veterinarian or society or association which shall enter
into such agreement shall carry out all of the provisions of this chapter in
the manner herein prescribed.
   (C)   Interference with officer. It shall be unlawful for any person to
interfere with, oppose or resist any officer or person empowered to enforce the
provisions of this chapter while such officer or person is engaged in the
performance of his or her duties as provided herein.
   (D)   State law. Nothing in this chapter shall prevent the animal control
officer from acting, when he or she deems it appropriate to do so, under the
applicable provisions of Cal. Penal Code §§ 597 et seq.
   (E)   Violation. Unless otherwise stated in this chapter or state law, any
person violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall be guilty of an
infraction or an administrative citation. Animal control officers shall
determine whether the violation should be treated as an infraction depending on
the severity of the violation. Each day a violation is committed or permitted
to continue shall constitute a separate offense.
   (F)   Recoupment of enforcement costs. The intent of this section is to
authorize the recoupment of administrative costs reasonably related to the
enforcement of this chapter. In furtherance of this intent the city shall be
entitled to recover costs, including staff time in the enforcement of the
provisions of this chapter.
   (G)   Records of costs. The animal control officer or his or her designee
shall maintain records of all administrative costs incurred in the processing
of violations in the enforcement of this chapter and other applicable chapters
and may recover such costs from the violator and/or property owner or property
occupier as provided herein.
(Ord. 604, passed 4-16-2013)
§ 10-3-53 SEVERABILITY.
   If any provision, clause, sentence or paragraph of this chapter or the
application thereof to any person or circumstance shall be held to be invalid,
such invalidity shall not affect the other provisions or applications of this
chapter which can be given effect independent from the invalid provision or
application, and to this end the provisions of this chapter are hereby declared
to be severable.
(Ord. 540, passed 4-18-2006; Ord. 604, passed 4-16-2013)
CHAPTER 4: DRUG PARAPHERNALIA
Section
10-4-1 Definitions
10-4-2 Maintenance and display of drug paraphernalia
10-4-3 Application
10-4-4 Sale to minors prohibited
10-4-5 Advertising prohibited
10-4-6 Exceptions
10-4-7 Enforcement
§ 10-4-1 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   ADVERTISE. To verbally, literally or pictorially display, publicize or tell
of an item or a quantum of merchandise that is offered for sale.
   BUSINESS. A fixed location, whether indoors or outdoors, at which
merchandise is offered for sale.
   CONTROLLED SUBSTANCES. Those controlled substances set forth in the Cal.
Health and Safety Code §§ 11054, 11055, 11056, 11057 and 11058, identified as
Schedules I through V, inclusive, as said sections now exist or may hereafter
be amended, renumbered or added to in any way.
   DISPLAY. To show or have available for view in.
   DRUG PARAPHERNALIA.
      1.   All equipment, products and materials of any kind which are used,
intended for use, or designed for use in manufacturing, compounding,
converting, producing, processing, preparing, testing, analyzing, packaging,
repacking, storing, containing, concealing, injecting, ingesting, inhaling, or
otherwise introducing into the human body a controlled substance in violation
of any law of the state.
      2.   DRUG PARAPHERNALIA includes, but is not limited to, all of the
following:
         (a)   Kits used, intended for use or designed for use in
manufacturing, compounding, converting, producing, processing or preparing
controlled substances;
         (b)   Isomerization devices used, intended for use or designed for use
in increasing the potency of any species of plant which is a controlled
substance;
         (c)   Testing equipment used, intended for use or designed for use in
identifying, or in analyzing the strength, effectiveness or purity of
controlled substances;
         (d)   Diluents and adulterants, such as quinine hydrochloride,
mannitol, marmite, dextrose and lactose used, intended for use or designed for
use in cutting controlled substances;
         (e)   Separation gins and sifters used, intended for use or designed
for use in removing twigs and seeds from, or in otherwise cleaning or refining
marijuana;
         (f)   Blenders, bowls, containers, spoons and mixing devices used,
intended for use or designed for use in compounding controlled substances;
         (g)   Capsules, balloons, envelopes and other containers used,
intended for use or designed for use in packaging small quantities of
controlled substances;
         (h)   Containers and other objects used, intended for use, or designed
for use in storing or concealing controlled substances;
         (i)   Objects used, intended for use or designed for use in injecting,
inhaling or otherwise introducing marijuana, cocaine, hashish or hashish oil
into the human body, such as:
            (1)   Metal, wooden, acrylic, glass, stone, plastic or ceramic
pipes with or without screens, permanent screens, hashish heads or punctured
metal bowls;
            (2)   Water pipes;
            (3)   Carburetion tubes and devices;
            (4)   Smoking and carburetion masks;
            (5)   “Roach clips”, meaning objects to hold burning materials,
such as a marijuana cigarette that has become to small or too short to be held
in the hand;
            (6)   Miniature cocaine spoons and cocaine vials;
            (7)   Chamber pipes;
            (8)   Carburetor pipes;
            (9)   Air driven pipes; and
            (10)   Bongs.
      3.   In determining whether an object is DRUG PARAPHERNALIA, a court or
other authority may consider to the extent authorized by law, in addition to
all other logically relevant factors, the following:
         (a)   Statements by an owner or by anyone in control of the object
concerning its use;
         (b)   Prior convictions, if any, of an owner, of anyone in control of
the object, under any state or federal law relating to any controlled
substances;
         (c)   The proximity of the object, in time and space, to a direct
violation of this chapter;
         (d)   The proximity of the object to controlled substances;
         (e)   The existence of any residue of controlled substances on the
object;
         (f)   Direct or circumstantial evidence of the intent of an owner, or
of anyone in control of the object, to deliver to persons whom he or she knows
intends to use the object to facilitate a violation of the laws of the state
relating to controlled substances;
         (g)   Descriptive materials or instructions, oral or written
accompanying the object which explain or depict its use;
         (h)   National and local advertising concerning its use;
         (i)   The manner in which the object is displayed for sale including
its proximity to other objects falling within the definition of drug
paraphernalia;
         (j)   Direct or circumstantial evidence of the ratio of sales of the
object or objects to the total sales of the business enterprise;
         (k)   The existence and scope of legitimate uses for the object in the
community; and
         (l)   Expert testimony concerning its use.
   ENCLOSURE. Floor space, the physical access to which is restricted and the
interior of which is not subject to view by a patrol from the outside.
   MINOR. Any person under 18 years of age.
   PERSON. A natural person or any firm, partnership, association, corporation
or cooperative association.
   SELL. Any form of transfer of possession or delivery, whether with or
without consideration.
(Ord. 226, passed 3-26-1981)
§ 10-4-2 MAINTENANCE AND DISPLAY OF DRUG PARAPHERNALIA.
   (A)   No person shall maintain or operate any place of business in which
drug paraphernalia is kept, displayed or offered in any manner, sold,
furnished, transferred or given away unless such drug paraphernalia are
completely and wholly kept, displayed or offered within a separate room or
enclosure from which persons under the age of 18 who are not accompanied by a
parent or legal guardian are excluded. Each entrance to such a room or
enclosure shall have a sign posted in reasonably visible and legible words to
the effect that minors, unless accompanied by a parent or legal guardian are
excluded.
   (B)   No owner, manager, proprietor or other person in charge of any room or
enclosure, within any place of business in which drug paraphernalia is kept,
displayed or offered in any manner, sold, furnished, transferred or given away
shall permit or allow any person under the age of 18 years to enter, be in,
remain in or visit such room or enclosure unless such minor is accompanied by
one of his or her parents or his or her legal guardian.
   (C)   No person under the age of 18 years shall enter, be in, remain in or
visit any room or enclosure in any place of business which has been signposted
in the manner prescribed by subsection (A) of this section unless accompanied
by one of his or her parents or by his or her legal guardian.
(Ord. 226, passed 3-26-1981)
§ 10-4-3 APPLICATION.
   The provisions of §
10-4-2(A) of this chapter shall not apply to any person unless that person
maintains or operates a place of business in which drug paraphernalia is kept,
displayed or offered in any manner with intent to deliver, sell, furnish,
transfer or give away, knowing or under circumstances where he or she should
reasonably know that it will be used to plant, propagate, cultivate, grow,
harvest, manufacture, compound, convert, produce, process, prepare, test,
analyze, pack, repack, store, contain, conceal, inject, ingest, inhale or
otherwise introduce into the human system a controlled substance in violation
of any law of the state. The provisions of §
10-4-2(B) of this chapter shall not apply to any owner, manager, proprietor or
other person in charge of any room or enclosure within any place of business in
which drug paraphernalia is kept, unless the drug paraphernalia is required by
the provisions of §
10-4-2(A) of this chapter to be kept, displayed or offered within such separate
room or enclosure.
(Ord. 226, passed 3-26-1981)
§ 10-4-4 SALE TO MINORS PROHIBITED.
   No person shall deliver, sell, furnish, transfer or give away to a minor any
drug paraphernalia knowing or under circumstances where he or she reasonably
should know that it will be used to plant, propagate, cultivate, grow, harvest,
manufacture, compound, convert, produce, process, prepare, test, analyze, pack,
repack, store, contain, conceal, inject, ingest, inhale or otherwise introduce
into the human body a controlled substance in violation of any law of the
state.
(Ord. 226, passed 3-26-1981)
§ 10-4-5 ADVERTISING PROHIBITED.
   No person shall advertise in any newspaper, handbill or other publication
produced within the county, knowing or under circumstances where he or she
reasonably should know that the purpose of the advertisement, in whole or in
part is to promote the sale of objects designed for use or intended for use as
drug paraphernalia.
(Ord. 226, passed 3-26-1981)
§ 10-4-6 EXCEPTIONS.
   (A)   This chapter shall not apply to any of the following:
      1.   Any pharmacist or other authorized person who sells or furnishes
drug paraphernalia upon the prescription of a physician, dentist, podiatrist or
veterinarian;
      2.   Any physician, dentist, podiatrist or veterinarian who furnishes or
prescribes drug paraphernalia to his or her patients; and
      3.   Any manufacturer, wholesaler or retailer licensed by the California
State Board of Pharmacy to sell or transfer drug paraphernalia.
   (B)   No provision of this chapter shall be deemed, whether directly or
indirectly, to authorize any use, possession or other act which is otherwise
prohibited by any law of the state, or require any act which is prohibited by
any law of the state nor shall any provision of this chapter be deemed, whether
directly or indirectly, to prohibit any act or acts which are prohibited by any
law of the state.
(Ord. 226, passed 3-26-1981)
§ 10-4-7 ENFORCEMENT.
   (A)   Violation. Any person who violates any of the provisions of this
chapter shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, and upon conviction thereof, shall be
punished by a fine not to exceed $500 or by imprisonment in the county jail for
a period not to exceed six months, or by both such fine and imprisonment.
   (B)   Public nuisance. A violation of any provision of this chapter is
declared to be a public nuisance subject to abatement pursuant to the Cal. Code
of Civil Procedure § 731.
   (C)   Business license.
      1.   A violation of any provision of this chapter shall be sufficient
grounds for the Finance Director to revoke, suspend or to refuse to renew the
business license of the person or entity violating this chapter. A criminal
conviction or adverse judgment in a nuisance action shall not be required in
order to establish a violation of this chapter for purposes of revocation,
suspension or refusal to issue or renew a business license pursuant to this
subsection.
      2.   Any person or entity aggrieved by the actions of the Finance
Director in revoking, suspending or refusing to renew or issue a business
license pursuant to this subsection (C) shall have the right to appeal to the
City Council.
(Ord. 226, passed 3-26-1981)
CHAPTER 5: REGULATION OF CARDROOMS
Section
10-5-1 Gambling house prohibited
10-5-2 Permitting use as a gambling house
10-5-3 Gambling or betting
10-5-4 Exceptions
10-5-5 Application and renewal
10-5-6 Denial, suspension or revocation
10-5-7 Penalty
§ 10-5-1 GAMBLING HOUSE PROHIBITED.
   No person shall keep, conduct or maintain any house, room, apartment or
place, used in whole or in part as a gambling house or place where any game is
played, conducted, dealt or carried on with cards, dice, dominoes or other
devices, for money, checks, chips, credit or any representative of value, in
the result of which game chance is any determining factor, except as set forth
in §
10-5-4 of this chapter. The word CARDS as used in this chapter is not intended
to and shall not include games known as bridge or whist. Except as provided in
this chapter, there shall be no gambling permitted in the city.
(Ord. 283, passed 4-11-1985)
§ 10-5-2 PERMITTING USE AS A GAMBLING HOUSE.
   No person shall knowingly permit any house, room, apartment or place owned
by him or her or under his or her charge or control to be used in whole or in
part as a gambling house or place of playing, conducting, dealing or carrying
on any game, played with cards, dice, dominoes or other device, for money,
checks, chips, credit or any representative of value, in the result of which
game chance is any determining factor except as set forth in §
10-5-4 of this chapter.
(Ord. 283, passed 4-11-1985)
§ 10-5-3 GAMBLING OR BETTING.
   No person shall deal, operate, attend, play or bet at or against any game,
in the result of which game chance is any determining factor, which game is
played, conducted, dealt or carried on with cards, dice, dominoes or other
device, for money, checks, chips, credit or any representative of value, in any
house, room, apartment or place, except as set forth in §
10-5-4 of this chapter.
(Ord. 283, passed 4-11-1985)
§ 10-5-4 EXCEPTIONS.
   The following exceptions are made to the provisions of §
10-5-1 of this chapter.
   (A)   Private games. Said provisions shall not apply to occasional private
games, otherwise lawful, carried on for purely social purposes in a private
home. Neither shall said provisions apply to otherwise lawful games, other than
card games, conducted by a private group of customers, for the sole purpose of
determining which member of said group shall pay for food, refreshments or
beverages for immediate consumption by the group.
   (B)   Benevolent organization licensed.
      1.   Generally. A license may be issued in the reasonable discretion of
the Chief of Police to any incorporated or chartered fraternal, labor,
benevolent or charitable organization or association, which organization or
association has been continuously carrying on within the city the activities
for which it was organized for a period of not less than two years immediately
preceding making application therefor. Said license shall authorize such
organization or association to conduct a game room or rooms wherein games not
in conflict with any state law may be played and conducted incidental to the
other activities of such organization, but in conformity with the provisions of
this subsection (B)1.. No advertising or advertising signs shall be permitted
in connection with said operation. The licensee shall have a paid attendant in
such rooms at all times when games are in progress, and it shall be his or her
duty to report to the licensee any violation of law.
      2.   Members only. No such game shall be open to the public, but shall be
used only by the members of the respective organization or association licensed
and shall be maintained in the building principally used by the licensee.
(Ord. 283, passed 4-11-1985)
§ 10-5-5 APPLICATION AND RENEWAL.
   Application for a license under the provisions of §
10-5-4(B) of this chapter shall be made to the Chief of Police in writing and
shall set forth facts which the applicant contends entitle it to a license
thereunder. Said application shall be verified. Said license shall be valid
only for the city fiscal year and shall be issued originally or renewed
annually upon application to the Chief of Police without action by the Council
unless a written objection to the issuance of the license has been filed with
the Chief of Police or he or she recommends denial of the license, in which
event the application shall be referred by him or her to the Council for action
in accordance with the provisions of §
10-5-6 of this chapter.
(Ord. 283, passed 4-11-1985)
§ 10-5-6 DENIAL, SUSPENSION OR REVOCATION.
   An application or license under the provisions of §
10-5-4(B) of this chapter may be denied, suspended or revoked by the Council
upon proof to its satisfaction of a violation of any law by the applicant or
licensee, or upon a determination by the Council that the applicant or licensee
does not meet the requirements of §
10-5-4(B) of this chapter, or upon a determination by the Council that the
conduct of the particular game room would be or is inimical to the public
health, morals, safety, peace or general welfare. If a license is revoked, no
new license shall be issued to the licensee for a period of one year subsequent
to the revocation. No license shall be denied, suspended or revoked until after
a hearing has been held by the City Council, notice of which shall be given in
writing by the Chief of Police at least ten days prior to the date of the
hearing by depositing the notice with postage fully prepaid thereon in the
mail, addressed to the applicant or licensee at the address appearing on its
application or license.
(Ord. 283, passed 4-11-1985)
§ 10-5-7 PENALTY.
   Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter is guilty of a
misdemeanor and shall, upon conviction thereof, be punished by a fine not
exceeding the sum of $300 or by imprisonment in the county jail not exceeding
180 days, or by both such fine and imprisonment.
(Ord. 283, passed 4-11-1985)
CHAPTER 6: ADULT ENTERTAINMENT BUSINESSES
Section
Article I. General Provisions
10-6-1 Purpose
10-6-2 Definitions
10-6-3 Permits required
10-6-4 Adult entertainment business regulatory permit required
10-6-5 Applications
10-6-6 Investigation and action on regulatory permit application
10-6-7 Permit denial
Article II. Applications And Permits
10-6-8 Transfer of regulatory permits
10-6-9 Adult entertainment business performer permit
10-6-10 Investigation and action on performer permit application
10-6-11 Suspension or revocation of regulatory and performer permits
10-6-12 Appeal of denial, suspension or revocation
10-6-13 Additional permits required
10-6-14 Application for escort or figure model permit
10-6-15 Issuance and denial of permits
10-6-16 Revocation or suspension of permit
10-6-17 Term of permit
Article III. Facilities And Employees
10-6-18 Adult entertainment business development and performance standards
10-6-19 Register and permit number of employees
10-6-20 Display of permit and identification cards
10-6-21 Persons employed under age 18 prohibited
Article IV. Miscellaneous Provisions
10-6-22 Inspections
10-6-23 Regulations nonexclusive
10-6-24 Employment of persons without permits unlawful
10-6-25 Time limit for filing permit application
10-6-26 Certain conduct in bars prohibited
10-6-27 Additional regulations
10-6-28 Severability
Article V. Appeals
10-6-29 Right of appeal
10-6-30 Filing appeal
10-6-31 Setting hearing
10-6-32 Hearings
10-6-33 Notice
ARTICLE I. GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 10-6-1 PURPOSE.
   It is the purpose of this chapter to regulate adult oriented businesses in
order to promote the health, safety, morals and general welfare of the citizens
of the city. The provisions of this chapter have neither the purpose nor effect
of imposing a limitation or restriction on the content of any communicative
materials, including sexually oriented materials. Similarly, it is not the
intent nor effect of this chapter to restrict or deny access by adults to
sexually oriented materials protected by the First Amendment, or to deny access
by the distributors and exhibitors of sexually oriented entertainment to their
intended market. Neither is it the intent nor effect of this chapter to condone
or legitimize the distribution of obscene material.
(Ord. 493, passed 4-18-2000)
§ 10-6-2 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   ADULT ENTERTAINMENT BUSINESS OPERATOR. A person who supervises, manages,
inspects, directs, organizes, controls or in any other way is responsible for
or in charge of the premises of an adult entertainment business or the conduct
or activities occurring on the premises thereof.
   ADULT ENTERTAINMENT BUSINESSES. Any one of the following.
      1.   ADULT ARCADE. An establishment where, for any form of consideration,
one or more still or motion picture projectors, slide projectors or similar
machines, for viewing by five or fewer persons each, are used to show films,
computer generated images, motion pictures, videocassettes, slides or other
photographic reproductions, 30% or more of the number of which are
characterized by an emphasis upon the depiction or description of specified
sexual activities or specified anatomical areas.
      2.   ADULT BOOKSTORE. An establishment that has 30% or more of its stock
in books, magazines, periodicals or other printed matter, or of photographs,
films, motion pictures, videocassettes, slides, tapes, records or other form of
visual or audio representations which are characterized or distinguished by an
emphasis upon the depiction or description of specified sexual activities and/
or specified anatomical areas.
      3.   ADULT CABARET. A nightclub, restaurant or similar business
establishment which regularly features live performance, 30% or more of the
number of which are characterized by an emphasis upon the display of specified
anatomical areas or specified sexual activities, or films, computer generated
images, motion pictures, videocassettes, slides or other photographic
reproductions, 30% or more of the number of which are characterized by an
emphasis upon the depiction or description of specified sexual activities or
specified anatomical areas.
      4.   ADULT HOTEL/MOTEL. A hotel or motel or similar business
establishment offering public accommodations for any form of consideration
which:
         (a)   Provides patrons with closed circuit television transmission,
film, computer generated images, motion pictures, videocassettes, slides or
other photographic reproductions, 30% or more of the number of which are
characterized by an emphasis upon the depiction or description of specified
sexual activities or specified anatomical areas; and
         (b)   Rents, leases or lets any room for less than a six-hour period,
or rents, leases or lets any single room more than twice in a 24-hour period.
      5.   ADULT MOTION PICTURE THEATER. A business establishment where for any
form of consideration, films, computer generated images, motion pictures,
videocassettes, slides or similar photographic reproductions are shown, and 30%
or more of the number of which are characterized by an emphasis upon the
depiction or description of specified sexual activities or specified anatomical
areas.
      6.   ADULT THEATER. A theater, concert hall, auditorium or similar
establishment which, for any form of consideration features live performances,
30% or more of the number of which are characterized by an emphasis on the
display of specified anatomical areas or specified sexual activities.
      7.   ESCORT BUREAU. A business which, for pecuniary compensation,
consideration, hire or reward, furnishes or offers to furnish escorts.
      8.   MODELING STUDIO.
         (a)   A business which provides, for pecuniary compensation, monetary
or other consideration, hire or reward, figure models who, for the purpose of
sexual stimulation of patrons, display specified anatomical areas to be
observed, sketched, photographed, painted, sculpted or otherwise depicted by
persons paying such consideration.
         (b)   MODELING STUDIO does not include schools maintained pursuant to
standards set by the State Board of Education.
         (c)   MODELING STUDIO further does not include a studio or similar
facility owned, operated, or maintained by an individual artist or group of
artists, and which does not provide, permit or make available specified sexual
activities.
   APPLICANT. A person who is required to file an application for a permit
under this chapter, including an individual owner, managing partner, officer of
a corporation or any other operator, manager, employee or agent of an adult
entertainment business.
   BAR. Any commercial establishment licensed by the State Department of
Alcoholic Beverage Control to serve any alcoholic beverages on the premises.
   DISTINGUISHED OR CHARACTERIZED BY AN EMPHASIS UPON. Means and refers to the
dominant or essential theme of the object described by such phrase. For
instance, when the phrase refers to films which are distinguished or
characterized by an emphasis upon the depiction or description of specified
sexual activities or specified anatomical areas, the films so described are
those whose dominant or predominant character and theme are the depiction of
the enumerated sexual activities or anatomical areas. See Pringle v. City of
Covina, 115 Cal. App 3d 151 (1981).
   ESCORT. A person who, for pecuniary compensation, monetary or other
consideration, hire or reward:
      1.   Escorts or accompanies others to or about social affairs,
entertainment or places of amusement;
      2.   Keeps company with others about any place or public resort or within
any private quarters;
      3.   Who agrees or offers to privately model lingerie or to privately
perform a striptease for another person; or
      4.   Who agrees to provide any service which is distinguished or
characterized by an emphasis upon the display of specified anatomical areas or
specified sexual activities.
   FIGURE MODEL. Any person who, for pecuniary compensation, consideration,
hire or reward, poses in a modeling studio to be observed, sketched, painted,
drawn, sculptured, photographed or otherwise depicted.
   HEALTH OFFICER. The Police Chief of the City of Livingston or his or her
duly authorized representative.
   NUDITY or A STATE OF NUDITY. The showing of the human male or female
genitals, pubic area or buttocks with less than a fully opaque covering, the
showing of the female breast with less than fully opaque covering of any part
of the nipple, or the showing of the covered male genitals in a discernibly
turgid state.
   OPERATING AN ADULT ENTERTAINMENT BUSINESS. The supervising, managing,
inspecting, directing, organizing, controlling or in any way being responsible
for or in charge of the conduct of activities of an adult entertainment
business or activities within an adult entertainment business.
   PERMITTEE. The person to whom an adult entertainment business permit is
issued.
   PERSON. Any individual, partnership, copartnership, firm, association, joint
stock company, corporation, or combination of the above in whatever form or
character.
   POLICE CHIEF. The Chief of Police of the City of Livingston or the
authorized representatives thereof.
   REGULARLY FEATURES. With respect to an adult theater or adult cabaret, means
a regular and substantial course of conduct. The fact that live performances
which are distinguished or characterized by an emphasis upon the display of
specified anatomical areas or specified sexual activities occurs on two or more
occasions within a 30-day period; three or more occasions within a 60-day
period; or four or more occasions within a 180-day period shall, to the extent
permitted by law, be deemed to be a regular and substantial course of conduct.
   SEMINUDE. A state of dress in which clothing covers no more than the
genitals, pubic region, buttocks, areola of the female breast, as well as
portions of the body covered by supporting straps or devices.
   SPECIFIED ANATOMICAL AREAS. Means and includes any of the following:
      1.   Less than completely and opaquely covered human:
         (a)   Genitals or pubic region;
         (b)   Buttocks; and
         (c)   Female breast below a point immediately above the top of the
areola.
      2.   Human male genitals in a discernibly turgid state, even if
completely and opaquely covered.
   SPECIFIED SEXUAL ACTIVITIES. Means and includes any of the following:
      1.   The fondling or other erotic touching of human genitals, pubic
region, buttocks, anus or female breast;
      2.   Sex acts, actual or simulated, including intercourse, oral
copulation or sodomy;
      3.   Masturbation, actual or simulated; and
      4.   Excretory functions as part of or in connection with any of the
other activities described in subsections 1. through 3. of this definition.
(Ord. 493, passed 4-18-2000)
§ 10-6-3 PERMITS REQUIRED.
   (A)   Adult business regulatory permit. It shall be unlawful for any person
to engage in, conduct or carry on, or to permit to be engaged in, conducted or
carried on, in or upon any premises in the city, the operation of an adult
entertainment business unless the person first obtains and continues to
maintain in full force and effect a permit from the city as herein required.
   (B)   Adult entertainment business performer permit. It shall be unlawful
for any person to engage in or participate in any live performance depicting
specified anatomical areas or involving specified sexual activities in an adult
entertainment business unless the person first obtains and continues in full
force and effect a permit from the city as herein required.
   (C)   Escort permit; figure model permit. It shall be unlawful for any
person to act as an escort, figure model or to take any other position of
employment with an escort bureau or modeling studio in the city unless the
person first obtains and continues to maintain in full force and effect a
permit from the city as herein required.
(Ord. 493, passed 4-18-2000)
§ 10-6-4 ADULT ENTERTAINMENT BUSINESS REGULATORY PERMIT REQUIRED.
   Every person who proposes to maintain, operate or conduct an adult
entertainment business in the city shall file an application with the Police
Chief upon a form provided by the city and shall pay a filing fee, as
established by resolution adopted by the City Council from time to time, which
shall not be refundable.
(Ord. 493, passed 4-18-2000)
§ 10-6-5 APPLICATIONS.
   (A)   Adult entertainment business regulatory permits are nontransferable,
except in accordance with §
10-6-8 of this chapter. Therefore, all applications shall include the following
information:
      1.   If the applicant is an individual, the individual shall state his or
her legal name, including any aliases, address and submit satisfactory written
proof that he or she is at least 18 years of age;
      2.   If the applicant is a partnership, the partners shall state the
partnership’s complete name, address, the names of all partners, whether the
partnership is general or limited, and attach a copy of the partnership
agreement, if any;
      3.   If the applicant is a corporation, the corporation shall provide its
complete name, the date of its incorporation, evidence that the corporation is
in good standing under the laws of California, the names and capacity of all
officers and directors, the name of the registered corporate agent and the
address of the registered office for service of process;
      4.   If the applicant is an individual, he or she shall sign the
application. If the applicant is other than an individual, an officer of the
business entity or an individual with a 10% or greater interest in the business
entity shall sign the application;
      5.   If the applicant intends to operate the adult entertainment business
under a name other than that of the applicant, the applicant shall file the
fictitious name of the adult business and show proof of registration of the
fictitious name;
      6.   A description of the type of adult entertainment business for which
the permit is requested and the proposed address where the adult business will
operate, plus the names and addresses of the owners and lessors of the adult
entertainment business site;
      7.   The address to which notice of action on the application is to be
mailed;
      8.   The names of all employees required by §
10-6-9 of this chapter, to obtain an adult entertainment business performer
license. (For ongoing reporting requirements, see §
10-6-9 of this chapter.);
      9.   A sketch or diagram showing the interior configuration of the
premises, including a statement of total floor area occupied by the adult
entertainment business. The sketch or diagram need not be professionally
prepared, but must be drawn to a designated scale or drawn with marked
dimensions of the interior of the premises to an accuracy of plus or minus six
inches;
      10.   A certificate and straight line drawing prepared within 30 days
prior to application depicting the building and the portion thereof to be
occupied by the adult entertainment business, and:
         (a)   The property line of any other adult entertainment business
within 1,000 feet of the primary entrance of the adult entertainment business
for which a permit is requested; and
         (b)   The property lines of any church, school, park, residential zone
or use within 1,000 feet of the primary entrance of the adult entertainment
business.
      11.   A diagram of the off-street parking areas and premises entries of
the adult entertainment business showing the location of the lighting system
required by §
10-6-18(C) of this chapter.
   (B)   If the Police Chief determines that the applicant has completed the
application improperly, the Police Chief shall promptly notify the applicant of
such fact and, on request of the applicant, grant the applicant an extension of
time of ten days or less to complete the application properly. In addition, the
applicant may request an extension, not to exceed ten days, of the time for the
Police Chief to act on the application. The time period for granting or denying
a permit shall be stayed during the period in which the applicant is granted an
extension of time.
   (C)   The fact that an applicant possesses other types of state or city
permits or licenses does not exempt the applicant from the requirement of
obtaining an adult entertainment business regulatory permit.
(Ord. 493, passed 4-18-2000)
§ 10-6-6 INVESTIGATION AND ACTION ON REGULATORY PERMIT APPLICATION.
   (A)   Upon receipt of a completed application and payment of the application
and permit fees, the Police Chief shall immediately stamp the application as
received and promptly investigate the information contained in the application
to determine whether the applicant shall be issued an adult entertainment
business regulatory permit.
   (B)   Within 30 days of receipt of the completed application, the Police
Chief shall complete the investigation, grant or deny the application in
accordance with the provisions of this section, and so notify the applicant as
follows.
      1.   The Police Chief shall write or stamp “granted” or “denied” on the
application and date and sign such notation.
      2.   If the application is denied, the Police Chief shall attach to the
application a statement of the reasons for denial.
      3.   If the application is granted, the Police Chief shall attach to the
application an adult entertainment business regulatory permit.
      4.   The application as granted or denied and the permit, if any, shall
be placed in the United States mail, first class postage prepaid, addressed to
the applicant at the address stated in the application.
   (C)   The Police Chief shall grant the application and issue the adult
entertainment business regulatory permit upon findings that the proposed
business meets the location criteria of the city business code requirements;
and that the applicant has met all of the development and performance standards
and requirements of §
10-6-18 of this chapter, unless the application is denied for one or more of
the reasons set forth in §
10-6-7 of this chapter, the permittee shall post the permit conspicuously in
the adult entertainment business premises.
   (D)   If the Police Chief grants the application or if the Police Chief
neither grants nor denies the application within 30 days after it is stamped as
received (except as provided in §
10-6-5(B) of this chapter), the applicant may begin operating the adult
entertainment business for which the permit was sought, subject to strict
compliance with the development and performance standards and requirements of §
10-6-18 of this chapter.
(Ord. 493, passed 4-18-2000)
§ 10-6-7 PERMIT DENIAL.
   The Police Chief shall deny the application for any of the following
reasons:
   (A)   The building, structure, equipment or location used by the business
for which an adult entertainment business regulatory permit is required do not
comply with the requirements and standards of the health, zoning, fire and
safety laws of the city and the state, or with the locational or development
and performance standards and requirements of these regulations;
   (B)   The applicant, his or her employee, agent, partner, director, officer,
shareholder or manager has knowingly made any false, misleading or fraudulent
statement of material fact in the application for an adult business regulatory
permit;
   (C)   An applicant is under 18 years of age; and
   (D)   1.   The required application fee has not been paid. Each adult
entertainment business regulatory permit shall expire one year from the date of
issuance, and may be renewed only by filing with the Police Chief a written
request for renewal, accompanied by the annual permit fee and a copy of the
permit to be renewed.
      2.   The request for renewal shall be made at least 30 days before the
expiration date, the expiration of the permit will not be stayed. Applications
for renewal shall be acted on as provided herein for action upon applications
for permits.
(Ord. 493, passed 4-18-2000)
ARTICLE II. APPLICATIONS AND PERMITS
§ 10-6-8 TRANSFER OF REGULATORY PERMITS.
   (A)   A permittee shall not operate an adult entertainment business under
the authority of an adult entertainment business regulatory permit at any place
other than the address of the adult entertainment business stated in the
application for the permit.
   (B)   A permittee shall not transfer ownership or control of an adult
entertainment business or transfer an adult entertainment business regulatory
permit to another person unless and until the transferee obtains an amendment
to the permit from the Police Chief stating that the transferee is now the
permittee. Such an amendment may be obtained only if the transferee files an
application with the Police Chief in accordance with §§
10-6-4 and
10-6-5 of this chapter, accompanies the application with a transfer fee in an
amount set by resolution of the City Council, and the Police Chief determines
in accordance with §
10-6-6 of this chapter that the transferee would be entitled to the issuance of
an original permit.
   (C)   No permit may be transferred when the Police Chief has notified the
permittee that the permit has been or may be suspended or revoked.
   (D)   Any attempt to transfer a permit either directly or indirectly in
violation of this section is hereby declared void, and the permit shall be
deemed revoked.
(Ord. 493, passed 4-18-2000)
§ 10-6-9 ADULT ENTERTAINMENT BUSINESS PERFORMER PERMIT.
   (A)   No person shall engage in, or participate in any live performance
depicting specified anatomical areas or involving specified sexual activities
in an adult entertainment business, without a valid adult entertainment
business performer permit issued by the city. All persons who have been issued
an adult entertainment business regulatory permit shall promptly supplement the
information provided as part of the application for the permit required by §
10-6-4 of this chapter, with the names of all performers required to obtain an
adult entertainment business performer permit, within 30 days of any change in
the information originally submitted. Failure to submit such changes shall be
grounds for suspension of the adult entertainment business regulatory permit.
   (B)   The Police Chief shall grant, deny and renew adult entertainment
business employee permits.
   (C)   The application for a permit shall be made on a form provided by the
Police Chief. An original and two copies of the completed and sworn permit
application shall be filed with the Police Chief.
   (D)   The completed application shall contain the following information and
be accompanied by the following documents:
      1.   The applicant’s legal name and any other names (including “stage
names” and aliases) used by the applicant;
      2.   Age, date and place of birth;
      3.   Height, weight, hair and eye color;
      4.   Present residence address and telephone number;
      5.   Whether the applicant has ever been convicted of:
         (a)   Any of the offenses set forth in the Cal. Penal Code §§ 315,
316, 266a, 266b, 266c, 266e, 266g, 266h, 266i, 647(a), 647(b) and 647(d) as
those sections now exist or may hereafter be amended or renumbered; or
         (b)   The equivalent of the aforesaid offenses outside the state.
      6.   Whether such person is or has ever been licensed or registered as a
prostitute, or otherwise authorized by the laws of any other jurisdiction to
engage in prostitution in such other jurisdiction. If any person mentioned in
this subsection (D)6. has ever been registered as a prostitute, or otherwise
authorized by the laws of any other state to engage in prostitution, a
statement shall be submitted giving the face of such registration, licensing or
legal authorization, and the inclusive dates during which such person was so
licensed, registered or authorized to engage in prostitution;
      7.   State driver’s license or identification number;
      8.   The applicant’s fingerprints on a form provided by the Police
Department, and a photograph clearly showing the applicant’s face. Any fees for
the photographs and fingerprints shall be paid by the applicant; and
      9.   If the application is made for the purpose of renewing a license to
be renewed.
   (E)   The completed application shall be accompanied by a nonrefundable
application fee. The amount of the fee shall be set by resolution of the City
Council.
   (F)   Upon receipt of an application and payment of the application fees,
the Police Chief shall immediately stamp the application as received and
promptly investigate the application.
   (G)   If the Police Chief determines that the applicant has completed the
application improperly, the Police Chief shall promptly notify the applicant of
such fact and grant the applicant an extension of time of not more than ten
days to complete the application properly. In addition, the applicant may
request an extension, not to exceed ten days, of the time for the City Manager
to act on the application. The time period for granting or denying a permit
shall be stayed during the period in which the applicant is granted an
extension of time.
(Ord. 493, passed 4-18-2000)
§ 10-6-10 INVESTIGATION AND ACTION ON PERFORMER PERMIT APPLICATION.
   (A)   Within five days after receipt of the properly completed application,
the Police Chief shall grant or deny the application and so notify the
applicant as follows.
      1.   The Police Chief shall write or stamp “granted” or “denied” on the
application and date and sign such notation.
      2.   If the application is denied, the Police Chief shall attach to the
application a statement of the reasons for denial.
      3.   If the application is granted, the Police Chief shall attach to the
application an adult entertainment business employee permit.
      4.   The application as granted or denied and the permit, if any, shall
be placed in the United States mail, first class postage prepaid, addressed to
the applicant at the residence address stated in the application.
   (B)   The Police Chief shall grant the application and issue the permit
unless the application is denied for one or more of the reasons set forth in
subsection (D) of this section.
   (C)   If the Police Chief grants the application or if the Police Chief
neither grants nor denies the application within five days after it is stamped
as received (except as provided in subsection
10-6-9(G) of this chapter), the applicant may begin performing in the capacity
for which the license was sought.
   (D)   The Police Chief shall deny the application for any of the following
reasons:
      1.   The applicant has knowingly made any false, misleading or fraudulent
statement of a material fact in the application for a permit or in any report
or document required to be filed with the application;
      2.   The applicant is under 18 years of age;
      3.   The adult entertainment business employee permit is to be used for
performing in a business prohibited by state or city law;
      4.   The applicant has been registered in any state as a prostitute; and
      5.   (a)   The applicant has been convicted of any of the offenses
enumerated in §
10-6-9(D)5. of this chapter or convicted of an offense outside of the state
that would have constituted any of the described offenses if committed within
the state.
         (b)   A permit may be issued to any person convicted of the described
crimes if the conviction occurred more than five years prior to the date of the
application.
   (E)   Each adult entertainment business performer permit shall expire one
year from the date of issuance and may be renewed only by filing with the
Police Chief a written request for renewal, accompanied by the application fee
and a copy of the permit to be renewed.
      1.   The request for renewal shall be made at least 30 days before the
expiration date of the permit. When made less than 30 days before the
expiration date, the expiration date of the permit will not be stayed.
      2.   Applications for renewal shall be acted upon as provided for herein
for applications for permits.
(Ord. 493, passed 4-18-2000)
§ 10-6-11 SUSPENSION OR REVOCATION OF REGULATORY AND PERFORMER PERMITS.
   An adult entertainment business regulatory permit or adult entertainment
business employee permit may be suspended or revoked in accordance with the
procedures and standards of this section.
   (A)   On determining that grounds for permit revocation exists the Police
Chief shall furnish written notice of the proposed suspension or revocation to
the permittee. Such notice shall set forth the time and place of a hearing, and
the ground or grounds upon which the hearing is based, the pertinent code
sections, and a brief statement of the factual matters in support thereof. The
notice shall be mailed, postage prepaid, addressed to the last known address of
the permittee, or shall be delivered to the permittee personally, at least ten
days prior to the hearing date. Hearing shall be conducted in accordance with
procedures established by the Police Chief, but at a minimum shall include the
following:
      1.   All parties involved shall have a right to offer testimonial,
documentary and tangible evidence bearing on the issues; may be represented by
counsel; and shall have the right to confront and cross examine witnesses;
      2.   Any relevant evidence may be admitted that is the sort of evidence
upon which reasonable persons are accustomed to rely in the conduct of serious
affairs;
      3.   Any hearing under this section may be continued for a reasonable
time for the convenience of a party or a witness; and
      4.   The Police Chief’s decision may be appealed in accordance with §
10-6-12 of this chapter.
   (B)   A permittee may be subject to suspension or revocation of his or her
permit, or be subject to other appropriate disciplinary action, for any of the
following causes arising from the acts or omissions of the permittee, or an
employee, agent, partner, director, stockholder or manager of an adult
entertainment business:
      1.   In the case of a permittee of an adult entertainment business
regulatory permit only, the building, structure, equipment or location used by
the adult entertainment business fails to comply with all applicable building,
fire, electrical, plumbing, health and zoning requirements of this code, all
applicable state and federal requirements of a similar nature which are
customarily enforced by the city, and all provisions of these regulations and
this code relating to adult entertainment businesses, including the adult
entertainment business development and performance standards contained in
section 10-6-18 of this chapter;
      2.   The permittee knowingly made any false, misleading or fraudulent
statement of material facts in the application for a permit, or in any report
or record required to be filed with the city;
      3.   The permittee, employee, agent, partner, director, stockholder or
manager of an adult entertainment business has knowingly allowed or permitted,
and has failed to make a reasonable effort to prevent the occurrence of any of
the following on the premises of the adult entertainment business, or in the
case of an adult entertainment business performer, the permittee has engaged in
one of the activities described below while on the premises of an adult
entertainment business:
         (a)   Any act of unlawful sexual intercourse, sodomy, oral copulation
or masturbation;
         (b)   Use of the establishment as a place where unlawful solicitations
for sexual intercourse, sodomy, oral copulation or masturbation openly occur;
         (c)   Any conduct constituting a criminal offense which requires
registration under the Cal. Penal Code § 290;
         (d)   The occurrence of acts of lewdness, assignation, or
prostitution, including any conduct constituting violations of the Cal. Penal
Code §§ 315, 316, 318 or 647(b);
         (e)   Any act constituting a violation of provisions in the Cal. Penal
Code relating to obscene matter or distribution of harmful matter to minors,
including, but not limited to, Cal. Penal Code §§ 311 through 313.4; and
         (f)   Any conduct prohibited by this chapter.
      4.   Failure to abide by any disciplinary action previously imposed by an
appropriate city official.
   (C)   After holding the hearing in accordance with the provisions of this
section, if the Police Chief finds and determines that there are grounds for
disciplinary action, based upon the severity of the violation, the Police Chief
shall impose one of the following:
      1.   A warning;
      2.   Suspension of the permit for a specified period not to exceed six
months; or
      3.   Revocation of the permit.
(Ord. 493, passed 4-18-2000)
§ 10-6-12 APPEAL OF DENIAL, SUSPENSION OR REVOCATION.
   After denial of an application for an adult entertainment business
regulatory permit or an adult entertainment business performer permit, or after
denial of renewal of a permit, or suspension or revocation of a permit, the
applicant or person to whom the permit was granted may seek review of such
administrative action by the City Council by filing a written appeal with the
Police Chief within ten days of the mailing of the decision. The City Council
shall hear the appeal at the next regularly scheduled meeting, at least seven
days after filing of the appeal. If the denial, suspension or revocation is
affirmed on review, the applicant, permittee may seek prompt judicial review of
such administrative action pursuant to Cal. Code of Civil Procedure § 1094.5.
The court shall promptly review the action taken by the City Council.
(Ord. 493, passed 4-18-2000)
§ 10-6-13 ADDITIONAL PERMITS REQUIRED.
   (A)   No person shall act as an escort unless an escort permit is first
obtained.
   (B)   No person shall act as a figure model in a modeling studio unless a
figure model permit is first obtained. The issuance of a business license shall
not authorize acting as an escort or as a figure model in a modeling studio
until the necessary regulatory permit has been lawfully granted.
(Ord. 493, passed 4-18-2000)
§ 10-6-14 APPLICATION FOR ESCORT OR FIGURE MODEL PERMIT.
   (A)   An applicant for an escort or figure model permit shall make an
application under penalty of perjury to the Police Chief or his or her
authorized representative upon a form provided by the city. A nonrefundable
fee, as established by resolution adopted by the City Council from time to
time, shall be paid to the city to reimburse the city for the cost of the
investigation. A copy of the receipt issued by the City Finance Department
shall accompany the application. The permit fee required under this section is
in addition to any other license or permit fee required by this code.
   (B)   The application for permit does not authorize the applicant to act as
an escort or as a figure model until such permit has been granted.
   (C)   Every application submitted to the Police Chief shall include the
following information:
      1.   The applicant’s full name, any other names used, date of birth,
California driver’s license number or California identification number, Social
Security number, present residence address, telephone number, sex, height,
weight, color of hair and color of eyes;
      2.   Previous two residence addresses of the applicant and the inclusive
dates at each address;
      3.   The applicant’s business, occupation and employment history for five
years preceding the date of application and inclusive dates of same;
      4.   The permit history of the applicant; whether such person ever had
any permit or license issued to him or her by any other public entity in this
state; the date of issuance of any such permit or license, whether any such
permit or license has ever been revoked or suspended; and if any such license
or permit has been revoked or suspended, the reason therefor;
      5.   All convictions for any crimes involving conduct which requires
registration under state law similar to, and including, Cal. Penal Code § 290,
or of conduct which is a violation of the provisions of any state laws similar
to and including Cal. Penal Code §§ 243.4, 261, 261.5, 262, 266a, 266b, 266c,
266d, 266e, 266f, 266g, 266h, 266i, 267, 309, 311.2, 311.3, 311.4, 311.5,
311.6, 311.10, 311.1, 313.1, 314, 315, 316, 318, 647(a), 647(b), 647(d), or
647.6;
      6.   Any felony offense involving the possession, possession for sale,
sale, transportation, furnishing, giving away, of a controlled substance
specified in the Cal. Health and Safety Code §§ 11054, 11055, 11056, 11057 or
11058, or as those sections may hereafter be amended or renumbered;
      7.   Whether such person is or has ever been licensed or registered as a
prostitute, or otherwise authorized by the laws of any other jurisdiction. If
any person mentioned in this subsection (C)7. has ever been licensed or
registered as a prostitute, or otherwise authorized by the laws of any other
state to engage in prostitution, a statement shall be submitted giving the
place of such registration, licensing or legal authorization, and the inclusive
dates during which such person was so licensed, registered or authorized to
engage in prostitution;
      8.   Acceptable written proof that the applicant is at least 18 years of
age;
      9.   A complete set of fingerprints acceptable to the Police Chief;
      10.   The applicant shall make himself or herself available to the city’s
Police Department in order to be photographed; and
      11.   Authorization for the city, its agents and employees to seek
information and conduct an investigation into the truth of the statements set
forth in the application.
(Ord. 493, passed 4-18-2000)
§ 10-6-15 ISSUANCE AND DENIAL OF PERMITS.
   (A)   The Police Chief or his or her authorized representative shall have 30
days from the date the application is accepted as complete in which to
investigate the application and background of the applicant. Upon completion of
the investigation, the Police Chief or his or her designated representative
shall approve or deny the permit. The Police Chief may refuse to issue a permit
for escort or figure model for any of the following reasons, which reasons will
be set forth fully in writing and delivered to applicant:
      1.   The applicant has been convicted of any of the offenses enumerated
in §
10-6-14(C)5. and (C)6. of this chapter, or convicted of an offense outside the
state that would have constituted any of the described offenses it committed
within the state. A permit may be issued to any person convicted of any of the
crimes described if such conviction occurred more than five years prior to the
date of the application;
      2.   The applicant has been licensed or registered in any state as a
prostitute;
      3.   Any false statements made in the initial application for escort or
figure model permit;
      4.   That the applicant has had an escort or figure model permit denied
or revoked for cause by this city within the last five years;
      5.   That the applicant is not at least 18 years of age; and
      6.   That the applicant has not paid the required fee to the city’s
Finance Department.
   (B)   Any refusal to issue a permit pursuant to this section or the
suspension, or revocation of a permit under the provisions of §
10-6-16 of this chapter is appealable to the City Council in accordance with
the provisions of §
10-6-2 of this chapter. After denial of any such appeal, the applicant may seek
prompt judicial review of such administrative action in any court of competent
jurisdiction pursuant to Cal. Code of Civil Procedure § 1094.5.
(Ord. 493, passed 4-18-2000)
§ 10-6-16 REVOCATION OR SUSPENSION OF PERMIT.
   After following the procedure in §
10-6-11 of this chapter, the Police Chief may revoke or suspend an escort or
figure model permit for conviction of any of the crimes specified in §
10-6-14(C)5. and (C)6. of this chapter. The decision of the Police Chief shall
be in writing and shall be mailed postage prepaid to the escort or figure
model.
(Ord. 493, passed 4-18-2000)
§ 10-6-17 TERM OF PERMIT.
   (A)   Permits issued under the provisions of this section shall be valid for
a period of one year from the date of issuance and shall be renewable annually.
   (B)   An application for renewal for an escort or figure model permit shall
be accompanied by a nonrefundable filing fee, as established by resolution
adopted by the City Council from time to time.
(Ord. 493, passed 4-18-2000)
ARTICLE III. FACILITIES AND EMPLOYEES
§ 10-6-18 ADULT ENTERTAINMENT BUSINESS DEVELOPMENT AND PERFORMANCE STANDARDS.
   (A)   Maximum occupancy load, fire exits, aisles and fire equipment shall be
regulated, designed and provided in accordance with the Fire Department and
building regulations and standards adopted by the city.
   (B)   No adult entertainment business shall be operated in any manner that
permits the observation of any material or activities depicting, describing or
relating to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas from any
public way or from any location outside the building or area of such
establishment. This provision shall apply to any display, decoration, sign,
show window or other opening. No exterior door or window on the premises shall
be propped or kept open at any time while the business is open, and any
exterior windows shall be covered with opaque covering at all times.
   (C)   All off-street parking areas and premises entries of the sexually
oriented business shall be illuminated from dusk to closing hours of operation
with a lighting system which provides an average maintained horizontal
illumination of one foot-candle of light on the parking surface and/or
walkways. The required lighting level is established in order to provide
sufficient illumination of the parking areas and walkways serving the sexually
oriented business for the personal safety of patrons and employees and to
reduce the incidence of vandalism and criminal conduct.
   (D)   The premises within which the adult entertainment business is located
shall provide sufficient sound absorbing insulation so that noise generated
inside said premises shall not be audible anywhere on any adjacent property or
public right-of-way or within any other building or other separate unit within
the same building.
   (E)   Except for those businesses also regulated by the California
Department of Alcoholic Beverage Control, an adult entertainment business shall
be open for business only between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 10:00 p.m. on any
particular day.
   (F)   No window signs or displays shall be allowed.
   (G)   The building entrance to an adult entertainment business shall be
clearly and legibly posted with a notice indicating that persons under 18 years
of age are precluded from entering the premises. Said notice shall be
constructed and posted to the satisfaction of the community development
director or designee. No person under the age of 18 years shall be permitted
within the premises at any time.
   (H)   All indoor areas of the adult entertainment business within which
patrons are permitted, except restrooms, shall be open to view by the
management at all times.
   (I)   The adult entertainment business shall provide and maintain separate
restroom facilities for male patrons and employees, and female patrons and
employees. Male patrons and employees shall be prohibited from using the
restroom(s) for females, and female patrons and employees shall be prohibited
from using the restroom(s) for males, except to carry out the duties of repair,
maintenance and cleaning of the restroom facilities. The restrooms shall be
free from any adult material. Restrooms shall not contain television monitors
or other motion picture or video projection, recording or reproduction
equipment. The foregoing provisions of this subsection (I) shall not apply to
an adult entertainment business which deals exclusively with sale or rental of
adult material which is not used or consumed on the premises, such as an adult
bookstore or adult video store, and which does not provide restroom facilities
to its patrons or the general public.
   (J)   The following additional requirements shall pertain to adult
entertainment businesses providing live entertainment depicting specified
anatomical areas or involving specified sexual activities.
      1.   No person shall perform live entertainment for patrons of an adult
entertainment business except upon a stage at least 24 inches above the level
of the floor which is separated by a distance of at least ten feet from the
nearest area occupied by patrons, and no patron shall be permitted within ten
feet of the stage while the stage is occupied by an entertainer. ENTERTAINER
shall mean any person who is an employee or independent contractor of the adult
entertainment business, or any person who, with or without any compensation or
other form of consideration, performs live entertainment for patrons of an
adult entertainment business.
      2.   The adult entertainment business shall provide separate dressing
room facilities for entertainers which are exclusively dedicated to the
entertainers’ use.
      3.   The adult entertainment business shall provide an entrance/exit for
entertainers which is separate from the entrance/exit used by patrons.
      4.   The adult entertainment business shall provide access for
entertainers between the stage and the dressing rooms which is completely
separated from the patrons. If such separate access is not physically feasible,
the adult business shall provide a minimum three-foot wide walk aisle for
entertainers between the dressing room area and the stage, with a railing,
fence or other barrier separating the patrons and the entertainers capable of
(and which actually results in) preventing any physical contact between patrons
and entertainers.
      5.   No entertainer, either before, during or after performances, shall
have physical contact with any patron and no patron shall have physical contact
with any entertainer either before, during or after performances by such
entertainer. This subsection (J)5. shall only apply to physical contact on the
premises of the adult entertainment business.
      6.   Fixed rail(s) at least 30 inches in height shall be maintained
establishing the separations between entertainers and patrons required by this
subsection (J).
      7.   No patron shall directly pay or give any gratuity to any entertainer
and no entertainer shall solicit any pay or gratuity from any patron.
   (K)   Adult entertainment businesses shall employ security guards in order
to maintain the public peace and safety, based upon the following standards.
      1.   Adult entertainment businesses shall provide one security guard for
each ten parking spaces, or portion thereof, at all times the business is open
after 5:00 p.m.
      2.   Security guard(s) shall be charged with preventing violations of law
and enforcing compliance by patrons of the requirements of these regulations.
Security guards shall be uniformed in such a manner so as to be readily
identifiable as a security guard by the public and shall be duly licensed as a
security guard as required by applicable provisions of state law. No security
guard required pursuant to this subsection (K) shall act as a door person,
ticket seller, ticket taker, admittance person or sole occupant of the
manager’s station while acting as a security guard. The foregoing applicable
requirements of this section shall be deemed conditions of adult entertainment
business regulatory permit approvals, and failure to comply with every such
requirement shall be grounds for revocation of the permit issued pursuant to
these regulations.
(Ord. 493, passed 4-18-2000)
§ 10-6-19 REGISTER AND PERMIT NUMBER OF EMPLOYEES.
   Every permittee of an adult entertainment business which provides live
entertainment depicting specified anatomical areas or involving specified
sexual activities must maintain a register of all persons so performing on the
premises and their permit numbers. Such register shall be available to
inspection during regular business hours by any police officer of the city or
health officer as designated by the city.
(Ord. 493, passed 4-18-2000)
§ 10-6-20 DISPLAY OF PERMIT AND IDENTIFICATION CARDS.
   (A)   Every adult entertainment business shall display at all times during
business hours the permit issued pursuant to the provisions of this chapter for
such adult entertainment business in a conspicuous place so that the same may
be readily seen by all persons entering the adult entertainment business.
   (B)   The Police Chief shall provide each adult entertainment business
performer required to have a permit pursuant to this chapter, with an
identification card containing the name, address, photograph and permit number
of such performer.
   (C)   The Police Chief shall provide each escort or figure model granted a
permit with an identification card containing the name, address, photograph and
permit number of the escort or figure model.
   (D)   An escort shall carry such card at all times while providing escort
services.
   (E)   A figure model shall have such card available for inspection at all
times during the hours of operation of the model studio.
   (F)   An adult entertainment business performer shall have such card
available for inspection at all times during which such person is on the
premises of the adult entertainment business.
(Ord. 493, passed 4-18-2000)
§ 10-6-21 PERSONS EMPLOYED UNDER AGE 18 PROHIBITED.
   It shall be unlawful for any permittee, operator or other person in charge
of any adult entertainment business to employ any person who is not at least 18
years of age.
(Ord. 493, passed 4-18-2000)
ARTICLE IV. MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS
§ 10-6-22 INSPECTIONS.
   An applicant or permittee shall permit representatives of the Police
Department, County of Merced Health Department, Fire Department, Planning or
other city departments or agencies to inspect the premises of an adult
entertainment business for the purpose of ensuring compliance with the law and
the development and performance standards applicable to adult entertainment
businesses, at any time it is occupied or open for business. A person who
operates an adult entertainment business or his or her agent or employee is in
violation of the provisions of this section if he or she refuses to permit such
lawful inspection of the premises at any time it is occupied or open for
business.
(Ord. 493, passed 4-18-2000)
§ 10-6-23 REGULATIONS NONEXCLUSIVE.
   The provisions of this chapter regulating adult entertainment businesses are
not intended to be exclusive and compliance therewith shall not excuse
noncompliance with any other regulations pertaining to the operation of
businesses as adopted by the City Council.
(Ord. 493, passed 4-18-2000)
§ 10-6-24 EMPLOYMENT OF PERSONS WITHOUT PERMITS UNLAWFUL.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any owner, operator, manager or permittee in
charge of or in control of an adult entertainment business which provides live
entertainment depicting specified anatomical areas or involving specified
sexual activities to allow any person to perform such entertainment who is not
in possession of a valid, unrevoked adult entertainment business performer
permit.
   (B)   No permittee or operator of an escort service shall allow or permit a
person to act as an escort for such service unless said person possesses a
valid escort permit under the provisions of this chapter. It shall be the
responsibility of the permittee and the operator to ensure that each such
person employed as an escort shall first have obtained a valid permit pursuant
to this article.
   (C)   No permittee or operator of a model studio shall allow or permit a
person to act as a figure model for such studio unless the person possesses a
valid figure model permit under the provisions of this chapter. It shall be the
responsibility of the permittee and the operator to ensure that each such
person employed as a figure model shall first have obtained a valid permit
pursuant to this chapter.
(Ord. 493, passed 4-18-2000)
§ 10-6-25 TIME LIMIT FOR FILING PERMIT APPLICATION.
   All persons who possess an outstanding business license heretofore issued
for the operation of an adult entertainment business and all persons required
by this chapter to obtain an adult entertainment business performer permit, or
an escort permit, or a figure model permit must apply for and obtain such a
permit within 90 days of the effective date of this chapter. Failure to do so
and continued operation of an adult entertainment business, or continued
employment as an escort or figure model or the continued performances depicting
specified anatomical areas or specified sexual activities in an adult
entertainment business after such time without a permit shall constitute a
violation of this chapter.
(Ord. 493, passed 4-18-2000)
§ 10-6-26 CERTAIN CONDUCT IN BARS PROHIBITED.
   The City Council finds that barroom nudity is a direct cause of increased
demand for police services in and about such establishments, and finds further
that the activities commonly engaged in by both employees and patrons of such
establishments are inimical to the public welfare in that nudity in such
establishments has been demonstrated to increase the occurrence of illegal
activity in and occurring around such establishments. Accordingly, the
following acts or conduct on the premises of any bar are deemed contrary to the
public interest and welfare and the best interests of the community and,
therefor.
   (A)   No bar owner or operator or an employee thereof shall permit any
person on the premises to display or expose his or her genitals, pubic hair,
buttocks, anal region or any portion of the female breast at or below the
areola thereof.
   (B)   No bar owner or operator or employee thereof shall permit any person
on the premises to perform specified sexual activities as defined in §
10-6-2 of this chapter.
   (C)   Any bar owner, operator or employee thereof who permits any of the
above while alcoholic beverages are being sold or in the presence of anyone who
has consumed any alcoholic beverages on the premises at any time during the
four hours immediately preceding the act or display referred to above shall be
guilty of a misdemeanor.
   (D)   Any person who exposes his or her genitals, pubic hair, buttocks, anal
region or any portion of the female breast at or below the areola thereof on
the premises while alcoholic beverages are being sold, or on the premises and
in the presence of anyone who has consumed any alcoholic beverages on the
premises at any time during the four hours immediately preceding the act or
display referred to above shall be guilty of a misdemeanor.
(Ord. 493, passed 4-18-2000)
§ 10-6-27 ADDITIONAL REGULATIONS.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person to appear in any adult
entertainment business in a state of nudity.
   (B)   It shall be unlawful for a person to appear in a seminude condition in
any adult entertainment business unless the person appearing while seminude is
on a stage at least 24 inches above the level of the floor and at least ten
feet from any patron or customer.
   (C)   It shall be unlawful for any person who engages in or participates in
any live performance which is distinguished or characterized by an emphasis
upon the display or depiction of specified anatomical areas or specified sexual
activities in an adult entertainment business, or who appears seminude in an
adult entertainment business, to solicit any pay or gratuity from any patron or
customer or for any patron or customer to pay or give any gratuity to any such
person.
(Ord. 493, passed 4-18-2000)
§ 10-6-28 SEVERABILITY.
   If any section, subsection, subdivision, paragraph, sentence, clause or
phrase in this chapter or any part thereof is for any reason held to be
unconstitutional or invalid or ineffective by any court of competent
jurisdiction, such decision shall not affect the validity or effectiveness of
the remaining portions of this chapter or any part thereof. The City Council
hereby declares that it would have passed each section, subsection,
subdivision, paragraph, sentence, clause or phrase thereof irrespective of the
fact that any one or more subsections, subdivisions, paragraphs, sentences,
clauses or phrases be declared unconstitutional, or invalid, or ineffective.
(Ord. 493, passed 4-18-2000)
ARTICLE V. APPEALS
§ 10-6-29 RIGHT OF APPEAL.
   Except as otherwise specifically provided in this chapter, any person
excepting to the denial, suspension or revocation of a permit applied for or
held by him or her pursuant to any of the provisions of this chapter, or to any
administrative decision made by any official of the city pursuant to any of the
provisions of this chapter, may appeal in writing to the City Council by filing
with the City Clerk a written notice of such appeal, setting forth the specific
grounds thereof.
(Ord. 493, passed 4-18-2000)
§ 10-6-30 FILING APPEAL.
   A notice of appeal must be filed with City Clerk within the following time
limits:
   (A)   When written notice of the action or decision, from which the appeal
is taken, is required to be given, a notice of appeal must be filed with the
City Clerk within 15 days of such notice being given; and
   (B)   When written notice of the action or decision, from which the appeal
is taken, is not required or given, a notice of appeal must be filed with the
City Clerk within 30 days after the date of the action or decision.
(Ord. 493, passed 4-18-2000)
§ 10-6-31 SETTING HEARING.
   Whenever a notice of appeal is filed with the City Clerk in proper form and
with any fee that may be required, the City Clerk shall set the matter for
hearing before the City Council within 30 days after the date of the filing of
the notice of appeal with the City Clerk. The City Clerk shall give written
notice of the time and place of the hearing to the appellant and any other
persons requesting notice not less than ten days prior to such hearing.
(Ord. 493, passed 4-18-2000)
§ 10-6-32 HEARINGS.
   At such hearing, the appellant shall show cause on the grounds specified in
the notice of the appeal why the action expected should not be sustained. The
City Council may continue the hearing from time to time. The City Council shall
render its decision by resolution not more than 40 days after the close of the
hearing and its decision in the matter shall be final and conclusive.
(Ord. 493, passed 4-18-2000)
§ 10-6-33 NOTICE.
   A written notice shall be considered as having been given whenever it has
been either personally delivered or deposited in the United States mail,
postage prepaid, and addressed to the person entitled to receive such notice.
(Ord. 493, passed 4-18-2000)
CHAPTER 7: NOISE
Section
10-7-1 Noise restrictions; bands, phonographs and the like
10-7-2 Noise restrictions; general
10-7-3 Host; defined
10-7-4 Liability for police costs
10-7-5 Notice of disturbance; host signature
10-7-6 Notice of disturbance; signature unavailable
10-7-7 Notice of unlawful party
10-7-8 Second response; costs of special police assignment
10-7-9 Second response; closure required
10-7-10 Collection of costs of special police assignment
10-7-11 Violations
§ 10-7-1 NOISE RESTRICTIONS; BANDS, PHONOGRAPHS AND THE LIKE.
   It shall be unlawful to conduct or allow to be conducted any party which has
present a band, orchestra, radio, phonograph or other electronic sound
reproduction and/or amplification device system between the hours of 10:00 p.m.
and 6:00 a.m. which produces loud and unreasonable sound in volume level,
duration and character sufficient to maliciously and willfully disturb the
comfort, health, peace, safety or repose of reasonable persons of ordinary
sensibilities. Continuation of an activity prohibited by this section after
notification by a peace officer that the activity is disturbing the peace shall
be prima facie evidence of malicious and willful intent.
(Ord. 442, passed 6-6-1995)
§ 10-7-2 NOISE RESTRICTIONS; GENERAL.
   It shall be unlawful to conduct or allow to be conducted any party where
there is loud and unreasonable noise between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 6:00
a.m., if such noise is sufficiently loud and unreasonable in volume level,
duration and character to maliciously and willfully disturb the comfort,
health, peace, safety or repose of reasonable persons of ordinary
sensibilities. Continuation of an activity prohibited by this section after
notification by a peace officer that the activity is disturbing the peace shall
be prima facie evidence of malicious and willful intent.
(Ord. 442, passed 6-6-1995)
§ 10-7-3 HOST; DEFINED.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definition shall apply unless
the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   HOST. Any person conducting and/or permitting a party, including:
      1.   Owner(s) and/or lessee(s) of the property where a party is given;
      2.   Person(s) hosting a party;
      3.   Person(s) receiving money or other consideration for granting access
to a party;
      4.   Person(s) serving, furnishing or making available alcoholic
beverages; and
      5.   Parent(s) or legal guardians of a minor who is also a host.
(Ord. 442, passed 6-6-1995)
§ 10-7-4 LIABILITY FOR POLICE COSTS.
   When a party occurs at a premises and a peace officer at the scene
determines that it constitutes a threat to the public peace, health, safety or
general welfare, each host shall be held jointly and severally liable for the
cost of providing police personnel and services to abate the threat to public
peace, health, safety or general welfare. Violation of any provision of this
chapter is prima facie evidence of a threat to public peace, health, safety or
general welfare.
(Ord. 442, passed 6-6-1995)
§ 10-7-5 NOTICE OF DISTURBANCE; HOST SIGNATURE.
   (A)   When Police Department personnel respond to a complaint involving a
disturbance caused by a party, the responding officer may issue a written
notice to the host if such person is available on the premises. The notice
provided shall state that if Police Department personnel are required to return
to the premises within the following 12-hour period because of further
disturbances, and responding officers determine there is a threat to the public
peace, health, safety or general welfare, such response shall constitute
special police services. The notice shall state the host may be assessed civil
penalties for the cost of providing such special police services. The notice
shall be signed by the available host, acknowledging receipt of the warning,
and a signed copy of the warning shall be left with the available host.
   (B)   If a second or any subsequent response is required, Police Department
personnel shall have the available host sign a “second response” voucher,
acknowledging the occurrence of the second response, and one additional voucher
for each response thereafter during the course of the party.
(Ord. 442, passed 6-6-1995)
§ 10-7-6 NOTICE OF DISTURBANCE; SIGNATURE UNAVAILABLE.
   If no host is available on the premises when the police are present, or the
host refuses to sign receipt of the notice, a copy of the notice shall be
posted in a conspicuous place on the premises on each occasion the police
respond. A refusal by a host at the party site to sign a receipt of the warning
after being requested to do so by a peace officer is a misdemeanor.
(Ord. 442, passed 6-6-1995)
§ 10-7-7 NOTICE OF UNLAWFUL PARTY.
   When Police Department personnel become aware of any scheduled party which
would be unlawful under this chapter, officers may issue a written notice to a
host describing the unlawful nature of the party. The notice provided shall
state that if Police Department personnel are required to respond to the
scheduled party, such response shall constitute special police services. The
notice shall state the host may be assessed for the cost of providing such
special police services. The notice shall be signed by a host, acknowledging
receipt of the warning, and a signed copy of the warning shall be left with the
host. This notice shall constitute a first warning as required by this chapter.
A refusal by a host to sign a receipt of the warning after being requested to
do so by a peace officer is a misdemeanor.
(Ord. 442, passed 6-6-1995)
§ 10-7-8 SECOND RESPONSE; COSTS OF SPECIAL POLICE ASSIGNMENT.
   Utilization of police personnel during any response after the first warning
to any party or to control the threat to the public peace, health, safety or
general welfare shall be deemed to be a special police assignment over and
above the services normally provided. The cost of such special police
assignment may include damages to city property and/or injuries to city
personnel.
(Ord. 442, passed 6-6-1995)
§ 10-7-9 SECOND RESPONSE; CLOSURE REQUIRED.
   The Chief of Police or his or her designee shall close and disperse any
party for which a second response is required.
(Ord. 442, passed 6-6-1995)
§ 10-7-10 COLLECTION OF COSTS OF SPECIAL POLICE ASSIGNMENT.
   The costs provided for in this chapter shall be collected in the following
manner:
   (A)   Copies of the initial warning, the second response voucher and any
additional voucher shall be forwarded to the Livingston City Hall where the
cost of special police assignment services shall be computed and an amount
assessed which reflects the actual costs of service rendered as established in
the city’s schedule of fees and charges as authorized by this code. The city
shall invoice the host.
      1.   The invoice shall notify the host that a hearing to present any
evidence or argument challenging the invoiced amount or liability for any
amount shall be available if such written request is received by the Chief of
Police within ten calendar days of the date the notice is mailed. If no such
written notice is received within ten calendar days, the total amount becomes
immediately due and payable.
      2.   If a written request is received within ten calendar days, the Chief
of Police or his or her designee shall conduct a hearing with an additional 20
calendar days after receipt of the written request at a date set by the Chief.
The Chief shall cause to be mailed written notices of the hearing to the
requester at least ten calendar days in advance of the hearing. The decision of
the Chief or his or her designee shall be mailed to each party within ten
calendar days after the conclusion of the hearing. That decision shall be final
unless a written notice appealing the decision is received by the City Manager
within ten calendar days after the decision has been mailed to the parties.
      3.   If a written notice appealing the decision is received by the City
Manager within ten calendar days after the decision has been mailed to the
parties, then the City Manager shall conduct a hearing de novo within 20
calendar days at a date set by the City Manager. The City Manager shall then
notify the parties in writing of the decision within ten calendar days after
the conclusion of the hearing. The City Manager’s decision shall be final and
the civil penalties imposed, if any, shall become immediately due and payable
upon the mailing.
   (B)   Costs for police response and services will be charged at the rate of
$75. This cost will cover administrative costs; peace officer wages; vehicle
maintenance.
(Ord. 442, passed 6-6-1995)
§ 10-7-11 VIOLATIONS.
   Any violation of §§
10-7-1 through
10-7-10 inclusive, of this chapter, shall be a misdemeanor.
(Ord. 442, passed 6-6-1995)
CHAPTER 8: PROHIBITING SOLICITATION OF MOTORISTS
Section
10-8-1 Solicitation of motorists prohibited
10-8-2 Solicitation of motorists by charitable organizations
10-8-3 Conflict with chapter
10-8-4 Penalty
§ 10-8-1 SOLICITATION OF MOTORISTS PROHIBITED.
   (A)   No person shall stand on any public or private parking lot, street or
highway, or any sidewalk or other area adjacent to any parking lot, street or
highway, and solicit or attempt to solicit employment, business or
contributions from occupants of a vehicle.
   (B)   The City Council finds this provision is necessary to assure traffic
flow and safety of both motorists and pedestrians. The solicitation of
motorists is potentially distracting to the operator of the motor vehicle, and
can place solicitors in close proximity to moving vehicles in an unsafe manner.
This prohibition is not directed toward any other form of solicitation, and is
expressly intended not to infringe on any protected rights of any individual.
This regulation is necessary to protect the safety and welfare of the public.
(Ord. 447, passed 11-7-1995)
§ 10-8-2 SOLICITATION OF MOTORISTS BY CHARITABLE ORGANIZATIONS.
   Recognizable charitable organizations may solicit funds or services from
motorists within the city by a permit issued by the Police Department at no
cost to the charitable organization.
(Ord. 447, passed 11-7-1995)
§ 10-8-3 CONFLICT WITH CHAPTER.
   All other ordinances and parts of ordinances in conflict herewith are hereby
repealed.
(Ord. 447, passed 11-7-1995)
§ 10-8-4 PENALTY.
   Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall be deemed
guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction thereof shall be punished as
provided in §
1-4-1 of this code.
(Ord. 447, passed 11-7-1995)
CHAPTER 9: NEWSRACKS AND BLINDER RACKS
Section
10-9-1 Purpose and findings
10-9-2 Definitions
10-9-3 Display of certain matter prohibited
10-9-4 Protection of minors
10-9-5 Violations of chapter
§ 10-9-1 PURPOSE AND FINDINGS.
   The City Council finds that the unrestricted display, and/or maintenance of
materials that is harmful to minors as defined in this chapter, in a public
place, other than a public place from which minors are excluded, interferes
with the public’s general welfare and is especially inappropriate to minors.
The City Council intends by this chapter to restrict the display and/or
maintenance of materials containing harmful matter where minors are not
allowed, and to cause concealment of harmful matters in areas where minors are
allowed.
(Ord. 494, passed 4-18-2000)
§ 10-9-2 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   BLINDER RACK. For the purposes of this chapter, shall mean a display or
merchandise rack which covers or conceals portions of the merchandise so as to
prevent the casual observer from viewing portions of the merchandise.
   NEWSRACK. Any self-service or coin operated box, container, storage unit or
other dispenser installed, used or maintained for the display or distribution
or sale of publications.
   PUBLIC RIGHT-OF-WAY. Any place of any nature which is dedicated to use by
the public for pedestrian travel, and includes, but is not limited to,
sidewalk, curb, parkway, lane, mall, court, park, square and any other similar
public way.
   ROADWAY. That part of a public right-of-way that is designated and used
primarily for vehicular traffic.
(Ord. 494, passed 4-18-2000)
§ 10-9-3 DISPLAY OF CERTAIN MATTER PROHIBITED.
   Publications offered for sale from newsracks placed or maintained on a
public right-of-way shall not be displayed or exhibited in a manner which
exposes to public view from the public right-of-way any of the following:
   (A)   Any statements or words described in explicit sexual acts, sexual
organs or excrement where such statements or words have as their purpose or
effect sexual arousal, gratification or affront;
   (B)   Any picture or illustration of genitals, pubic hair, perineum, anuses
or anal regions of any person where such picture or illustration has had as its
purpose or effects sexual arousal, gratification or affront; and
   (C)   Any picture or illustration depicting explicit sexual acts where such
picture illustration has as its purpose or effect sexual arousal, gratification
or affront. EXPLICIT SEXUAL ACT as used in this section means depictions of
sexual intercourse, oral copulation, anal intercourse or oral-anal copulation,
bestiality, sadism, masochism, or lewd exhibition of genitals, whether any of
the above conduct is depicted or described as being performed above or between
members of the same or opposite sex or between humans and animals, or other act
of sexual arousal, involving any physical contact with a person’s genitals,
pubic region, pubic hair, perineum, anus or anal region.
(Ord. 494, passed 4-18-2000)
§ 10-9-4 PROTECTION OF MINORS.
   No persons shall knowingly display or cause to be displayed, on a public
right-of-way or any other place opened to the public where minors are not
excluded, any harmful matter as defined in the Cal. Penal Code § 313, and in §
10-9-3 of this chapter unless such matter is displayed in newsracks equipped
with the devices commonly known as “blinder racks” affixed in such a manner
that the lower two-thirds of the matter is not exposed to view.
(Ord. 494, passed 4-18-2000)
§ 10-9-5 VIOLATIONS OF CHAPTER.
   A violation of this chapter is a misdemeanor offense as more particularly
described in §
1-4-1(A) of this code.
(Ord. 494, passed 4-18-2000)
CHAPTER 10: MASSAGE ESTABLISHMENTS AND SERVICES
Section
10-10-1 Purpose
10-10-2 Definitions
10-10-3 Permit required
10-10-4 Application fee; operator
10-10-5 Application fee; employee
10-10-6 Application; general information
10-10-7 Application; masseuse, masseur or instructor
10-10-8 Application; massage establishment
10-10-9 Application; health certificate
10-10-10 Application; school of massage
10-10-11 Verification
10-10-12 Referral to Chief of Police
10-10-13 Referral to other departments
10-10-14 Trainee permit
10-10-15 Issuance, refusal, revocation or suspension of permit
10-10-16 Specific permit issued
10-10-17 Term of permit
10-10-18 Sale, transfer or change of location
10-10-19 Massage establishment; generally
10-10-20 Massage establishment hours
10-10-21 School of massage
10-10-22 Operating requirements
10-10-23 Register and permit numbers of employees
10-10-24 Identification cards
10-10-25 Persons employed under the age of 18 not permitted
10-10-26 Daily register
10-10-27 Notices
10-10-28 Inspection
10-10-29 Persons employed without permits not allowed
10-10-30 Time limit for filing application
10-10-31 Exceptions
10-10-32 Alcoholic beverages
10-10-33 Violation, penalty; permitless employees
10-10-34 Violation, penalty; generally
§ 10-10-1 PURPOSE.
   It is the purpose and intent of this chapter to provide for the orderly
regulation of massage therapists and operations of massage establishments as
defined in this chapter in the interest of public health, safety and welfare by
providing certain minimum qualifications for the operators of massage
establishments, massage therapists and massage therapist trainees.
(Ord. 537, passed 1-17-2006)
§ 10-10-2 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   BONA FIDE NONPROFIT CLUB. Any fraternal, charitable, religious, benevolent
or any other nonprofit organization having a regular membership association
primarily for mutual social, mental, political and civic welfare to which
admission is limited to the members and guests and revenue accruing therefrom
is to be used exclusively for the benevolent purposes of said organization and
which organization or agency is exempt from taxation, under the internal
revenue laws of the United States as a bona fide fraternal, charitable,
religious, benevolent or nonprofit organization, and in which massage or bath
services are provided incidental to its primary operation.
   HEALTH OFFICER. That person designated by the City of Livingston as health
officer or his or her authorized representative.
   MASSAGE. Any method of pressure on or friction against, or stroking,
kneading, rubbing, tapping, pounding, vibrating or stimulating of the external
parts of another human body with the use of the hands, arms or other portions
of the body, or with the aid of any mechanical or electrical apparatus or
appliances with or without such supplementary aids as rubbing alcohol,
liniments, antiseptics, oils, powder, creams, lotions, ointments or other
similar preparations commonly used in this practice. MASSAGE should also
include the giving of any baths as listed under this section.
   MASSAGE ESTABLISHMENT. Any establishment having a fixed place of business
where any person, firm, association or corporation engages in or carries on or
permits to be engaged in or carried on, any of the activities mentioned in this
chapter. Any establishment engaged in or carrying on, or permitting any
combination of massage and bathhouse is a MASSAGE ESTABLISHMENT.
   MASSEUR or MASSEUSE. Any person who for any consideration whatsoever engages
in the practice of “massage” as defined in this section unless otherwise
accepted.
   PERSON. Any individual, copartnership, firm, association, joint stock
company, corporation or combination of individuals of whatever form or
character.
   PUBLIC BATHHOUSE. Any place, including a private club or organization,
except as otherwise provided, wherein any person, firm, association,
corporation or partnership engages in, conducts, or carries on, or permits to
be engaged in, conducted or carried on, or the giving or furnishing of Russian,
Finnish, Swedish, hot air, vapor, electric cabinet, steam, mineral, sweat,
salt, Japanese, sauna, fomentation or electric baths of any kind whatever
excluding ordinary tub baths or showers.
   RECOGNIZED SCHOOL OF MASSAGE. Any school or institution which has for its
purpose the teaching of the theory, method, profession or work of massage,
which school requires a resident course of study not less than 180 class hours
to be given in not less than three calendar months, before the student is
furnished with a diploma or certificate of graduation from such school or
institution of learning following the successful completion of such course of
study or learning, and which school has been approved pursuant to the Cal.
Business and Professional Code § 4601.
(Ord. 537, passed 1-17-2006)
§ 10-10-3 PERMIT REQUIRED.
   (A)   Except as provided by §
10-10-31 of this chapter, no person shall perform a massage for a fee or any
other consideration at a location outside a massage establishment or a school
of massage as defined in this chapter. It is unlawful for any person to engage
in, conduct or carry on, or to permit to be engaged in, conducted or carried
on, in or upon any premises in the city the operation of a “massage
establishment” as defined in this chapter without first having obtained a
permit from the city after approval by the requisite city officers.
   (B)   It is unlawful for any person to act as a masseur, masseuse,
instructor, trainee or to take any other position of employment involving the
performance of massages, with a massage establishment or school of massage,
without first having obtained a permit from the city after approval by the
requisite city officers.
(Ord. 537, passed 1-17-2006)
§ 10-10-4 APPLICATION FEE; OPERATOR.
   Every applicant for a permit to maintain, operate or conduct a massage
establishment or a school of massage shall file an application with the city
upon a form provided and shall pay a filing fee of $100 which shall not be
refundable. APPLICANT includes an individual owner, managing partner or
corporate manager.
(Ord. 537, passed 1-17-2006)
§ 10-10-5 APPLICATION FEE; EMPLOYEE.
   Every person employed by a massage establishment, including any person who
engages in the practice of “massage” as defined in this chapter, and every
instructor and trainee in a school of massage shall file an application with
the city upon a form provided and shall pay a filing fee of $25 which shall not
be refundable.
(Ord. 537, passed 1-17-2006)
§ 10-10-6 APPLICATION; GENERAL INFORMATION.
   Applications for permits shall be submitted to the city. Every application
shall furnish the following information:
   (A)   The type of permit applied for;
   (B)   The name and residence address including all aliases by which the
applicant has been known;
   (C)   The two previous residence addresses immediately prior to the present
residence address of the applicant;
   (D)   Written proof that the applicant is at least 18 years of age;
   (E)   The applicant’s height, weight, color of eyes and hair;
   (F)   Two recent portrait photographs of the applicant, which photographs
shall not exceed two inches square in size and shall be full front views of the
face and head only;
   (G)   Business, occupation or employment of the applicant for the three
years immediately preceding the date of application;
   (H)   The applicant’s Social Security number and driver’s license number, if
any;
   (I)   The massage or similar business license or permit history of the
applicant; whether such person has previously operated in this or another city
or state under license or permit; whether such person has had such license or
permit revoked or suspended and the reason therefor; and the business activity
or occupation subsequent to such action of suspension or revocation;
   (J)   Whether the applicant has ever been arrested for or convicted of:
      1.   An offense involving conduct which required registration pursuant to
the Cal. Penal Code § 290;
      2.   An offense involving the use of force and violence upon the person
of another that amounts to a felony;
      3.   An offense involving sexual misconduct with children;
      4.   An offense as defined in Cal. Penal Code §§ 311, 315, 316, 318,
266a, 266b, 266d, 266e, 266f, 266g, 266h, 647(a), 647(b), 647(d), 647a, or any
violation of Cal. Penal Code § 182;
      5.   Conspiracy to violate any of the aforesaid sections of the
California Penal Code; or
      6.   The commission of the equivalent of any of the aforesaid crimes in a
jurisdiction outside the state.
   (K)   Whether such person is or has ever been licensed or registered as a
prostitute, or otherwise authorized by the laws of any other jurisdiction to
engage in prostitution in such other jurisdiction. If any person mentioned in
this subsection (K) has been licensed or registered as a prostitute, or
otherwise authorized by the laws of any other state to engage in prostitution,
a statement must be made giving the place of such registration, licensing or
legal authorization, and the inclusive dates during which such person was so
licensed, registered or authorized to engage in prostitution;
   (L)   The location at which the permittee is to be employed; and
   (M)   Such other identification and information necessary to discover the
truth of matters specified in this section as required to be set forth in the
application.
(Ord. 537, passed 1-17-2006)
§ 10-10-7 APPLICATION; MASSEUSE, MASSEUR OR INSTRUCTOR.
   (A)   An applicant for a permit as a masseur, masseuse or instructor must
furnish a diploma or certificate of graduation from a recognized school of
massage wherein the method, profession and work of massage is taught.
   (B)   The city shall accept as meeting the training requirements of this
section satisfactory evidence that the applicant has attended not less than 180
hours of instruction in not less than three months at a recognized school
within or without this state or in any foreign country that provides education
substantially equal to or in excess of the educational requirements of this
chapter.
   (C)   Two years’ bona fide experience as a masseur or masseuse in a massage
establishment attested to in writing by a person other than the applicant may
be substituted for the requirement of a diploma or certificate of graduation
from a recognized school or other institution of learning wherein the method
and work of massage is taught.
(Ord. 537, passed 1-17-2006)
§ 10-10-8 APPLICATION; MASSAGE ESTABLISHMENT.
   (A)   An application for a permit to operate a massage establishment shall
set forth the exact nature of the massage or baths to be administered and the
proposed place of business and facilities therefor.
   (B)   1.   If the applicant is a corporation, the name of the corporation
shall be set forth exactly as shown on its articles of incorporation together
with the names and addresses of each of the officers, directors, and each
stockholder holding more than ten percent (10%) of the stock of the
corporation.
      2.   If the applicant is a partnership, the application shall set forth
the names and residence address of each of the partners, including limited
partners. If one or more of the partners is a corporation, the provisions of
this section pertaining to a corporate applicant apply.
(Ord. 537, passed 1-17-2006)
§ 10-10-9 APPLICATION; HEALTH CERTIFICATE.
   Every application filed by a natural person shall be accompanied by a
certificate from a physician licensed to practice medicine in the state that
the applicant has been tested within the previous 30 days in a manner to be
approved by the health officer and has been found to be free of all contagious,
infectious and communicable disease.
(Ord. 537, passed 1-17-2006)
§ 10-10-10 APPLICATION; SCHOOL OF MASSAGE.
   Every application for a school of massage shall be accompanied by:
   (A)   Proof of approval pursuant to Cal. Business and Professional Code §
4601;
   (B)   A statement of the educational and experience qualifications and the
names and residence addresses of all directors, administrators and instructors;
and
   (C)   A copy of the course outline, schedule of tuition fee and other
charges, regulations pertaining to tardiness and absence, grading policy, and
rules of operation and conduct.
(Ord. 537, passed 1-17-2006)
§ 10-10-11 VERIFICATION.
   Every application for a permit under this chapter shall be verified by
affidavit or by declaration, or certification under penalty of perjury as
provided in the Cal. Code of Civil Procedure.
(Ord. 537, passed 1-17-2006)
§ 10-10-12 REFERRAL TO CHIEF OF POLICE.
   (A)   The application shall be referred to the Chief of Police who shall
take the fingerprints and confirm the height and weight of the applicant.
   (B)   Nothing contained in this chapter shall be construed to deny the right
of the Chief of Police to require additional photographs, information or
identification of the applicant.
(Ord. 537, passed 1-17-2006)
§ 10-10-13 REFERRAL TO OTHER DEPARTMENTS.
   (A)   Copies of an application for a massage establishment or school of
massage permit shall be referred to the Building Inspection Department, the
Fire Chief, the Health Department, the Planning Director and the Chief of
Police, who shall inspect the premises proposed to be operated as a massage
establishment and shall make written recommendations to the finance officer
concerning compliance with the codes that they administer.
   (B)   All other applications shall be referred to the Health Department and
the Chief of Police for their approval or written recommendations.
(Ord. 537, passed 1-17-2006)
§ 10-10-14 TRAINEE PERMIT.
   (A)   The city shall issue a massage trainee permit to any person who
qualifies for such a permit who files an application under §
10-10-6 of this chapter and who is currently registered and attending a
recognized school of massage in the city, except that the city may refuse,
revoke or suspend a permit for the reasons set forth in §
10-10-15 of this chapter. No trainee shall perform any of the services
enumerated in the definitions of “massage”, “masseur or masseuse” and “public
bathhouse” in §
10-10-2 of this chapter, except that such trainee may engage in massage
services within the school premises under the direction of a qualified
instructor and in his or her presence.
   (B)   Such trainee permit shall be valid for a period of three months and
shall not be renewed or extended except for a delay of requisite training due
to accident, illness or other valid reason.
   (C)   The applicant for a trainee permit must submit a letter signed by the
owner, manager or director of the recognized school showing that the applicant
is currently accepted for or enrolled in a course of study leading to a degree
or certificate of graduation.
   (D)   The trainee permit may be extended by the Finance Officer for a period
of three months or until the trainee has completed at least 180 hours of
instruction in a recognized school of massage upon a showing of good cause by
the trainee contained in a written application to the city.
(Ord. 537, passed 1-17-2006)
§ 10-10-15 ISSUANCE, REFUSAL, REVOCATION OR SUSPENSION OF PERMIT.
   (A)   The city shall issue all other permits after the application has been
reviewed and approved, except that for good cause the city may refuse, revoke
or suspend a permit for a massage establishment, a school of massage or for any
other applicant or permittee for any of the following reasons to be set forth
in writing and delivered to the applicant or permittee:
      1.   The operation as proposed by the applicant if permitted will not or
does not comply with all applicable laws including, but not limited to,
ordinances relating to building, health, planning, housing, zoning and fire
protection, and other applicable codes which the city has a responsibility to
administer including the regulations adopted by the Health Department;
      2.   The applicant or any other person who will be directly engaged in
the management and operation of a massage establishment or school of massage
has been arrested or convicted of any of the offenses enumerated in §
10-10-6(J) of this chapter or convicted of an offense outside the state that
would have constituted any of the described offenses if committed within the
state;
      3.   A permit may be issued to any person arrested or convicted of any of
the crimes described if such arrest or conviction occurred more than seven
years prior to the date of the application and the applicant has had no
subsequent felony arrests or convictions of any nature and no subsequent
misdemeanor arrests or convictions for crimes mentioned in §
10-10-6(J) of this chapter;
      4.   The applicant has been licensed or registered in any state as a
prostitute;
      5.   The character of the neighborhood or district is not a proper or
suitable place in which to conduct or maintain such business or calling;
      6.   The location of the establishment must not be within close proximity
of any school grounds;
      7.   In any case where any of the provisions of this chapter are violated
or where the permittee or any employee including a masseur, a masseuse,
instructor or trainee is engaged in any conduct at a massage establishment or
school of massage which violates any state or local law or ordinances, or where
the permittee of a massage establishment or school of massage has actual or
constructive knowledge of such violations, or where any such permittee by the
exercise of due diligence should have had actual or constructive knowledge of
any such violation, or in any case where such permittee or any other person
whatever acting on his or her behalf refuses to allow any duly authorized
building inspector, police officer or health officer representing the city to
inspect the premises or the operations therein; and
      8.   Upon the recommendation of the Merced County health officer that
such business is being managed, conducted or maintained without regard for the
public health, or for the health of patrons or customers, or without due regard
to proper sanitation or hygiene.
   (B)   Any refusal to issue a permit, suspension or revocation under the
provisions of this section is appealable to the City Council as provided by
law.
(Ord. 537, passed 1-17-2006)
§ 10-10-16 SPECIFIC PERMIT ISSUED.
   The permit when issued shall state whether it is for a massage
establishment, for a school of massage, for a masseur or masseuse, for a
massage establishment employee who is not authorized to perform a massage, or
for an instructor or trainee in a school of massage.
(Ord. 537, passed 1-17-2006)
§ 10-10-17 TERM OF PERMIT.
   (A)   Permits issued under these provisions shall be valid for a period of
one year from the date of issuance and shall be renewable annually.
   (B)   Application for the renewal of a masseur or masseuse permit shall be
accompanied by a nonrefundable $10 filing fee, and shall contain the same
information as in §
10-10-6 of this chapter, excluding therefrom §
10-10-6(D), (G), (H) and (I) of this chapter.
   (C)   The application shall be referred to the Chief of Police who shall
have the right to confirm the identity of the applicant by taking fingerprints
and additional photographs and shall have the right to confirm the height and
weight and criminal record of the applicant.
   (D)   The application of a natural person shall be accompanied by a
certificate from a physician licensed to practice medicine in the state that
the applicant has been tested within the previous 30 days in a manner to be
approved by the Health Department and has been found to be free of all
contagious, infectious and communicable diseases.
(Ord. 537, passed 1-17-2006)
§ 10-10-18 SALE, TRANSFER OR CHANGE OF LOCATION.
   (A)   Upon sale, transfer or relocation of a massage establishment or school
of massage the permit therefor shall be null and void; provided, however, that
upon the death or incapacity of the permittee the massage establishment may
continue a business for a reasonable period of time, not to exceed three
months, to allow for an orderly transfer of the permit.
   (B)   No such permittee shall operate under any name or conduct his or her
business under any designation or at any location not specified in the permit.
   (C)   Any masseur, masseuse, instructor, trainee or other employee may
continue to use a valid and unexpired permit at any other massage establishment
or school of massage as authorized upon written notice to the city.
(Ord. 537, passed 1-17-2006)
§ 10-10-19 MASSAGE ESTABLISHMENT; GENERALLY.
   (A)   No permit to conduct a massage establishment shall be issued until an
inspection has been made by a building inspector, Fire Chief, health officer
and the Chief of Police of the city.
   (B)   Construction of rooms used for toilets, tubs, steam baths and showers
shall be made in accordance with the state and city building codes. Plumbing
fixtures shall be installed in accordance with said codes.
   (C)   Toilet facilities shall be provided in convenient locations. Separate
toilet facilities shall be provided for male and female and shall be designated
as to the sex accommodated therein.
   (D)   Lavatories or wash basins provided with both hot and cold running
water shall be installed in either room or the vestibule. Lavatories or wash
basins shall be provided with soap in a dispenser and with sanitary towels.
   (E)   All portions of massage establishments and baths shall be provided
with adequate light and ventilation as approved by the public health officer.
When windows or skylights are used for ventilation, at least one-half of the
total required window area shall be openable.
   (F)   To allow for adequate ventilation, cubicles, rooms and areas provided
for patrons’ use not served directly by a required window, skylight or
mechanical system of ventilation shall be constructed so that the height of
partitions does not exceed 75% of the floor to ceiling height of the area in
which they are located.
   (G)   No cubicle, room, booth or any area within a massage establishment
which is used for giving massages shall be fitted with a door capable of being
locked.
   (H)   All electrical equipment shall be installed in accordance with the
requirements of the city electrical code.
(Ord. 537, passed 1-17-2006)
§ 10-10-20 MASSAGE ESTABLISHMENT HOURS.
   No person shall conduct or operate a massage establishment or service
between the hours of 2:00 a.m. and 6:00 a.m. of the same day.
(Ord. 537, passed 1-17-2006)
§ 10-10-21 SCHOOL OF MASSAGE.
   A school of massage shall have the same facilities as required of a massage
establishment. A school of massage permit shall not be issued for the same
location as a massage establishment.
(Ord. 537, passed 1-17-2006)
§ 10-10-22 OPERATING REQUIREMENTS.
   (A)   Every portion of a massage establishment or school of massage
including appliances, apparatus and personnel shall be kept clean and operated
in a sanitary condition.
   (B)   All masseurs, masseuses, instructors and trainees shall be clean and
wear clean outer garments, the use of which is restricted to the massage
establishment. A separate dressing room for each sex must be maintained on the
premises with individual lockers for each employee or trainee. Doors to such
dressing rooms shall open inward and shall be self-closing.
   (C)   Each massage establishment and school of massage shall be provided
with clean, laundered sheets and towels in sufficient quantity which shall be
laundered after each use thereof and stored in an approved and sanitary manner.
Each massage table shall be provided with clean sheets and towels prior to each
use. No towels or sheets shall be laundered or dried in any massage
establishment. Approved receptacles shall be provided for the storage of soiled
linen and paper towels.
   (D)   Wet and dry heat rooms, shower compartments and toilet rooms shall be
thoroughly cleaned each day the business is in operation. Bathtubs and shower
compartments shall be thoroughly cleaned with a disinfectant after each use.
   (E)   No massage establishment or school of massage, whether located in any
building originally constructed for residential or sleeping purposes or not,
shall be used for residential or sleeping purposes.
(Ord. 537, passed 1-17-2006)
§ 10-10-23 REGISTER AND PERMIT NUMBERS OF EMPLOYEES.
   (A)   The operator of a massage establishment must maintain a register of
all persons employed on the premises and their permit numbers. Such register
shall be available for inspection during regular business hours by any city
police officer or county health officer.
   (B)   The operator of a school of massage must maintain a register of all
persons employed on the premises and of all trainees or students. Such register
shall be available for inspection during regular business hours by any city
police officer or county health officer.
(Ord. 537, passed 1-17-2006)
§ 10-10-24 IDENTIFICATION CARDS.
   (A)   The city shall provide each masseur, masseuse, instructor or trainee,
or other employee granted a permit with an identification nameplate which shall
contain a photograph of and the first name and permit number of said masseur,
masseuse, instructor or trainee which must be worn on the front of the
outermost garment at all times during the hours of employment or training.
   (B)   Every permit which shall have been granted pursuant to the provisions
of this chapter to a massage establishment or school of massage shall be
displayed in a conspicuous place so that the name may be readily seen by
persons entering the premises.
(Ord. 537, passed 1-17-2006)
§ 10-10-25 PERSONS EMPLOYED UNDER THE AGE OF 18 NOT PERMITTED.
   It shall be unlawful for any owner, proprietor, manager or other person in
charge of any massage establishment or school of massage to employ any person
who is not at least 18 years of age.
(Ord. 537, passed 1-17-2006)
§ 10-10-26 DAILY REGISTER.
   Every permittee of a massage establishment or school of massage shall keep a
daily register, approved as to form by the Police Department, of all patrons or
customers with names, addresses and hours of arrival and the rooms or cubicles
assigned, if any, or of location of any massage given under the direction of a
practitioner of the healing arts, chiropractic, or physical therapy and with
the name of the employee providing any such massage services. The daily
register shall at all times during business hours be subject to inspection by a
health officer or a police officer and shall be kept on file for one year.
(Ord. 537, passed 1-17-2006)
§ 10-10-27 NOTICES.
   Every permittee of a massage establishment or school of massage shall post
the following signs in a conspicuous place printed in bold letters not less
than one inch in height:
   (A)   A statement of the rates to be charged for all massage services to be
performed. No sum shall be charged for such massage services greater than that
shown on the rate card; and
   (B)   A statement that the premises are subject to inspection without notice
by authorized officials of the city.
(Ord. 537, passed 1-17-2006)
§ 10-10-28 INSPECTION.
   The Police Department, Building Inspection and the Health Department shall
from time to time, but not less than twice a year, make an inspection of each
massage establishment in the city for the purpose of determining that the
provisions of this chapter are being complied with.
(Ord. 537, passed 1-17-2006)
§ 10-10-29 PERSONS EMPLOYED WITHOUT PERMITS NOT ALLOWED.
   It shall be the responsibility of the permittee for the massage
establishment or school of massage to ensure that each person employed shall
first have obtained a valid permit pursuant to this chapter.
(Ord. 537, passed 1-17-2006)
§ 10-10-30 TIME LIMIT FOR FILING APPLICATION.
   All persons who possess an outstanding business license heretofore issued
for the operation of a massage establishment or school of massage and all
employees thereof must file for a permit on or before December 31, 1975, if
they qualify under the provisions contained in this chapter. Failure to do so
and continued operation of said place of business or continued employment
without a permit shall constitute a violation of all applicable provisions of
this chapter.
(Ord. 537, passed 1-17-2006)
§ 10-10-31 EXCEPTIONS.
   (A)   This chapter shall not apply to hospitals, nursing homes, sanatoriums
or persons holding an unrevoked certificate to practice the healing arts,
chiropractic or physical therapy under the laws of the state when lawfully
carrying out their particular profession, or persons working under the
direction of any persons in any such establishments, nor shall this chapter
apply to barbers or cosmetologists when lawfully carrying out their particular
profession or business and holding a valid unrevoked license or certificate of
registration issued by the state.
   (B)   A bona fide nonprofit club or organization as defined in §
10-10-2 of this chapter or its employees shall be required to obtain a permit,
and must conform to all applicable building, health, fire and zoning laws and
regulations of the city. The fees for the permits may be waived by the city.
(Ord. 537, passed 1-17-2006)
§ 10-10-32 ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES.
   No massage establishment, school of massage or any employee or trainee
thereof shall sell, serve, furnish, keep or possess any alcoholic beverage on
the premises.
(Ord. 537, passed 1-17-2006)
§ 10-10-33 VIOLATION, PENALTY; PERMITLESS EMPLOYEES.
   Any owner, operator, manager or permittee in charge of or in control of a
massage establishment or school of massage who knowingly employs any person who
is not in possession of a valid, unrevoked permit or who allows such a person
to practice within such a place of business is guilty of a misdemeanor and upon
conviction such person shall be punished by a fine not to exceed $1,000 or by
imprisonment in the county jail for a period not to exceed six months, or by
both such fine and imprisonment.
(Ord. 537, passed 1-17-2006)
§ 10-10-34 VIOLATION, PENALTY; GENERALLY.
   Every person who violates any provisions of this chapter is guilty of a
misdemeanor, and upon conviction such person shall be punished by a fine not to
exceed $1,000 or by imprisonment in the county jail for a period not to exceed
six months, or by both fine and imprisonment.
(Ord. 537, passed 1-17-2006)
CHAPTER 11: BODY ART ESTABLISHMENTS
Section
10-11-1 Legislative purpose
10-11-2 Definitions
10-11-3 Registration
10-11-4 Business permits; health
10-11-5 Permit fees; Health Department
10-11-6 Permit forms; Health Department
10-11-7 Plan review
10-11-8 Public health facility permit
10-11-9 Public health operator permit
10-11-10 Posting requirements
10-11-11 Permit and registration; reporting requirements
10-11-12 Compliance with chapter provisions required
10-11-13 Communicable disease control
10-11-14 Health officer; enforcement authority
10-11-15 Owner’s responsibility
10-11-16 Managers; requirements
10-11-17 Facilities held in common or shared
10-11-18 Noncompliance with county health officer; injunctive relief
10-11-19 Exemptions
10-11-20 Severability
10-11-21 Exposure control plan
10-11-22 Exposure control training
10-11-23 Reporting requirements; complications
10-11-24 Equipment and instruments
10-11-25 Cleaning, sterilization and housekeeping
10-11-26 Equipment purchased presterilized
10-11-27 Sharps disposal
10-11-28 Clients
10-11-29 Restricted clients
10-11-30 Technician condition
10-11-31 Procedures and preparation
10-11-32 Hepatitis B vaccination status
10-11-33 Prohibited procedures and activities
10-11-34 Operation of body art establishment
10-11-35 Temporary and mobile body art facilities
10-11-36 Penalties
§ 10-11-1 LEGISLATIVE PURPOSE.
   It is the purpose and intent of the City Council in enacting this chapter to
protect the health, welfare, safety and interest of the public and of patrons
of establishments regulated herein by requiring the licensing and regulation of
the establishments, services and persons herein defined, by providing minimum
building, health, and sanitation standards for such establishments, and by
requiring minimum qualifications for persons performing such services.
(Ord. 539, passed 4-4-2006)
§ 10-11-2 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   APPROVED. Acceptable to the health officer of the County of Merced.
   ASEPTIC TECHNIQUE. Practices which prevent and hinder the transmission of
disease producing microorganisms from one person or place to another person or
place.
   BIOHAZARDOUS WASTE. Any of the following:
      1.   Laboratory waste, including, but not limited to, specimen cultures
from medical and pathological laboratories, cultures and stocks of infectious
agents from research and industrial laboratories, wastes from the production of
biological agents, discarded live and attenuated vaccines, and culture dishes
and devices used to transfer, inoculate and mix cultures or material which may
contain infectious agents and may pose a substantial threat to health;
      2.   Recognizable fluid blood elements and regulated body fluids and
containers and articles contaminated with blood elements or regulated body
fluids that readily separate from the solid portion of the waste under ambient
temperature and pressure. Regulated body fluids are cerebrospinal fluid,
synovial fluids, pleural fluid, peritoneal fluid, pericardial fluid and
amniotic fluid;
      3.   Sharps, which are objects or devices having acute rigid corners,
edges or protuberances capable of cutting or piercing, including, but not
limited to, hypodermic needles, blades and slides;
      4.   Contaminated animal carcasses, body parts, excrement and bedding of
animals including materials resulting from research, production of biologicals
or testing of pharmaceuticals which are suspected of being infected with a
disease communicable to humans;
      5.   Any specimens sent to a laboratory for microbiological analysis;
      6.   Surgical specimens including human or animal parts or tissues
removed surgically or by autopsy; and
      7.   Such other waste materials that result from the administration of
medical care to a patient by healthcare providers and are found by the
administering agency or the local health officer to pose a threat to human
health or the environment. If there is a difference in opinion between the
administering agency and the local health officer, the local health officer’s
view will prevail.
   BODY ART. To adorn the body through the permanent application of a tattoo or
insertion of an object, such as jewelry, into a hole for display purposes. BODY
ART is the collective term for any single activity or combination of activities
defined herein as tattooing, “body piercing” or “permanent cosmetics”. It shall
not include activities such as, or similar to, cutting of the skin or
subcutaneous tissue, cutting or modification of cartilage or bone,
implantation, branding, deep tissue penetration, threading, stapling or any
other invasive procedure, whether or not such act would constitute the practice
of medicine requiring licensure as a physician.
   BODY ART ACTIVITY. Any temporary or permanent application, process of
application, sterilization, sanitization, cleaning, preparation, implementation
or other procedure, utilized in the conduct of body art or any associated
activity, which is necessary to the conduct of “body art”, as defined in this
section.
   BODY ART ESTABLISHMENT. Any temporary or permanent premises, business,
location facility, mobile facility or any portion thereof, used or operated as
a body piercing parlor or as a permanent cosmetics parlor.
   BODY ART TECHNICIAN. A person that has completed an approved blood borne
pathogen training course and is registered with the department to conduct body
art activity, in a permitted art establishment.
   BODY ART TECHNICIAN INDEPENDENT OPERATOR. A body art technician conducting
body art activity at a permitted body art establishment, but who is not an
employee of the owner of the body art establishment.
   BODY PIERCING. The creation of an opening in the human body for purpose of
inserting jewelry or other decorations. This includes, but is not limited to,
creating such an opening in the ear, lip, tongue, nose, eyebrow or navel for
the purpose of inserting jewelry or other decorations.
   CITY. The City of Livingston.
   CLIENT. Any person who meets all legal requirements set forth in this
chapter and has given informed consent to have body art activity performed upon
his or her person.
   CONSENT FORM. A document provided by the body art establishment or body art
technician independent operator to each person requesting that any body art
activity be performed upon his or her person.
   CONTAMINATED. The presence or the reasonably anticipated presence of blood
or other potentially infectious materials on a substance or in or on an item.
   CONTAMINATED WASTE. Any contaminated substance, including, but not limited
to, any liquid or semiliquid blood or body fluid or any material that would
release potentially infectious material in a liquid or semiliquid state if
compressed, or any contaminated sharps, or any items that are caked with dried
blood or other potentially infectious material and are capable of releasing
these materials during handling.
   COUNTY. The County of Merced.
   DEPARTMENT. The Merced County Department of Public Health, Division of
Environmental Health.
   DEPARTMENTAL REGULATIONS. The regulations pertaining to body art activity
and establishments promulgated by the department as currently written or as may
from time to time be amended. When adopted by the department, these regulations
are incorporated in and become part of this chapter.
   ENFORCEMENT OFFICER. The health officer of the County of Merced or his or
her designees, the deputy director of environmental health services or his or
her assistant deputies, designees and employees.
   EXISTING OWNER. An owner of a body art establishment operating on the
effective date hereof.
   EXPOSURE CONTROL PLAN. A written plan that meets all requirements of Cal.
Code of Regulations Title 8, Division 1, Chapter 4, Subchapter 7, § 3203,
Injury and Illness Prevention Program, and Division 1, Chapter 4, Subchapter 7,
Group 16, Article 109, § 5193, Bloodbourne Pathogens, to minimize clients’ and
employees’ risk of exposure to blood or potentially infectious material.
   EXPOSURE INCIDENT. A person’s eye, mouth, other mucous membrane, nonintact
skin or blood coming in contact with potentially infectious material as a
result of body art activity.
   HEALTH PERMIT. An annual permit issued to a body art establishment by the
Deputy Director of Environmental Health Services.
   INSTRUMENT.
      1.   Approved equipment, devices and components utilized to conduct body
art activity, including, but not limited to, needles, needle bars, needle
tubes, forceps, hemostats, tweezers, or other items used to insert pigment or
dye, or to pierce, puncture or be inserted into any part of the human body, or
to assist in such acts, for the intended purpose of making a tattoo or
permanent hole.
      2.   Such items also include studs, hoops, rings or other decorative
jewelry, materials or apparatuses.
   INVASIVE. Entry into a client’s body either by incision or insertion of any
instruments into or through the skin or mucosa, or by any other means intended
to puncture, break or otherwise compromise the skin or mucosa.
   MANAGER. The owner or other person designated by the owner to be the owner’s
on site representative in a body art establishment, who shall meet the criteria
and comply with the provisions set forth in §
10-11-16  of this chapter.
   MOBILE BODY ART ESTABLISHMENT. A vehicle, conveyance or other mobile
platform approved for use by the department as a body art establishment.
   MOBILE TATTOO VEHICLE. A nonpermanent, mobile tattoo establishment operating
at a location remote from the permanent tattoo establishment, from which a
tattoo artist does tattooing for a fee or for other considerations.
   OWNER. The person, persons or legal entity having legal ownership of a
business operating as a body art establishment. Any reference in this chapter
to OWNING means having existing owner status.
   PERMANENT COSMETICS. Any application of pigment to or under the skin of a
person for the purpose of permanently or semipermanently changing the color or
appearance of the skin. This includes, but is not limited to, permanent or
semipermanent eyeliner, eye shadow or lip color.
   PERMANENT HOLE. A hole produced by piercing or puncturing any part of the
body with instruments intended to leave an opening in body tissue in which a
device or apparatus may be inserted. PERMANENT HOLE includes any body part
newly pierced or punctured which is undergoing a healing process, and any
piercing or puncture whether or not removal of the device or apparatus from the
perforation would result in fusing of the tissue structures.
   PHYSICIAN. An individual licensed as a qualified physician by the State of
California.
   POTENTIALLY INFECTIOUS MATERIAL. Human body fluids, including, but not
limited to, semen, vaginal secretions, cerebrospinal fluid, synovial fluid,
pleural fluid, pericardial fluid, peritoneal fluid, amniotic fluid and any
other body fluid that is visibly contaminated with blood such as saliva or
vomitus, and all body fluids in situations where it is difficult or impossible
to differentiate between body fluids.
   REGISTRATION. The process as set forth in §
10-11-3  of this chapter whereby persons wishing to be body art technicians
file a completed registration form with the department as a prerequisite to
conducting body art activities in any jurisdiction wherein this chapter is in
force. REGISTRATION BY THE DEPARTMENT shall mean the registered body art
technician has demonstrated to the department’s satisfaction that the bearer
has a level of competency sufficient to practice in this field. REGISTRATION
shall remain valid for no more than three years.
   SANITARY. Clean and free of agents of infection or disease.
   SHARPS. Any object, sterile or contaminated, that may intentionally or
accidentally cut or penetrate the skin or mucosa, including, but not limited
to, needle devices, lancets, scalpel blades, razor blades and broken glass.
   SINGLE SERVICE. One time, one person use.
   SINGLE USE ITEMS. Products or items that are intended for onetime, one
person use and are disposed of after use on each client, including, but not
limited to, cotton swabs or balls, tissues or paper products, paper or plastic
cups, gauze and sanitary coverings, razors, piercing needles, scalpel blades,
stencils, ink cups and protective gloves.
   TATTOO.
      1.   To insert pigment, ink or dye under the surface of the skin of a
person by pricking with a needle or otherwise, to permanently change the color
or appearance of the skin or to produce an indelible mark or figure visible
through the skin.
      2.   The indelible mark, figure or decorative design introduced by
insertion of dyes or pigments into or under the subcutaneous portion of the
skin.
   TEMPORARY BODY ART ESTABLISHMENT. A location that is approved by the
department and the city as a body art establishment in conjunction with a
temporary body art event.
(Ord. 539, passed 4-4-2006)
§ 10-11-3 REGISTRATION.
   (A)   Every person conducting “body art activity” as defined in this
chapter, or Chapter 9.56 of the Merced County codes, desiring to conduct such
activity, on or after the effective date hereof, shall file with the department
a completed registration form, accompanied by the applicable fee as set by law.
   (B)   No person may be registered unless he or she is at least 18 years of
age.
   (C)   Every person registering with the department must comply with the
provisions for registration established through departmental regulations.
   (D)   Failure to provide all information required by departmental
regulations or submission of false or misleading information shall make the
registration invalid.
   (E)   The registrant shall be deemed registered with the department as a
body art technician upon provision of a certificate of registration to the
registrant by the department. Until such time as a certificate of registration
is issued, the person is not authorized to conduct body art activity.
   (F)   Any registration issued by the department certifying that a person is
registered with the department as a body art technician is nontransferable and
is valid only for the person to whom it is issued.
   (G)   Registration shall be valid for three years from date of issuance
unless made invalid earlier due to the registrant’s failure to comply with
departmental regulations. Upon expiration, any person desiring to continue to
conduct body art activity must renew his or her registration and provide all
required documentation, as specified in this section.
(Ord. 539, passed 4-4-2006)
§ 10-11-4 BUSINESS PERMITS; HEALTH.
   Every person wishing to establish a body art establishment within the city
must first file for a business permit through the city.
   (A)   1.   Upon receipt of a written application for a business permit with
the city, the Chief of Police shall conduct an investigation to ascertain
whether such permit should be issued as requested. The Chief of Police shall,
within 60 days of receipt of an application, approve, conditionally approve or
deny the application. The 60-day period may be extended for up to 30 additional
days, if necessary, to complete the investigation.
      2.   The Chief of Police shall approve such permit as requested, unless
he or she makes any of the following findings:
         (a)   The applicant has been convicted of a violation of Cal. Penal
Code §§ 266h, 266i, 314, 315, 316, 318 or 647(a) or (b) or any other provision
of law pursuant to which a person is required to register under the provisions
of Cal. Penal Code § 290, or when the prosecution accepted a plea of guilty or
nolo contendere to a charge of a violation of Cal. Penal Code § 415 or any
lesser included or lesser related offense, in satisfaction of, or as a
substitute for, any of the previously listed crimes;
         (b)   The applicant has been convicted of a violation of Cal. Health
and Safety Code § 11550 or any offense involving the illegal sale, distribution
or possession of a controlled substance specified in Cal. Health and Safety
Code §§ 11054, 11055, 11056, 11057 or 11058;
         (c)   The applicant has been convicted of any offense in any other
state which is the equivalent of any of the above mentioned offenses;
         (d)   The applicant has been engaged in conduct in another
jurisdiction which, if it had occurred within the city, would constitute
grounds for denial, suspension or revocation under this chapter;
         (e)   The applicant has been subjected to a permanent injunction
against the conducting or maintaining of a nuisance pursuant to the California
Penal Code §§ 11225 through 11235, or any similar provisions of law in a
jurisdiction outside the state;
         (f)   The applicant has engaged in conduct which would constitute an
offense as described in subsection (A)1. of this section;
         (g)   The applicant has committed an act in another jurisdiction
which, if committed in this state, would have been a violation of law and
which, if done by a permittee under this chapter, would be grounds for denial,
suspension or revocation of the permit.
         (h)   The applicant has been convicted of an act involving dishonesty,
fraud, deceit or moral turpitude or an act of violence, which act or acts are
related to the qualifications, functions or duties of the operator;
         (i)   The applicant has had a tattoo and body art permit or other
similar license or permit denied, suspended or revoked for cause by a licensing
authority or by any city, county or state;
         (j)   The applicant has made a false, misleading or fraudulent
statement or omission of fact to the city in the permit application process;
         (k)   The city application does not contain all of the information
required by this section;
         (l)   The tattoo establishment does not comply with all applicable
laws, including, but not limited to, health, zoning, fire and safety
requirements and standards;
         (m)   If the applicant is denied for failure to comply with subsection
(A)2.(b) or (A)2.(c) of this section, the applicant may not reapply for a
period of one year from the date the application was denied;
         (n)   All individuals who will be employed at the establishment must
be identified in full by filling out a completed personnel form with the city
during application for a city business permit. The form will include the
following information: full name; nicknames; aliases used by the employee; home
address; age; birth date; gender; height; weight; color of hair and eyes; phone
numbers; Social Security number; date of employment; and all duties of the
employee; and
         (o)   All employees must meet the requirements set forth in subsection
(A)2.(a) of this section to be cleared for employment by the establishment.
   (B)   1.   The city will maintain the authority to revoke a business permit
should the body art establishment violate any section of this chapter.
      2.   Upon receiving tentative business permit approval through the city,
the business owner must then register with the Merced County Department of
Public Health, Division of Environmental Health.
   (C)   The business owner must then show proof to the city that all
requirements are met under the Cal. Health and Safety Code § 119303 with the
necessary certified registration forms.
   (D)   The business owner must obtain a valid health permit from the Director
of Public Health.
(Ord. 539, passed 4-4-2006)
§ 10-11-5 PERMIT FEES; HEALTH DEPARTMENT.
   Permit fees will be set by the Deputy Director of Environmental Health
Services of Merced County (Merced County Ord. § 9.56.030). This does not cover
business permit fees which are separate from this chapter.
(Ord. 539, passed 4-4-2006)
§ 10-11-6 PERMIT FORMS; HEALTH DEPARTMENT.
   Permit forms will be designated by the Deputy Director of Environmental
Health Services of Merced County.
(Ord. 539, passed 4-4-2006)
§ 10-11-7 PLAN REVIEW.
   (A)   The existing owner of the proposed body art establishment must submit
to the city and the department three sets of complete legible plans of his or
her body art establishment, drawn to scale, which shall include all
specifications required under this chapter. The city will review the plans and
approve or reject them within a reasonable time of submission. Nothing in this
section shall require that plans or specifications be prepared by anyone other
than the applicant.
   (B)   A person proposing to build or remodel a body art establishment shall
submit to the city complete legible plans, drawn to scale, which shall include
all specifications required under this chapter. The city will review the plans
and approve or reject them within a reasonable time after submission. Nothing
in this section shall require that plans or specifications be prepared by
anyone other than the applicant.
(Ord. 539, passed 4-4-2006)
§ 10-11-8 PUBLIC HEALTH FACILITY PERMIT.
   (A)   Each person owning a body art establishment shall obtain a public
health facility permit by meeting the requirements enumerated in departmental
regulations.
   (B)   Upon review and verification that the owner has met the requirements
enumerated in departmental regulations, the department shall issue a public
health facility permit to the owner.
   (C)   No person may conduct any body art activity in a body art
establishment unless that facility has a valid public health facility permit
issued by the department.
   (D)   The department may at any time suspend or revoke the public health
facility permit to operate as a body art establishment for failure to comply
with any provision of Chapter 9.56 of the Merced County code.
   (E)   If a public health facility permit has been suspended or revoked by
the department pursuant to this chapter or Chapter 9.56 of the Merced County
code, the permit may be reinstated by the department provided the department is
satisfied that the cause for the suspension or revocation no longer exists and
the condition of the body art establishment now meets the requirements for
issuance of such public health facility permit pursuant to Chapter 9.56 of the
Merced County code. The department may require the owner of such a body art
establishment to make any changes necessary to comply with this chapter,
satisfy any fines imposed pursuant to this chapter and to submit plans and
specifications reflecting any required changes, as a condition of reinstating
the public health facility permit.
   (F)   Any public health facility permit issued by the department to the
owner of a body art establishment is nontransferable. The public health
facility permit shall be valid for the approved facility only, and for the time
period indicated, unless suspended or revoked.
(Ord. 539, passed 4-4-2006)
§ 10-11-9 PUBLIC HEALTH OPERATOR PERMIT.
   (A)   Persons wishing to operate as a body art technician or a body art
technician independent operator, or intending to do so, shall obtain a public
health operator permit by filing a completed application form with the
department and paying the required fee, and providing proof of registration as
a body art technician with the department. No person may conduct any body art
activity within the city unless that person has a valid public health operator
permit issued by the department.
   (B)   The department may at any time suspend or revoke the public health
operator permit for failure to comply with the provisions of this chapter or
Chapter 9.56 of the Merced County codes.
(Ord. 539, passed 4-4-2006)
§ 10-11-10 POSTING REQUIREMENTS.
   (A)   The public health facility permit issued to the owner of any facility
operating as a body art establishment must be posted and exhibited at all times
in an area that is visible to the public and clients of said establishment.
   (B)   The public health operator permit issued to a body art technician must
be posted and exhibited at all times in an area that is visible to the public
and clients of any body art establishment in which the body art technician is
conducting body art activity.
   (C)   Every person registered with the department as a body art technician
shall at all times prominently post the certificate of registration adjacent to
his or her work station in an area that is readily visible to clients from that
location.
   (D)   Every establishment permitted to conduct body art activity, pursuant
to this chapter and Chapter 9.56 of the Merced County codes, shall have posted
at all times a legible sign in at least one inch lettering, that provides the
following information so as to be clearly visible to patrons entering the
establishment:
Any public health concerns regarding this establishment should be directed to
the Merced County Department of Public Health: (The department’s address and
phone number will be included.)
   (E)   Every establishment permitted to conduct body art activity pursuant to
this chapter shall have posted at all times a legible sign in at least one inch
lettering that provides the name of each body art technician conducting body
art activities within the establishment in an area that is easily visible to
the clients of said establishment.
   (F)   Every establishment permitted to conduct body art activity pursuant to
this chapter shall have posted at all times a legible sign in at least two inch
lettering at all work stations and cleaning rooms or areas, indicating that
smoking is prohibited.
(Ord. 539, passed 4-4-2006)
§ 10-11-11 PERMIT AND REGISTRATION; REPORTING REQUIREMENTS.
   Every person having a public health permit or registration with the
department under the provisions of this chapter and Chapter 9.56 of the Merced
County codes shall report to the department any changes in status to the
business or activities made reportable by departmental regulations within 15
days of the change.
(Ord. 539, passed 4-4-2006)
§ 10-11-12 COMPLIANCE WITH CHAPTER PROVISIONS REQUIRED.
   (A)   Except as exempted under this chapter, or Chapter 9.56 of the Merced
County codes, every person who conducts a “body art activity”, as defined in
this chapter, and Chapter 9.56 of the Merced County codes, including any person
owning or operating any business or establishment regulated by the chapters
mentioned, must comply with the provisions of such said chapters. Each person
receiving services resulting from activities regulated by this chapter or
Chapter 9.56 of the Merced County codes must also comply with the provisions of
either chapter.
   (B)   Any person who operates a body art establishment without a valid
public health facility permit, any person conducting any body art activity
without a valid public health operator permit, unless exempted pursuant to this
chapter, or any person, who violates any law, ordinance or regulation governing
any activity regulated by this chapter, or who, upon demand of the county
health officer, refuses or neglects to conform to a lawful order or directive
of a county health officer pertaining to conduct regulated by this chapter, or
Chapter 9.56 of the Merced County codes, is guilty of a misdemeanor punishable
by fine of $1,000, imprisonment in the county jail for a period not to exceed
six months, or both. Each such act is punishable as a separate offense, and
each subsequent day that an act continues constitutes a separate act punishable
as a separate offense.
   (C)   Operating a body art establishment in violation of any provision of
this chapter constitutes a misdemeanor, punishable as provided herein.
   (D)   Except as specified in an approved variance issued pursuant to
subsection (E) of this section, it is unlawful for any person to conduct any
body art activity in any manner not conforming to the provisions of this
chapter.
   (E)   1.   Any person seeking to conduct any activity or operate an
establishment regulated by this chapter in a nonconforming manner must apply to
the city and the department for a variance. Such application must include a
detailed description of the proposed nonconforming activity, including, but not
limited to, describing all involved equipment, instruments, processes,
procedures and methods.
      2.   The application must also include any available documentation that
verifies that the nonconforming activity, when conducted as proposed, provides
adequate safeguards to the public health and safety. No person may conduct any
activity or operate an establishment regulated by this chapter or Chapter 9.56
of the Merced County codes in a nonconforming manner without having an approved
variance from the department and the city in his or her possession.
(Ord. 539, passed 4-4-2006)
§ 10-11-13 COMMUNICABLE DISEASE CONTROL.
   If the department has reasonable cause to suspect a communicable disease has
been, or may be, transmitted by any person conducting activities regulated by
this chapter, or Chapter 9.56 of the Merced County codes, or by any use of
contaminated equipment, or by other unsanitary or unsafe conditions which may
adversely impact the public health and safety, the department may do any or all
of the following:
   (A)   Issue an order excluding from the permitted body art establishment any
person responsible for transmitting a communicable disease, or reasonably
believed to be responsible for transmitting a communicable disease, or
reasonably believed to pose a substantial risk of transmitting a communicable
disease, until the department determines there is no further risk to the public
health and safety;
   (B)   Issue an order to immediately suspend the public health facility
permit issued to the owner of the body art establishment until the department
determines there is no further risk to the public health and safety; and
   (C)   Issue an order to an owner, an employee or a client of a body art
establishment, to provide information reasonably deemed necessary to prevent
the spread of communicable disease.
(Ord. 539, passed 4-4-2006)
§ 10-11-14 HEALTH OFFICER; ENFORCEMENT AUTHORITY.
   (A)   The county health officer may enter and inspect any body art
establishment or enter and inspect any location suspected of conducting any
activity regulated by this chapter, and, for purposes of enforcing this chapter
or Chapter 9.56 of the Merced County codes, the county health officer may issue
notices and impose fines therein and take possession of any sample, photograph,
record or other evidence, including any documents bearing upon the body art
establishment’s or body art technician’s compliance with the provisions of this
chapter or Chapter 9.56 of the Merced County codes. Such inspections may be
conducted as often as necessary to ensure compliance with the provisions of
both city and department codes.
   (B)   The county health officer shall prepare a written report of the
results of the inspection and provide a copy of such report to the owner or
body art technician, as appropriate, in the event any person is cited in the
report for a violation of city or department codes, the cited person will be
provided a notice to comply by either personal service or by first class mail
to the cited person’s last known address or to his or her place of employment.
   (C)   Upon inspection findings or other evidence, the county health officer
may do any of the following:
      1.   Impound any equipment, device or supply that is found to be
unsanitary, lacking any required approval, or otherwise in such condition that
it poses a substantial risk to endanger the public health and safety; and
      2.   Attach a tag to any equipment, device or supply that is found to be
unsanitary, lacking any required approval, or is otherwise in such condition
that it poses a substantial risk to endanger the public health and safety,
which designates the tagged item as unauthorized for use.
         (a)   No person shall use the tagged item or move or remove the tag
without authorization from the department.
         (b)   The department shall commence an administrative review within 30
days of an action impounding or tagging an item to assess the propriety of such
action, or release said impounded item or remove the tag from said tagged item.
(Ord. 539, passed 4-4-2006)
§ 10-11-15 OWNER’S RESPONSIBILITY.
   The owner of a body art establishment is responsible for any violation by
any person who does any body art activity with the owner’s consent in the
owner’s body art establishment whether such person is an employee or a body art
technician independent operator. Any such body art activity done with the
owner’s actual or constructive knowledge is presumed to be done with the
owner’s consent.
(Ord. 539, passed 4-4-2006)
§ 10-11-16 MANAGERS; REQUIREMENTS.
   A manager must have successfully completed the blood borne pathogen training
required for registrants under this chapter, and be familiar with the
provisions of this chapter as they relate to employees and clients of the body
art establishment wherein he or she acts as manager. A manager shall be present
in the body art establishment during business hours and at all times during
which body art activity is conducted therein. The manager shall immediately
identify himself or herself to any county health officer entering the body art
establishment on official business. In the owner’s absence, the manager shall
be authorized to accept on behalf of the owner any notice issued to the owner
pursuant to the provisions of this chapter.
(Ord. 539, passed 4-4-2006)
§ 10-11-17 FACILITIES HELD IN COMMON OR SHARED.
   A violation of any provision of this chapter occurring in an area of a
facility held in common or shared by more than one body art establishment,
which is related to the condition of the facility or any requirement for
obtaining or maintaining a public health facility permit, shall be deemed a
violation for which the owner of each such body art establishment is
responsible.
(Ord. 539, passed 4-4-2006)
§ 10-11-18 NONCOMPLIANCE WITH COUNTY HEALTH OFFICER; INJUNCTIVE RELIEF.
   (A)   Any act or failure to act which is a violation of this chapter and
Chapter 9.56 of the Merced County codes, may be the subject of a civil action
to enjoin the person so acting or failing to act to conform his or her conduct
to the provisions of this chapter.
   (B)   A civil action to enforce the provisions of this section may be
brought by the City Attorney, the district attorney, county counsel or any
person directly affected by said failure to comply with the provisions of this
chapter. The filing and prosecution of such an action shall in no way limit the
authority or ability to impose other requirements of this chapter or penalties
enumerated hereunder.
(Ord. 539, passed 4-4-2006)
§ 10-11-19 EXEMPTIONS.
   (A)   A physician licensed by the state under the Cal. Business and
Professions Code Chapter 5 (commencing with § 2000 of Division 2) who utilizes
body art activities as part of patient treatment is exempt from the
registration and permitting requirements of this chapter.
   (B)   A person who exclusively engages in the piercing of the leading edge
or earlobe of the ear shall be exempt from the permitting and registration
requirements of this chapter, provided he or she does the following:
      1.   Performs the procedure through the use of an approved ear
perforating mechanical device to force the single use stud or single use needle
through the tissue of the ear; and
      2.   Utilizes a sterile, disposable, single use stud or single use solid
needle.
(Ord. 539, passed 4-4-2006)
§ 10-11-20 SEVERABILITY.
   If any provision of this chapter or the application thereof to any person or
circumstance is held invalid, the remainder of this chapter or the application
of such provision to other persons or circumstances shall not be affected
thereby.
(Ord. 539, passed 4-4-2006)
§ 10-11-21 EXPOSURE CONTROL PLAN.
   The owner of every body art establishment shall provide a written exposure
control plan, approved by the department, which shall be applicable to all
those who perform body art activities within said establishment, describing how
the requirements of this chapter will be implemented. The exposure control plan
shall meet all the requirements established in § 956.040 of the Merced County
codes.
(Ord. 539, passed 4-4-2006)
§ 10-11-22 EXPOSURE CONTROL TRAINING.
   (A)   Prior to registration as a body art practitioner with the County
Department of Public Health, Division of Environmental Health, all body art
practitioners shall complete and submit proof of completion of an exposure
control training program that meets or exceeds the requirements of § 9.56.035
(d) of the Merced County codes.
   (B)   The person conducting the training shall be knowledgeable in the
subject matter covered by the elements defined in this section.
   (C)   The organization providing the exposure control training shall provide
appropriate written training materials to each trainee.
   (D)   The content of the exposure control training program shall include:
      1.   California Occupational Safety and Health Administration blood borne
pathogens standard and other applicable standards and regulations with
pertinent explanations;
      2.   The causes, control and symptoms of the diseases caused by blood
borne pathogens;
      3.   The modes of transmission of blood borne pathogens;
      4.   A discussion of risks involved in body piercing and the application
of tattoos and permanent cosmetics and how they may lead to exposure to blood
borne pathogens for the client or body art practitioner;
      5.   The use of personal protective equipment such as disposable gloves
and an explanation of the limitations of the equipment;
      6.   The importance of hand washing and a demonstration of the hand
washing process as described in § 9.56.065 of the Merced County codes;
      7.   The types, proper technique and order of tasks before and after
putting on and removing gloves to avoid cross contamination;
      8.   Activities that compromise a disinfected work area, a sterile
procedure site, inks and pigments, sterile instruments and disinfected skin
area;
      9.   Choosing, using and storing disinfectants and antiseptics;
      10.   Signs required for contaminated materials and the importance of
labeling chemicals and supplies;
      11.   Information on hepatitis B vaccine, including its efficacy, safety
and method of administration; and
      12.   What constitutes a blood borne pathogen exposure incident
including:
         (a)   How the exposure occurred and what actions are to be taken to
prevent or minimize future exposures;
         (b)   Risk of infection following a blood borne pathogen exposure
incident;
         (c)   Procedures to be followed after an exposure incident, including
medical follow up; and
         (d)   Opportunity for interactive questions and answers with the
instructor.
(Ord. 539, passed 4-4-2006)
§ 10-11-23 REPORTING REQUIREMENTS; COMPLICATIONS.
   (A)   All infections, complications or diseases resulting from the body art
activity which become known to the owner or body art technician shall be
reported to the department by the informed person within 24 hours of acquiring
such knowledge.
   (B)   Should department offices be closed at such times as to make
notification within 24 hours impossible, the informed person shall mail written
notification to the department within 24 hours of acquiring such knowledge and
follow this by providing the department with oral notification within five
working days of acquiring the knowledge.
(Ord. 539, passed 4-4-2006)
§ 10-11-24 EQUIPMENT AND INSTRUMENTS.
   All equipment and instruments utilized in conducting body art activity shall
be used and maintained in accordance with department regulations.
(Ord. 539, passed 4-4-2006)
§ 10-11-25 CLEANING, STERILIZATION AND HOUSEKEEPING.
   (A)   Instruments that pierce the skin or touch nonintact skin that will be
reused shall be cleaned, packaged in appropriately labeled sterilizer pouches
and sterilized prior to reuse.
   (B)   Used instruments that will be sterilized and reused shall be placed in
a container of clean water until cleaned and sterilized. Used instruments must
be kept physically separated from sterilized or unused disposable instruments.
Disposable instruments must be disposed of directly into a sharps container or
into the appropriate trash receptacle after use.
   (C)   Ultrasonic cleaner, if used, shall be maintained and operated
according to manufacturer’s instructions.
   (D)   If an ultrasonic cleaner is not available, instruments shall be
cleaned and disinfected manually by scrubbing with a brush and a disinfectant
used according to manufacturer’s instructions.
   (E)   Clean instruments to be sterilized shall be first placed in sterilizer
pouches that contain either a sterilizer indicator or internal temperature
indicator. Each pack shall contain instruments for not more than one client.
The outside of the pack shall be labeled with the name of the instrument, date
sterilized and initials of the person operating the equipment.
   (F)   Instruments must be repackaged and resterilized if the pouch is torn
or otherwise compromised, if the indicator shows that adequate temperature was
not reached or if the item is not used within six months of the date of
sterilization.
   (G)   Sterilized instruments must be maintained and stored in sterilized
pouches until use.
   (H)   Sterilizers shall be operated according to manufacturer’s
instructions. If manufacturer’s instructions cannot be obtained, steam
sterilization shall be accomplished in an autoclave with at least 15 pounds of
pressure per square inch at a temperature of 250°F for at least 30 minutes or
as instructed by the Director of Public Health should the standards for
sterilization change from time to time.
   (I)   Liquid sterilants shall not be used to sterilize instruments.
   (J)   Sterilized instruments shall be placed in clean, dry, labeled
containers or stored in a labeled cabinet that is protected from dust and water
contamination.
   (K)   Sterilization equipment shall meet the following requirements:
      1.   Only sterilizers intended for medical instruments shall be used.
Sterilization equipment shall be cleaned and maintained according to
manufacturer’s instructions;
      2.   Sterilization equipment shall be tested after the initial
installation, after any major repair, and at the frequency recommended by the
manufacturer. If no manufacturer’s recommendation can be found, then the unit
shall be tested at least weekly utilizing a biological monitoring system
appropriate for the sterilizer type; and
      3.   Biological indicator test results shall be maintained on site and
available for review for a period of two years subsequent to the date of the
results.
   (L)   A written log of each sterilization cycle shall be maintained on site
and available for review for a period of two years, and shall include the
following information:
      1.   Date of load;
      2.   The contents of the load;
      3.   The exposure time and temperature; and
      4.   The results of the chemical indicator.
(Ord. 539, passed 4-4-2006)
§ 10-11-26 EQUIPMENT PURCHASED PRESTERILIZED.
   (A)   A practitioner using only purchased, disposable, single use and
presterilized instruments shall not be required to have sterilization
equipment.
   (B)   Invoices for the purchase of all presterilized instruments must be
maintained on site and available for review for a period of two years after
purchase. Required invoices include, but are not limited to, combo couplers,
needle chambers, barrels, casings, tips and needles.
(Ord. 539, passed 4-4-2006)
§ 10-11-27 SHARPS DISPOSAL.
   (A)   Each procedure area shall have a container for the disposal of sharps
waste that is rigid, puncture resistant, leakproof and that is closeable and
sealable so that when sealed, the container cannot be reopened without great
difficulty. The container must be labeled with the words “sharps waste” or with
the international biohazard symbol and the word “biohazard”.
   (B)   All sharps waste produced during the process of tattooing, body
piercing, and permanent cosmetics shall be disposed of by one of the following
methods:
      1.   Steam sterilized on site and disposed of as solid waste. If this
method is utilized, a chemical indicator strip or tape that indicates that the
container has been treated must be affixed prior to sterilization, and shall
stay affixed to the container when it is disposed;
      2.   Treated on site by a method approved by the Director of Public
Health, and disposed of as solid waste; and
      3.   Removal and disposal through use of a registered medical waste
hauler in accordance with the provisions of the California Medical Waste
Management Act, being Cal. Health and Safety Code, Division 104, Environmental
Health, Part 14, Medical Waste, §§ 117600 et seq. Tracking documents must be
maintained on site and be available for review for a period of two years from
the date of removal from the body art facility.
(Ord. 539, passed 4-4-2006)
§ 10-11-28 CLIENTS.
   (A)   No body art procedures shall be performed on skin surface areas
containing any rash, pimples, boils or infection or otherwise manifesting any
evidence of unhealthy conditions including, but not limited to, any evidence of
inflammation, such as redness, swelling, infection, or open or draining
lesions.
   (B)   Prior to receiving a tattoo, body piercing or permanent cosmetics, the
client shall be verbally informed of the following details. The client will
then be required to sign and receive a copy of an informed consent form and
postprocedure instructions appropriate to the procedure:
      1.   History of diabetes.
      2.   History of hemophilia (bleeding);
      3.   History of skin disease, skin lesions or skin sensitivities to
soaps, disinfectants and the like;
      4.   History of allergies or adverse reactions to pigments, dyes, other
sensitivities;
      5.   History of epilepsy, seizures, fainting or narcolepsy;
      6.   Use of medications such as anticoagulants, which thin the blood and/
or interfere with blood clotting; and
      7.   Any other conditions such as hepatitis or HIV.
   (C)   A copy of the signed informed consent form and postprocedure
instructions for all body art procedures must be maintained on site and
available for review for a period of two years after the procedure is
performed.
   (D)   The consent form and postprocedure instructions shall include, at a
minimum, the following:
      1.   Record of information from the client’s picture identification
showing the name, date of birth, gender, address of client, and driver’s
license or identification card number; and
      2.   A summary, including the date, location and description of the
procedure.
(Ord. 539, passed 4-4-2006)
§ 10-11-29 RESTRICTED CLIENTS.
   (A)   Nipple and genital piercing shall not be performed on any person under
the age of 18 years. Tattoos and permanent cosmetics shall not be applied to
any person under 18 years of age, except when authorized by a physician and
performed with the consent and in the presence of the person’s parent or
guardian. Persons under 18 years of age may receive body piercing to body parts
other than nipples or genitalia provided the body piercing is performed with
the consent and in the presence of the person’s parent or guardian. For any
procedure restricted under this section to persons 18 years of age or older or
requiring the presence and consent of a person’s parent or guardian, both the
minor and his or her parent or guardian shall provide a valid picture
identification, provide proof of parentage or legal guardianship and complete a
consent form which conforms with the requirements established in departmental
regulations.
   (B)   Body art activity shall not be performed on any person who, in the
opinion of the body art technician, has impaired judgment due to the use of
drugs or alcohol or for any other reason.
(Ord. 539, passed 4-4-2006)
§ 10-11-30 TECHNICIAN CONDITION.
   (A)   No body art technician whose judgment is impaired for any reason shall
perform any body art activity while in such condition.
   (B)   No body art technician affected with a rash, infection, boils,
infected wounds, open sores, abrasions, keloids, weeping dermatological lesions
or acute respiratory infection shall conduct any body art activity or work in
any area of the body art establishment in any capacity in which there is a
likelihood that such person could contaminate instruments, equipment, or
surfaces or come in contact with another person.
(Ord. 539, passed 4-4-2006)
§ 10-11-31 PROCEDURES AND PREPARATION.
   Body art activities shall be conducted in accordance with the sanitation and
preparation procedures set forth in departmental regulations.
(Ord. 539, passed 4-4-2006)
§ 10-11-32 HEPATITIS B VACCINATION STATUS.
   A body art technician shall make available upon request his or her hepatitis
B vaccination information as required by department health officers.
(Ord. 539, passed 4-4-2006)
§ 10-11-33 PROHIBITED PROCEDURES AND ACTIVITIES.
   (A)   It is a violation of this chapter for any person to perform or conduct
any activities or procedures upon any person that endanger the health or safety
of that person, regardless of the consent of the recipient.
   (B)   An invasive procedure or activity, whether or not such procedure or
activity constitutes the practice of medicine under the applicable law,
endangers the recipient’s health and safety unless performed by a person
possessing medical expertise.
   (C)   Such prohibited procedures and activities include, but are not limited
to, activities or procedures requiring an injection, cutting of skin or
subcutaneous tissue or bone, implantation, branding, deep tissue penetration,
threading, stapling, suturing, stitching or pocketing of skin or tissue, or any
procedure to reduce the size of or close an orifice, or remove or reduce the
size of any skin, cartilage, tissue, organ or appendage or placement of
chemicals or substances onto the skin for purposes of scarring or keloid
formation or insertion of chemicals or other solutions into or under the skin
surface.
   (D)   1.   Any such procedure or activity shall be conducted only by a
licensed medical doctor or by a person specifically authorized by law to
conduct the procedure or activity and only when otherwise permitted by law.
Such procedure or activity shall only be conducted at a facility approved for
the conduct of such procedure or activity by the appropriate authority under
the applicable laws.
      2.   Further, no such procedure or activity shall be conducted by a body
art technician unless he or she is specifically authorized by law to perform
such procedure or activity.
      3.   It is a violation of this chapter for any person to use in the
conduct of body art activity or dispense any drug, chemical, agent or device
that requires a licensed medical practitioner’s authorization or prescription
for use, application or to dispense, without such medical practitioner’s
authorization or prescription.
(Ord. 539, passed 4-4-2006)
§ 10-11-34 OPERATION OF BODY ART ESTABLISHMENT.
   The city has established minimum requirements for the design and
construction of all body art establishments within its jurisdiction:
   (A)   The establishment must meet and conform to all zoning requirements set
forth by the city;
   (B)   Every operator or applicant for a body art establishment permit shall
submit to the city and county scaled plans and specifications of the proposed
facility wherein any body art activity is intended to be conducted
demonstrating the compliance of the facility with this section. The Board of
Supervisors may require an on site inspection of the proposed facility to
determine and/or ensure compliance with the requirements of this section prior
to the issuance by the board of a body art establishment permit pursuant to
this section;
   (C)   A detailed description of all physical requirements within the body
art establishment, which includes all required fixtures, rooms, equipment,
material, safeguards, and minimum square feet, is available through the City
Planning Department; and
   (D)   Body art establishments may be open for operation only between the
hours of 7:00 a.m. and 10:00 p.m. inclusive, of each day.
(Ord. 539, passed 4-4-2006)
§ 10-11-35 TEMPORARY AND MOBILE BODY ART FACILITIES.
   The city prohibits any form of temporary body art facility within the city
limits. Also the use of any type or form of a mobile body art establishment is
banned within the jurisdictional boundaries of the city.
(Ord. 539, passed 4-4-2006)
§ 10-11-36 PENALTIES.
   Violation of any section of this chapter or Chapter 9.56 of the Merced
County codes by the proprietor or practitioner shall constitute a misdemeanor
and upon conviction thereof shall be punishable by a fine not to exceed $1,000
per day per violation or by imprisonment in the county jail for a term not
exceeding six months, or both such fine and imprisonment or an infraction
pursuant to Merced County codes § 1.20.020. Each day the violation continues
and is not corrected shall be treated as a separate and distinct violation.
(Ord. 539, passed 4-4-2006)
CHAPTER 12: URINATING OR DEFECATING IN PUBLIC
Section
10-12-1 Prohibited
10-12-2 Applicability
10-12-3 Penalty for violation
§ 10-12-1 PROHIBITED.
   No person shall urinate or defecate in or upon any street, sidewalk, alley,
plaza, park, public building or publicly maintained facility, or in any place
open to the public or exposed to public view.
(Ord. 543, passed 5-24-2006)
§ 10-12-2 APPLICABILITY.
   This section does not apply to urination or defecation which is done in any
restroom or other facility designed for the sanitary disposal of human waste.
(Ord. 543, passed 5-24-2006)
§ 10-12-3 PENALTY FOR VIOLATION.
   Any person who violates the provisions of this chapter is guilty of a
misdemeanor and shall be punishable as provided in Title 1, Chapter 4 of this
code.
(Ord. 543, passed 5-24-2006)
CHAPTER 13: PROHIBITION AGAINST UNDERAGE DRINKING AND SOCIAL HOST LIABILITY
Section
10-13-1 Title
10-13-2 Legislative findings
10-13-3 Intent and purpose
10-13-4 Definitions
10-13-5 Consumption of alcohol by minor prohibited in public place, place open
to public, or place not open to public
10-13-6 Hosting, permitting and allowing a party, gathering or event where
minors consume alcoholic beverages prohibited
10-13-7 Prima facie evidence
10-13-8 Separate violation for each incident
10-13-9 Enforcement authority
10-13-10 Enforcement remedies
10-13-11 Public nuisance and recovery of response costs
10-13-12 Billing and collection
10-13-13 Special fund
10-13-14 Appeals
10-13-15 Severability
§ 10-13-1 TITLE.
   This chapter shall be known as the “Prohibition Against Underage Drinking
and Social Host Liability Ordinance”.
(Ord. 560, passed 7-3-2007)
§ 10-13-2 LEGISLATIVE FINDINGS.
   (A)   Minors often obtain, possess or consume alcoholic beverages at
gatherings held at private residences or other private property, places or
premises, including rented commercial premises which are under the control of a
person who knows or should know of the consumption of alcoholic beverages by
minors yet persons responsible for the occurrence of such gatherings often fail
to take reasonable steps to prevent the consumption of alcoholic beverages by
minors at these gatherings.
   (B)   Consumption of alcoholic beverages by minors who are under the legal
age to consume alcohol in the state, is harmful to the minors themselves and
poses an immediate threat to the public health, safety and welfare in that it
increases alcohol abuse by minors, physical altercations, violent crimes
including rape and other sexual offenses, accidental injury, neighborhood
vandalism and excessive noise disturbance, all of which may require
intervention by local law enforcement.
   (C)   Law enforcement responses to gatherings involving consumption of
alcoholic beverages by minors often require extensive resources to manage the
incident. Further, when law enforcement personnel respond to gatherings
involving the consumption of alcoholic beverages by minors it takes away
valuable resources from other service calls in the community, thereby placing
the community at increased risk. Law enforcement, fire and emergency response
services are not currently reimbursed for the response cost associated when
called to a premises or gathering where minors obtain, possess, or consume
alcoholic beverages.
   (D)   The prohibitions found in this chapter are reasonable and expected to
deter the consumption of alcoholic beverages by minors by holding responsible
persons who know of, or should know of, the illegal conduct yet fail to stop or
prevent it. In addition, the revenue received by the city after cost
reimbursement will be directed toward alcohol abuse and prevention education
programs in the community.
(Ord. 560, passed 7-3-2007)
§ 10-13-3 INTENT AND PURPOSE.
   The purposes of this chapter are:
   (A)   To protect public health, safety and general welfare;
   (B)   To enforce laws prohibiting the service to and consumption of
alcoholic beverages by minors; and
   (C)   To reduce the costs of providing law enforcement, fire and other
emergency response services to premises where alcoholic beverages are served to
or consumed by a minor, by holding the responsible person, social host and/or
landowners responsible for the costs associated with providing law enforcement
and other emergency response services.
(Ord. 560, passed 7-3-2007)
§ 10-13-4 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   ADULT. Any person over the age of 18 years.
   ALCOHOL. Ethyl alcohol, hydrated oxide of ethyl or spirits of wine, from
whatever source or by whatever process produced.
   ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGE. Means and includes any liquid or solid material intended
to be ingested by a person which contains ethanol, also known as ethyl alcohol,
drinking alcohol or alcohol, including, but not limited to, alcoholic beverages
as defined in the Cal. Business and Professions Code § 23004, intoxicating
liquor, malt beverage, beer, wine, spirits, liqueur, whiskey, rum, vodka,
cordials, gin and brandy, and any mixture containing one or more alcoholic
beverages. ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGE includes a mixture of one or more alcoholic
beverages whether found or ingested separately or as a mixture.
   FAMILY GATHERING. A gathering where each minor present is supervised by his
or her parent or legal guardian.
   GATHERING. A party, gathering or event where a group of two or more persons
have assembled or are assembling for a social occasion or social activity.
   JUVENILE. Any person under the age of 18 years.
   LEGAL GUARDIAN.
      1.   A person who, by court order, is the guardian of the person of a
minor; or
      2.   A public or private agency with whom a minor has been placed by the
court.
   MINOR. Any person under the age of 21 years.
   PARENT. A person who is a natural parent, adoptive parent, foster parent or
stepparent of another person.
   PREMISES. Any residence or other private property, place or premises,
including any commercial or business premises.
   RESPONSE COSTS. The costs associated with response by law enforcement, fire
or other emergency response providers to a gathering, including, but not
limited to:
      1.   Salaries and benefits of law enforcement, code enforcement, fire or
other emergency response personnel for the amount of time spent responding to,
remaining at or otherwise dealing with a gathering, and the administrative cost
associated with or attributed to such response(s);
      2.   The cost of any medical treatment for any law enforcement, code
enforcement, fire or other emergency response personnel injured responding to,
remaining at, or leaving the scene of a gathering;
      3.   The cost of repairing any city equipment or property damaged, and
the cost of the use of any such equipment in, responding to, remaining at, or
leaving the scene of a gathering; and
      4.   Any other allowable costs related to enforcement of §§
10-13-5 and
10-13-6 of this chapter.
   RESPONSIBLE PERSON. A person or persons with a right of possession in the
premises including, but not limited to:
      1.   An owner of the residence or other private property, place or
premises, including any commercial or business premises;
      2.   A tenant or lessee of the residence or other private property, place
or premises, including any commercial or business premises;
      3.   The landlord of another person responsible for the gathering;
      4.   The person(s) in charge of the residence or other private property,
place or premises, including commercial or business premises;
      5.   The person(s) who organizes, supervises, officiates, conducts or
controls the gathering or any other person(s) accepting responsibility for such
a gathering; and
      6.   If a RESPONSIBLE PERSON or social host for the party or gathering is
a juvenile, then the parents or guardians of that juvenile and the juvenile
will be jointly and severally liable for the response costs incurred pursuant
to this chapter. To incur liability for response costs imposed by this chapter,
the RESPONSIBLE PERSON or social host for the gathering must be aware of the
gathering, but need not be present at such gathering which results in the
imposition of response costs pursuant to this chapter.
   SOCIAL HOST. A person who knowingly hosts, permits or allows a gathering to
take place where one or more minors consume one or more alcoholic beverages on
property owned or controlled by the person and the person knows or reasonably
should have known that the minor is consuming or has consumed an alcoholic
beverage.
(Ord. 560, passed 7-3-2007)
§ 10-13-5 CONSUMPTION OF ALCOHOL BY MINOR PROHIBITED IN PUBLIC PLACE, PLACE
OPEN TO PUBLIC, OR PLACE NOT OPEN TO PUBLIC.
   Except as permitted by state law, it is unlawful for any minor to:
   (A)   Consume at any public place or any place open to the public any
alcoholic beverage; or
   (B)   Consume at any place not open to the public any alcoholic beverage,
unless in connection with the consumption of the alcoholic beverage that minor
is being supervised by his or her own parent or legal guardian.
(Ord. 560, passed 7-3-2007)
§ 10-13-6 HOSTING, PERMITTING, AND ALLOWING A PARTY, GATHERING OR EVENT WHERE
MINORS CONSUME ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES PROHIBITED.
   (A)   It is unlawful and a misdemeanor for any person having control of any
premises to knowingly host, permit or allow a gathering to take place at said
premises where at least one minor consumes an alcoholic beverage, whenever the
person having control of the premises either knows a minor is or has consumed
an alcoholic beverage or reasonably should have known that a minor is or has
consumed an alcoholic beverage had the person taken all reasonable steps to
prevent the consumption of alcoholic beverages by a minor as set forth in
subsection (B) of this section.
   (B)   It is the duty of any person having control of any premises, who
knowingly hosts, permits or allows a gathering at said premises to take all
reasonable steps to prevent the consumption of alcoholic beverages by any minor
at the gathering. Reasonable steps include, but are not limited to:
      1.   Controlling access to alcoholic beverages at the gathering;
      2.   Controlling the quantity of alcoholic beverages at the gathering;
      3.   Verifying the age of persons attending the gathering by inspecting
driver’s licenses or other government issued identification cards to ensure
minors do not consume alcoholic beverages while at the gathering; and
      4.   Supervising the activities of minors at the gathering.
   (C)   This section shall not apply to conduct involving the use of alcoholic
beverages that occurs exclusively between a minor and his or her parent or
legal guardian, as permitted by Article I, Section 4 of the California
Constitution or if the event is a family gathering.
   (D)   This section shall not apply to any California Department of Alcoholic
Beverages Control licensee at any premises regulated by the Department of
Alcoholic Beverages Control.
(Ord. 560, passed 7-3-2007)
§ 10-13-7 PRIMA FACIE EVIDENCE.
   Whenever a responsible person and/or social host having control of the
premises is present at the premises at the time that a minor obtains, possesses
or consumes any alcoholic beverage, it shall be prima facie evidence that such
adult had the knowledge or should have had the knowledge, that the minor
obtained, possessed or consumed an alcoholic beverage at the gathering.
(Ord. 560, passed 7-3-2007)
§ 10-13-8 SEPARATE VIOLATION FOR EACH INCIDENT.
   Each incident in violation of §§
10-13-5 and
10-13-6 of this chapter shall constitute a separate offense.
(Ord. 560, passed 7-3-2007)
§ 10-13-9 ENFORCEMENT AUTHORITY.
   The city’s Police Department is authorized to administer and enforce the
provisions of this chapter. The City Attorney and the Police Chief and/or their
designees may exercise any enforcement powers provided by law.
(Ord. 560, passed 7-3-2007)
§ 10-13-10 ENFORCEMENT REMEDIES.
   In addition to any other remedies available by law, including criminal
prosecution, the city may seek administrative penalties, response costs and any
other cost associated with enforcement of §§
10-13-5 and
10-13-6 of this chapter, through all remedies or procedures provided by
statute, ordinance or law. Sections
10-13-5 and
10-13-6 of this chapter shall not limit the authority of peace officers to make
arrests for any criminal offense arising out of conduct regulated by §§
10-13-5 and
10-13-6 of this chapter. If a violation of §§
10-13-5 and/or
10-13-6 of this chapter is prosecuted administratively the mandatory minimum
penalty shall be $500 for the first offense, $1,000 for a second offense, and
$1,500 for a third offense in a 12-month period.
(Ord. 560, passed 7-3-2007)
§ 10-13-11 PUBLIC NUISANCE AND RECOVERY OF RESPONSE COSTS.
   (A)   In addition to any other remedies available by law, a violation of §§
10-13-5 and/or
10-13-6 of this chapter shall constitute a public nuisance, as an immediate
threat to the public health, safety and welfare.
   (B)   As a public nuisance, the gathering of underage drinkers may be
summarily abated by police by all reasonable means, singularly or in
combination, including, but not limited to:
      1.   In order requiring the gathering to be disbanded;
      2.   Issuance of an administrative citation under this chapter; and
      3.   Issuance of an administrative citation, misdemeanor citation and/or
arrest of any law violators under any other applicable ordinances and/or
statutes.
   (C)   When law enforcement, fire or other emergency response provider
responds to a gathering at which a minor obtains, possesses or uses alcoholic
beverages within the city all responsible persons and/or social host(s) shall
be jointly and severally liable for the city’s response costs to abate the
nuisance.
(Ord. 560, passed 7-3-2007)
§ 10-13-12 BILLING AND COLLECTION.
   (A)   1.   The amount of response costs shall be deemed a debt owed to the
city by the responsible person and/or social host. If a juvenile, by the
juvenile’s parents or guardians.
      2.   Any person owing such costs shall be liable in a civil action
brought in the name of the city for recovery for such costs, including
reasonable attorney fees. Notice of the costs for which the responsible person
is liable shall be mailed via first class mail.
   (B)   The notice shall contain the following information:
      1.   The name of the person(s) being held liable for the payment of such
costs;
      2.   The address of the private property or private premises where the
party occurred;
      3.   The date and time of the response;
      4.   The law enforcement, fire or emergency service provider(s) who
responded; and
      5.   (a)   An itemized list of the response costs for which the person(s)
is being held liable. The responsible person must remit payment of the noticed
response costs to the city’s Police Department within 30 calendar days of the
date of the notice.
         (b)   The payment of any such costs shall be stayed upon the filing of
a timely appeal pursuant to §
10-13-14 of this chapter.
   (C)   The failure of any person to pay the penalties assessed by an
administrative citation and/or response costs within the time specified on the
administrative citation or response cost bill may result in the Police Chief or
his or her authorized designee referring the matter to the Finance Department
or other designated agent for collection.
(Ord. 560, passed 7-3-2007)
§ 10-13-13 SPECIAL FUND.
   (A)   Established. There is hereby established a special fund for the
purposes of receiving and expending civil penalties and response costs
collected. This special fund shall be known and designated as the Prevention of
Underage Drinking Fund.
   (B)   Expenditure of monies. The appropriation of all monies in the
prevention of underage drinking fund shall be made exclusively for the purposes
of prevention of underage drinking programs within the city. The underage
drinking program shall include the enforcement of, education for and prevention
of underage drinking. Expenditures shall include, but not be limited to,
purchase of equipment, contractual services, material and supplies, or any
other expenditure related to the prevention of underage drinking with the city.
The administration of the Fund shall conform to this code and all accounting
principles practiced by the city.
   (C)   Accumulation of monies in the Fund. The balance remaining in the
Prevention of Underage Drinking Fund at the close of any fiscal year shall be
deemed to have been provided for a specialized purpose and shall be carried
forward and accumulated in said Fund for the purposes set forth herein.
(Ord. 560, passed 7-3-2007)
§ 10-13-14 APPEALS.
   (A)   The person or persons charged shall have the right of appeal to the
City Council.
   (B)   The appeal shall be filed with the City Clerk within five working days
following receipt of notice of the decision of the Chief of Police or the
Chief’s designee. The appeal shall be in writing and shall state the grounds
for the appeal.
   (C)   The appeal shall be submitted on the records filed with the notice of
appeal. If further evidence is required, the City Clerk may request the parties
to submit additional evidence to the City Council. A decision by the City
Council must be made no later than 30 days following the filing of the appeal.
The City Council may continue the date for decision, when necessary, to a date
more than 30 days after the date initiating the appeal.
   (D)   The Council may, by resolution from time to time, establish a fee for
the processing of an appeal.
   (E)   A copy of the Council’s order shall be mailed to the appellant, and to
any other person requesting the same, by the City Clerk within five working
days after the adoption thereof. The Council’s decisions shall be final and
conclusive.
   (F)   Upon denial of an appeal, the appellant shall have ten days to pay the
applicable response costs, or the city may commence proceedings to collect such
sums as are due as provided by law and to place a lien upon the affected
property.
   (G)   Failure to appeal shall constitute a failure to exhaust administrative
remedies and result in the citation and/or response cost becoming a final
administrative enforcement order.
(Ord. 560, passed 7-3-2007)
§ 10-13-15 SEVERABILITY.
   If any provisions of this chapter or its application to any person or
circumstance is held invalid, the invalidity does not affect other provisions
or applications of this chapter that can be given effect without the invalid
provision or application, and to this end the provisions of this chapter are
severable.
(Ord. 560, passed 7-3-2007)
CHAPTER 14: MILITARY EQUIPMENT USE
Section
10-14-1 Findings
10-14-2 Determinations
10-14-3 Short title
10-14-4 Definitions
10-14-5 Military equipment use policy requirement
10-14-6 Use in exigent circumstances
10-14-7 Reports on the use of controlled equipment
10-14-8 Enforcement
10-14-9 Effective date
§ 10-14-1 FINDINGS.
   (A)   On September 30, 2021, Assembly Bill 481 was signed into law, relating
to the use of military equipment by law enforcement agencies.
   (B)   Assembly Bill 481, codified at Cal. Gov’t Code §§ 7070 through 7075,
requires law enforcement agencies to obtain approval of the applicable
governing body by an ordinance adopting a military equipment use policy at a
regular meeting held pursuant to open meeting laws, prior to taking certain
actions relating to the funding, acquisition or use of military equipment. The
term MILITARY EQUIPMENT is defined in Cal. Gov’t Code § 7070.
   (C)   Assembly Bill 481 allows the governing body of a city to approve the
funding, acquisition or use of military equipment within its jurisdiction only
if it makes specified determinations.
   (D)   The proposed military use policy is found within the city’s Police
Department policy and procedural manual.
   (E)   The Police Department policy was published on the Police Department’s
internet website on www.cityoflivingston.org/police. In addition, the Police
Department’s military equipment use policy was presented to City Council on
March 15, 2022.
   (F)   The Police Department’s military equipment use policy meets the
requirements of Cal. Gov’t Code § 7070, Subdivision (d).
(Ord. 647, passed 4-5-2022)
§ 10-14-2 DETERMINATIONS.
   Based on the findings in §
10-14-1, in addition to the information provided to the City Council at the
public meeting, the City Council determines as follows.
   (A)   The military equipment identified in the Police Department’s military
equipment use policy is necessary, as there are no reasonable alternatives that
can achieve the same objectives of officer and civilian safety.
    (B)   The Police Department’s military equipment use policy will safeguard
the public’s welfare, safety, civil rights and civil liberties.
    (C)   The military equipment identified in the Police Department’s military
equipment use policy is reasonably cost-effective compared to available
alternatives that can achieve the same objective of officer and civilian
safety.
   (D)   The Police Department’s military equipment use policy was approved and
adopted April 5, 2022.
(Ord. 647, passed 4-5-2022)
§ 10-14-3 SHORT TITLE.
   This chapter shall be known as the “Military Equipment Use Ordinance”.
(Ord. 647, passed 4-5-2022)
§ 10-14-4 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   CITY. Any department, agency, bureau and/or subordinate division of the
city.
   CITY COUNCIL. The governing body that is the Livingston City Council.
   EXIGENT CIRCUMSTANCES. A law enforcement agency’s good faith belief that an
emergency involving the danger of or imminent threat of death or serious
physical injury to any person is occurring, has occurred or is about to occur.
   MILITARY EQUIPMENT. Includes all of the following (per Cal. Gov’t Code §
7070):
      1.   Unmanned, remotely piloted, powered aerial or ground vehicles;
      2.   Mine-resistant, ambush-protected (MRAP) vehicles or armored
personnel carriers. However, police versions of standard consumer vehicles are
specifically excluded from this definition;
      3.   High mobility, multipurpose wheeled vehicles (HMMWV), commonly
referred to as “Humvees”, two and one-half-ton trucks, five-ton trucks or
wheeled vehicles that have a breaching or entry apparatus attached. However,
unarmored all-terrain vehicles (ATVs) and motorized dirt bikes are specifically
excluded from this definition;
      4.   Tracked armored vehicles that provide ballistic protection to their
occupants and utilize a tracked system instead of wheels for forward motion;
      5.   Command and control vehicles that are either built or modified to
facilitate the operational control and direction of public safety units;
      6.   Weaponized aircraft, vessels or vehicles of any kind;
      7.   Battering rams, slugs and breaching apparatuses that are explosive
in nature. However, items designed to remove a lock, such as bolt cutters or a
handheld ram designed to be operated by one person, are specifically excluded
from this definition;
      8.   Firearms of 0.50 caliber or greater. However, standard issue
shotguns are specifically excluded from this subdivision;
      9.   Ammunition of 0.50 caliber or greater. However, standard issue
shotgun ammunition is specifically excluded from this division.
      10.   Specialized firearms and ammunition of less than 0.50 caliber,
including assault weapons as defined in Cal. Penal Code §§ 30510 and 30515,
with the exception of standard issue service weapons and ammunition of less
than 0.50 caliber that are issued to officers, agents or employees of a law
enforcement agency or a state agency;
      11.   Any firearm or firearm accessory that is designed to launch
explosive projectiles;
      12.   “Flashbang” grenades and explosive breaching tools, “tear gas” and
“pepper balls”, excluding standard, service-issued handheld pepper spray;
      13.   Taser shockwave, microwave weapons, water cannons and the long
range acoustic devices (LRADS);
      14.   The following projectile launch platforms and their associated
munitions: 40-millimeter projectile launchers; “bean bags”; rubber bullets; and
specialty impact munition (SIM) weapons;
      15.   Any other equipment as determined by a governing body or a state
agency to require additional oversight; and
      16.   Notwithstanding divisions 1. through 15. above, MILITARY EQUIPMENT
does not include general equipment not designated as prohibited or controlled
by the federal Defense Logistics Agency.
   MILITARY EQUIPMENT USE POLICY. A publicly released, written document that
includes, at a minimum, all of the following:
      1.   A description of each type of military equipment, the quantity
sought, its capabilities, expected lifespan, and product descriptions from the
manufacturer of the military equipment;
      2.   The purposes and authorized uses for which the law enforcement
agency or the state agency proposes to use each type of military equipment;
      3.   The fiscal impact of each type of military equipment, including the
initial costs of obtaining the equipment and estimated annual costs of
maintaining the equipment;
      4.   The legal and procedural rules that govern each authorized use;
      5.   The training, including any course required by the Commission on
Peace Officer Standards and Training, that must be completed before any
officer, agent or employee of the law enforcement agency or the state agency is
allowed to use each specific type of military equipment to ensure the full
protection of the public’s welfare, safety, civil rights and civil liberties
and full adherence to the MILITARY EQUIPMENT USE POLICY;
      6.   The mechanisms to ensure compliance with the MILITARY EQUIPMENT USE
POLICY, including which independent persons or entities have oversight
authority, and, if applicable, what legally enforceable sanctions are put in
place for violations of the POLICY; and
      7.   For a law enforcement agency, the procedures by which members of the
public may register complaints or concerns or submit questions about the use of
each specific type of military equipment, and how the law enforcement agency
will ensure that each complaint, concern or question receives a response in a
timely manner.
   POLICE DEPARTMENT. Any division, section, bureau, employee, volunteer and/or
contractor of the Police Department.
   STATE AGENCY. The law enforcement division of every state office, officer,
department, division, bureau, board and commission or other state body or
agency, except those agencies provided for in Article IV (except § 20 thereof)
or Article VI of the California Constitution.
   TYPE. Each item that shares the same manufacturer model number.
(Ord. 647, passed 4-5-2022)
§ 10-14-5 MILITARY EQUIPMENT USE POLICY REQUIREMENT.
   (A)   The Livingston Department shall obtain approval of the City Council,
by an ordinance adopting a military equipment use policy (MEUP) at a regular
meeting of the City Council held pursuant to the Bagley-Keene Open Meeting Act
(Article 9 (commencing with § 11120) of Chapter 1 of Part 1 of Division 3 of
Title 2) or the Ralph M. Brown Act (Chapter 9 (commencing with § 54950) of Part
1 of Division 2 of Title 5), as applicable, prior to engaging in any of the
following:
      1.   Requesting military equipment made available pursuant to of United
States Code Title 10, § 2576a;
      2.   Seeking funds for military equipment, including, but not limited to,
applying for a grant, soliciting or accepting private, local, state or federal
funds, in-kind donations or other donations or transfers.
      3.   Acquiring military equipment either permanently or temporarily,
including by borrowing or leasing;
      4.   Collaborating with another law enforcement agency in the deployment
or other use of military equipment within the territorial jurisdiction of the
City of San Bruno;
      5.   Using any new or existing military equipment for a purpose, in a
manner, or by a person not previously approved by the governing body pursuant
to this chapter;
      6.   Soliciting or responding to a proposal for, or entering into an
agreement with, any other person or entity to seek funds for, apply to receive,
acquire, use, or collaborate in the use of, military equipment; and
      7.   Acquiring military equipment through any means not provided by this
section.
   (B)   No later than May 1, 2022, if seeking to continue the use of any
military equipment that was acquired prior to January 1, 2022, the Police
Department shall commence a City Council approval process in accordance with
this section. If the City Council does not approve the continuing use of
military equipment, including by adoption pursuant to a military equipment use
policy submitted pursuant to this code, within 180 days of submission of the
proposed military equipment use policy to City Council, the Police Department
shall cease its use of the military equipment until it receives the approval of
City Council in accordance with this chapter.
   (C)   In seeking the approval of City Council, the Police Department shall
submit a proposed military equipment use policy to City Council and make those
documents available on the Police Department’s internet website at least 30
days prior to any public hearing concerning the military equipment at issue.
   (D)   The governing body shall consider a proposed military equipment use
policy as an agenda item for an open session of a regular meeting and provide
for public comment in accordance with the Bagley-Keene Open Meeting Act
(Article 9 (commencing with § 11120) of Chapter 1 of Part 1 of Division 3 of
Title 2) or the Ralph M. Brown Act (Chapter 9 (commencing with § 54950) of Part
1 of Division 2 of Title 5), as applicable.
   (E)   The governing body shall only approve a military equipment use policy
pursuant to this chapter if it determines all of the following:
      1.   The military equipment is necessary because there is no reasonable
alternative that can achieve the same objective of officer and civilian safety;
      2.   The proposed military equipment use policy will safeguard the
public’s welfare, safety, civil rights and civil liberties;
      3.   If purchasing the equipment, the equipment is reasonably cost
effective compared to available alternatives that can achieve the same
objective of officer and civilian safety; and
      4.   Prior military equipment use complied with the military equipment
use policy that was in effect at the time, or if prior uses did not comply with
the accompanying military equipment use policy, corrective action has been
taken to remedy nonconforming uses and ensure future compliance.
   (F)   In order to facilitate public participation, any proposed or final
military equipment use policy shall be made publicly available on the internet
website of the Police Department for as long as the military equipment is
available for use.
   (G)   The City Council shall review any ordinance that it has adopted
pursuant to this chapter approving the funding, acquisition or use of military
equipment at least annually and vote on whether to renew the ordinance at a
regular meeting held pursuant to the Bagley-Keene Open Meeting Act (Article 9
(commencing with § 11120) of Chapter 1 of Part 1 of Division 3 of Title 2) or
the Ralph M. Brown Act (Chapter 9 (commencing with § 54950) of Part 1 of
Division 2 of Title 5), as applicable.
(Ord. 647, passed 4-5-2022)
§ 10-14-6 USE IN EXIGENT CIRCUMSTANCES.
   (A)   Notwithstanding the provisions of this chapter, the Police Department
may acquire, borrow and/or use military equipment in exigent circumstances
without following the requirements of this chapter.
   (B)   If the Police Department acquires, borrows, and/or uses military
equipment in exigent circumstances, in accordance with this section, it must
take all of the following actions:
      1.    Provide written notice of that acquisition or use to the City
Council within 30 days following the commencement of such exigent circumstance,
unless such information is confidential or privileged under local, state or
federal law.
      2.   If it is anticipated that the use will continue beyond the exigent
circumstance, submit a proposed amended military equipment use policy to the
City Council within 90 days following the borrowing, acquisition and/or use,
and receive approval, as applicable, from the City Council.
      3.   Include the military equipment in the Police Department’s next
annual military equipment report.
(Ord. 647, passed 4-5-2022)
§ 10-14-7 REPORTS ON THE USE OF CONTROLLED EQUIPMENT.
   (A)   The Police Department shall submit to City Council an annual military
equipment report for each type of military equipment approved by the City
Council within one year of approval, and annually thereafter for as long as the
military equipment is available for use.
   (B)   The Police Department shall also make each annual military equipment
report required by this section publicly available on its internet website for
as long as the military equipment is available for use.
   (C)   The annual military equipment report shall, at a minimum, include the
following information for the immediately preceding calendar year for each type
of military equipment:
      1.   A summary of how the military equipment was used and the purpose of
its use;
      2.   A summary of any complaints or concerns received concerning the
military equipment;
      3.   The results of any internal audits, any information about violations
of the military equipment use policy, and any actions taken in response;
      4.   The total annual cost for each type of military equipment, including
acquisition, personnel, training, transportation, maintenance, storage, upgrade
and other ongoing costs, and from what source funds will be provided for the
military equipment in the calendar year following submission of the annual
military equipment report;
      5.   The quantity possessed for each type of military equipment; and
      6.   If the law enforcement agency intends to acquire additional military
equipment in the next year, the quantity sought for each type of military
equipment.
   (D)   Within 30 days of submitting and publicly releasing an annual military
equipment report pursuant to this section, the Police Department shall hold at
least one well-publicized and conveniently located community engagement
meeting, at which the general public may discuss and ask questions regarding
the annual military equipment report and the law enforcement agency’s funding,
acquisition or use of military equipment.
   (E)   The City Council shall determine, based on the annual military
equipment report submitted pursuant to this section, whether each type of
military equipment identified in that report has complied with the standards
for approval set forth in this code and the military equipment use policy. If
the City Council determines that a type of military equipment identified in
that annual military equipment report has not complied with the standards for
approval, the City Council shall either disapprove a renewal of the
authorization for that type of military equipment or require modifications to
the military equipment use policy in a manner that will resolve the lack of
compliance.
(Ord. 647, passed 4-5-2022)
§ 10-14-8 ENFORCEMENT.
   (A)   This chapter does not provide a private right of action upon any
person or entity to seek injunctive relief against the city or any employee
unless that person or entity has first provided written notice to the City
Manager by serving the City Clerk, regarding the specific alleged violations of
this chapter.
   (B)   If a specific alleged violation is not remedied within 90 days of that
written notice, a person or entity may seek injunctive relief in a court of
competent jurisdiction.
   (C)   If the alleged violation is substantiated and subsequently cured, a
notice shall be posted in a conspicuous manner on the city’s website that
describes, to the extent permissible by law, the corrective measures taken to
address the violation.
   (D)   If it is shown that the violation is the result of arbitrary or
capricious action by the city or an employee or agent thereof in his or her
official capacity, the prevailing complainant in an action for relief may
collect from the city reasonable attorney’s fees in an amount not to exceed
$15,000 if they are personally obligated to pay such fees.
(Ord. 647, passed 4-5-2022)
§ 10-14-9 EFFECTIVE DATE.
   This chapter became effective 30 days after its final passage and adoption.
(Ord. 647, passed 4-5-2022)
TITLE 11: MOTOR VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC
CHAPTER 1: GENERAL TRAFFIC PROVISIONS
Section
11-1-1 Definitions
11-1-2 Authority of police; traffic signs and signals
11-1-2-1 Obedience to police
11-1-2-2 Signs
11-1-2-3 Obedience to traffic signs
11-1-2-4 Traffic stop and go signal legend
11-1-2-5 Establish and maintain crosswalks
11-1-2-6 Display of unauthorized signs prohibited
11-1-3 Police and fire vehicles exempt from certain rules
11-1-4 Riding on running boards
11-1-5 Railway trains blocking street
11-1-6 Use of muffler cutout prohibited
11-1-7 Penalty
11-1-8 Disposal of fines and forfeitures
§ 11-1-1 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   ALLEY. A public highway which does not exceed 20 feet between the property
lines.
   BUSINESS DISTRICT. The territory contiguous to a street when 50% or more of
the frontage thereon for a distance of 300 feet or more is occupied by
buildings in use for retail or wholesale business; also any territory
contiguous to a street which is immediately adjacent to or a continuation of a
street within a business district when such territory is so designated by the
Chief of Police.
   CENTRAL TRAFFIC DISTRICT. That portion of the city bounded and described as
follows:
      1.   All of Front Street;
      2.   All of Third Street from State Highway 99 to D Street, inclusive,
and one block west on lateral streets leading west, and one block east on all
lateral streets leading east from Third Street, between the State Highway 99
and D Street, inclusive; and
      3.   All of State Highway 99 from and including Stefani Street on the
west and Simpson Street on the east, and one block north on all lateral streets
leading north from State Highway 99 between Stefani and Simpson, inclusive.
   INTERSECTION. The area embraced within the prolongation of the property
lines of two or more streets which join at an angle whether or not one such
street crosses the other.
   LOADING ZONE. That space adjacent to a curb reserved for the exclusive use
of vehicles during the loading of passengers or materials.
   OFFICIAL WARNING, DIRECTION SIGNS AND SIGNALS. All warning and direction
signs and signals not inconsistent with this title, placed or erected under
this title or by authority of the City Council.
   OPERATOR. Any person who is in actual physical control of a vehicle.
   PARK. To stand a vehicle for a period of time greater than is reasonably
necessary for the actual loading or unloading of persons or material.
   PEDESTRIAN. Any person afoot.
   RIGHT-OF-WAY. The privilege of the immediate use of the street.
   ROADWAY. That portion of a street between the regularly established curb
lines.
   SAFETY ZONE. That marked portion of a roadway reserved for the exclusive use
of pedestrians.
   SIDEWALK. That portion of a street between the curb lines and the adjacent
property lines.
   STREET. Every way set apart for public travel except alleyways, bridle paths
and footpaths.
   TRAFFIC. Pedestrians, vehicles and streetcars, either singly or together,
while using any street for purposes of travel.
   VEHICLE.
      1.   Every device or animal by which any person or property is or may be
transported or drawn upon a street, excepting devices moved by human power or
used exclusively upon rails.
      2.   For the purpose of this title, a bicycle shall be deemed a VEHICLE.
(Ord. 15, passed 8-8-1927)
§ 11-1-2 AUTHORITY OF POLICE; TRAFFIC SIGNS AND SIGNALS.
§ 11-1-2-1 OBEDIENCE TO POLICE.
   (A)   Officers of the Police Department are hereby authorized to direct all
traffic by means of visible or audible signal, and it shall be unlawful for any
person to refuse or fail to comply with any lawful order, signal or direction
of a traffic or police officer.
   (B)   It shall be unlawful for any minor to direct or attempt to direct
traffic unless authorized to do so by order of the Chief of Police or Mayor.
(Ord. 15, passed 8-8-1927)
§ 11-1-2-2 SIGNS.
   (A)   The City Council shall by resolution determine and designate the
character of all official warning and direction signs and signals. Subject to
this selection, the Chief of Police is hereby authorized, and as to those signs
required hereunder, it shall be his or her duty after consultation with the
Director of Public Works, to place and maintain or cause to be placed and
maintained all official warning and direction signs and signals. All signs
authorized and required hereunder for a particular purpose shall be uniform.
   (B)   No provision of this title for which signs are required shall be
enforceable against the alleged violator if at the time and place of the
alleged violation the sign herein required is not in proper position and
sufficiently legible to be seen by an ordinarily observant person.
(Ord. 15, passed 8-8-1927)
§ 11-1-2-3 OBEDIENCE TO TRAFFIC SIGNS.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any operator or pedestrian to disobey the
instructions of any mechanical or electrical traffic signal, traffic sign or
marks upon the street placed in accordance with the provisions of this title,
provided every sign or mark made by the use of paint upon the curb shall bear
thereon the official emblem of the Police Department.
   (B)   1.   No public utility or department in the city shall erect or place
any barrier or sign unless of a type first approved by the Chief of Police.
      2.   It shall be unlawful for any operator or pedestrian to disobey the
instructions of any barrier or sign approved as above provided, erected or
placed by public utility or by any department of the city.
(Ord. 15, passed 8-8-1927)
§ 11-1-2-4 TRAFFIC STOP AND GO SIGNAL LEGEND.
   Whenever traffic at any intersection is regulated by a stop and go
mechanical or electrical signal, the following colors may be used, and none
other, and those colors herein authorized shall indicate as follows:
   (A)   Red. Except in flashing signals, this requires that traffic shall stop
and remain standing;
   (B)   Green. Requires that traffic shall move and continue in motion except
when stopped for the purpose of avoiding an accident or in the event of other
emergency or when stopped at the command of a police officer;
   (C)   Amber. Shall indicate preparation for a change in the direction of
traffic movement. When amber is shown, no traffic shall enter the intersection
until green or “Go” signal is shown; and
(Ord. 15, passed 8-8-1927)
§ 11-1-2-5 ESTABLISH AND MAINTAIN CROSSWALKS.
   (A)   The Chief of Police and the Director of Public Works are hereby
authorized and required to establish and maintain and to designate upon the
surface of the roadway appropriate devices, marks or white lines as crosswalks
approximately equal in width to the adjacent sidewalk at all intersections
where in their opinions there is particular danger to pedestrians crossing the
roadway.
   (B)   When crosswalks are established and maintained outside the central
traffic district or a business district, the Director of Public Works shall by
appropriate devices, marks or white lines mark and maintain along the surface
of the roadway an arrow not less than 12 inches wide in the shaft and not less
than 30 feet long, pointing in the direction of such crosswalk, together with
the word “SLOW” in block letters not less than 24 inches long and not less than
four inches wide, 100 feet distant from each crosswalk so established.
(Ord. 15, passed 8-8-1927)
§ 11-1-2-6 DISPLAY OF UNAUTHORIZED SIGNS PROHIBITED.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to place or maintain or to display any
device, other than an official warning or direction sign or signal erected
under competent authority, upon or in view of a street which purports to be, or
is an imitation of, or resembles an official warning or direction sign or
signal, or which attempts to direct the movement of traffic or the actions of
operators, and any such prohibited device shall be a public nuisance, and the
Chief of Police may remove it or cause it to be removed, without notice.
(Ord. 15, passed 8-8-1927)
§ 11-1-3 POLICE AND FIRE VEHICLES EXEMPT FROM CERTAIN RULES.
   The provisions of this title regulating the movements, parking and standing
of vehicles shall not apply to emergency vehicles of the police or sheriff’s
office or of the Fire Department or of a public utility, while the driver of
any such vehicle is engaged in the necessary performance of public emergency
duties.
(Ord. 15, passed 8-8-1927)
§ 11-1-4 RIDING ON RUNNING BOARDS.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to ride upon the fender or running board
of any motor vehicle.
(Ord. 15, passed 8-8-1927)
§ 11-1-5 RAILWAY TRAINS BLOCKING STREET.
   It shall be unlawful for the operator of any steam railway train or car to
separate the same in such a manner as to prevent the use of any street for
purposes of travel for a period of time longer than five minutes.
(Ord. 15, passed 8-8-1927)
§ 11-1-6 USE OF MUFFLER CUTOUT PROHIBITED.
   It shall be unlawful for any operator of a motor vehicle to use a muffler
cutout within a business or residence section of the city.
(Ord. 15, passed 8-8-1927)
§ 11-1-7 PENALTY.
   Any person violating any of the provisions of this title, unless otherwise
provided, or any rule or regulation made by the Chief of Police pursuant
thereto shall be punished for the first offense by a fine not to exceed $50, or
imprisonment in the county jail for not more than 30 days; for a second
violation within a period of one year, by a fine not to exceed $100 or by
imprisonment in the county jail for not more than 60 days or by both such fine
and imprisonment; for a third and each additional offense within one year, by a
fine not exceeding $300 or by imprisonment in the county jail for a period not
to exceed three months or by both such fine and imprisonment.
(Ord. 15, passed 8-8-1927)
§ 11-1-8 DISPOSAL OF FINES AND FORFEITURES.
   All fines or forfeitures collected upon conviction or upon the forfeiture of
bail of any person charged with a violation of any of the provisions of this
title shall be paid into the city treasury and deposited in a special fund,
which is hereby created, to be known as the Street Improvement Fund. There may
be appropriated out of said Fund such monies as from time to time may be
authorized by the Council for the purchase and maintenance of official traffic
signs, signals, lights and paint marks necessary to designate the provisions
used exclusively in the construction, maintenance and improvement of public
streets within the city.
(Ord. 15, passed 8-8-1927)
CHAPTER 2: RULES FOR DRIVING
Section
11-2-1 Turning movements, regulations
11-2-2 Speed restrictions
11-2-3 Driving from alleys
11-2-4 Driving on sidewalks
11-2-5 Certain vehicles prohibited in certain areas
11-2-6 Boulevard stops
11-2-7 Crossing fire hose
11-2-8 Driving through funeral procession
11-2-9 Driving vehicles without lights
11-2-10 Clinging to moving vehicles
11-2-11 Unlawful use of skateboards, roller skates, scooter or any other device
or toy propelled by human power, other than a bicycle
11-2-12 Shopping centers, public plazas, incline ramps or incline surface areas
on private property open to the public
11-2-13 Signing and posting
§ 11-2-1 TURNING MOVEMENTS, REGULATIONS.
   (A)   Left turn.
      1.   Method of approach. The operator of a vehicle intending to turn to
the left at an intersection or into an alley or driveway shall approach the
point of turning in the line of traffic next to the center of the roadway.
      2.   Method of turning. The operator of a vehicle in turning left at an
intersection shall pass to the right of the center of the intersection before
turning, except that where markers have been placed upon the intersection
boundary lines to be crossed by the vehicle, the operator shall pass to the
right of such markers.
   (B)   Right turn.
      1.   Method of approach. The operator of a vehicle intending to turn to
the right at an intersection or into an alley or driveway shall approach to the
point of turning in the line of traffic nearest the right hand edge of the curb
of the street.
      2.   When allowed.
         (a)   Within the central traffic district a right turn shall not be
made at an intersection by the operator of any vehicle against a traffic
signal.
         (b)   Elsewhere the operator of a vehicle may make a right turn at any
intersection irrespective of a traffic signal, after stopping at a boulevard
stop and subject to the rights of pedestrians at such intersections.
   (C)   Location of turning markers. The Chief of Police is hereby authorized,
and as to those intersections mentioned in subsection (C)1. of this section, it
shall be his or her duty to place or cause to be placed turning markers in
intersections as follows.
      1.   Within intersections where either intersecting roadway is less than
60 feet in width and in intersections where streets meet at other than right
angles and in intersections where one street terminates in another, a marker
shall be placed at every intersection of the medial line of each street with
the prolongation of the property or curb line of the intersection street, or as
near the intersecting point of said lines as may be practical.
      2.   Intersections other than those mentioned in subsection (C)1. of this
section may be marked as provided in said subsection or a single marker may be
placed within such intersection at the intersection of the medial lines of the
intersecting streets.
(Ord. 15, passed 8-8-1927)
§ 11-2-2 SPEED RESTRICTIONS.
   (A)   The operator of a motor vehicle upon a street shall operate the same
at a careful and prudent speed, subject to this limitation, and may lawfully
proceed at a speed not exceeding 25 mph, except where otherwise marked.
   (B)   Pursuant to a speed survey conducted by TJKM Consultants of Fresno,
the following changes in the current speed limits shall be implemented:
      1.   Livingston-Cressey Road: 25 mph from Highway 99 to Nut Tree Road; 35
mph from Nut Tree Road to Olive Avenue (city limits);
      2.   Peach Avenue: 35 mph from Main Street to Dwight Way;
      3.   Walnut Avenue: 35 mph from Hammatt Avenue to Dwight Way; and
      4.   Those roadways adjacent to schools will be retained as 25 mph zones.
(Ord. 424, passed 11-16-1993)
§ 11-2-3 DRIVING FROM ALLEYS.
   The operator of a vehicle emerging from an alley, driveway or garage shall
stop such vehicle immediately prior to driving onto a sidewalk or onto the
sidewalk area extended across any alleyway.
(Ord. 15, passed 8-8-1927)
§ 11-2-4 DRIVING ON SIDEWALKS.
   The operator of a vehicle shall not drive within any sidewalk area except at
a permanent or temporary driveway.
(Ord. 15, passed 8-8-1927)
§ 11-2-5 CERTAIN VEHICLES PROHIBITED IN CERTAIN AREAS.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for the operator of any of the following vehicles
to drive the same in the central traffic district or any business district
between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m. of any day except Sunday; any
vehicle so loaded that any part of its load extends more than three feet to the
front or more than ten feet to the rear of said vehicle.
   (B)   1.   The Chief of Police is hereby authorized to establish over an
appropriate street or streets and to designate by appropriate signs, through
traffic routes for the movement of vehicles of two or more tons’ capacity
designated for carrying merchandise, freight or materials.
      2.   When any such through traffic route or routes are established and
designated by appropriate signs, the operator of any vehicle mentioned in this
section shall drive on such route or routes and none other except when it is
impracticable to do or when necessary to traverse another street or streets to
a destination for the purpose of unloading, but then only by such deviation
from the nearest freight route as is reasonably necessary.
(Ord. 15, passed 8-8-1927)
§ 11-2-6 BOULEVARD STOPS.
   (A)   The following streets and parts of streets are hereby declared to
constitute boulevards for the purpose of this section: (none listed).
   (B)   Every operator of a vehicle or streetcar traveling any street
intersecting any boulevard shall bring such vehicle or streetcar to a full stop
at the place where such street meets the nearest property line of the boulevard
before entering such boulevard, provided the property line is clearly marked or
signposted as required in this title, except at intersections where and when
traffic is subject to stop and go signals or directions.
   (C)   The Chief of Police is hereby authorized and required to place and
maintain or cause to be placed and maintained upon each and every street
intersecting a boulevard and at or near the property line of the boulevard
appropriate signs upon the street or devices or marks in the roadway, such
signs, devices or marks to bear the word “Stop” or the words “Boulevard Stop”
in such a position and with letters of a size to be clearly legible from a
distance of 50 feet along the street intersecting the boulevard.
(Ord. 15, passed 8-8-1927)
§ 11-2-7 CROSSING FIRE HOSE.
   No streetcar or vehicle shall be driven over any unprotected hose of the
Fire Department when laid down on the street, private driveway or streetcar
track, to be used at any fire or alarm of fire, without the consent of the
Director of Public Safety or assistant in command.
(Ord. 15, passed 8-8-1927)
§ 11-2-8 DRIVING THROUGH FUNERAL PROCESSION.
   It shall be unlawful for the operator of any vehicle to drive between the
vehicles comprising a funeral procession; provided, that such vehicles are
conspicuously so designated.
(Ord. 15, passed 8-8-1927)
§ 11-2-9 DRIVING VEHICLES WITHOUT LIGHTS.
   It shall be unlawful for the operator of any vehicle to drive the same
within the city limits when and if the said lights do not conform to the
requirements of the state motor vehicle act in regard to lights on vehicles.
(Ord. 15, passed 8-8-1927)
§ 11-2-10 CLINGING TO MOVING VEHICLES.
   It shall be unlawful for any person traveling upon any bicycle, motorcycle
or any toy vehicle to cling to or attach himself or herself or his or her
vehicle to any other moving vehicle upon any roadway.
(Ord. 15, passed 8-8-1927)
§ 11-2-11 UNLAWFUL USE OF SKATEBOARDS, ROLLER SKATES, SCOOTER OR ANY OTHER
DEVICE OR TOY PROPELLED BY HUMAN POWER, OTHER THAN A BICYCLE.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful to ride any of the above mentioned devices upon
Main Street, Livingston-Cressey, Davis Street and/or Walnut roadways within the
city limits, or upon the sidewalks or roadways of any business district
therein, or upon any tennis court or park maintained by the city.
   (B)   It shall be unlawful to use ramps and the like to jump from sidewalk
curbs to the street or to jump from the street to the sidewalks, or to use any
other means to propel skateboards, roller skates, scooters or bicycles or any
other device or toy propelled by human power into the air or over any other
object within the city limits.
(Ord. 370, passed 2-6-1990)
§ 11-2-12 SHOPPING CENTERS, PUBLIC PLAZAS, INCLINE RAMPS OR INCLINE SURFACE
AREAS ON PRIVATE PROPERTY OPEN TO THE PUBLIC.
   It shall be unlawful to ride skateboards, roller skates, scooters or any
other device or toy propelled by human power, other than a bicycle, upon the
sidewalks, incline ramps or incline surface areas of any shopping center,
public plaza or private property open to the public where signs prohibit such
activity.
(Ord. 370, passed 2-6-1990)
§ 11-2-13 SIGNING AND POSTING.
   The posting of shopping centers, public plazas and private property open to
the public shall be painted with white paint at ground level (not to exceed 36
inches above ground). Each letter shall be between one and one-half inches to
two inches wide.
(Ord. 370, passed 2-6-1990)
CHAPTER 3: STOPPING, STANDING OR PARKING
Section
11-3-1 Stopping or parking prohibited in specified places
11-3-2 Standing for loading only in certain places
11-3-3 Restricted or prohibited parking on certain streets and city parking
lots
11-3-4 Standing or parking close to curb
11-3-5 Parking vehicles for sale
11-3-6 Removal of parked vehicles
11-3-7 Removal of abandoned vehicles
11-3-8 Vehicle release fees
§ 11-3-1 STOPPING OR PARKING PROHIBITED IN SPECIFIED PLACES.
   It shall be unlawful for the operator of a vehicle to stop or park such
vehicle in any of the following places except when necessary to avoid conflict
with other traffic or in compliance with the direction of a police officer or
traffic signal:
   (A)   In an intersection;
   (B)   In a crosswalk;
   (C)   Between a safety zone and adjacent curb or within 20 feet of a point
on the curb immediately opposite the end of a safety zone;
   (D)   Within 30 feet of any intersecting roadway except buses at a
designated bus stop. Upon all streets within the central traffic district or
any business district the Chief of Police shall designate the provisions of
subsection (C) of this section and this subsection (D) by placing and
maintaining red paint or other red material upon the entire curb surface within
such areas omitting any crosswalk area or by placing and maintaining
appropriate signs directing that the stopping of a vehicle is prohibited;
   (E)   Restricted parking:
      1.   Vehicles or equipment. No person shall park any of the following
types of vehicles or equipment upon any street or parcel within the city unless
so designated. This subsection (E) in no way exempts any vehicle from parking
on a public roadway in excess of 72 hours. Vehicles left unattended for a
period which exceeds 72 hours are subject to storage by the city.
         (a)   Truck tractor, which is described as every vehicle in excess of
five tons, and designed and used primarily for drawing other vehicles and not
so constructed as to carry a load other than a part of the weight of the
vehicle and load so drawn, and does specifically include, but is not limited
to, truck tractors used to pull semitrailers, mobilehomes and structures,
vehicles or tractors; and
         (b)   Semitrailer, which is defined as any trailer type vehicle,
designed to haul freight, liquids, gases or livestock, and designed and used in
such a way that some of its weight rests on the motor vehicle that tows it, and
has an unladen weight of 6,000 pounds or greater.
      2.   Exceptions to the above.
         (a)   City or state equipment and vehicles;
         (b)   The driving or parking of any commercial vehicle or truck for
the limited purpose of making a pick up or delivery shall be at the specific
site where the pick up or delivery is to be made;
         (c)   The parking of semitrucks and trailers on commercial property
where the business owns and operates such vehicles during the normal course of
business; and
         (d)   Any private commercial truck stop within the city limits.
      3.   Approved truck trailer parking area within the city. The following
areas are designated as approved parking for semitrucks with trailers and other
vehicles meeting the restrictions set forth in this subsection (E):
         (a)   Posted locations on Industrial Way;
         (b)   North side of Campbell Boulevard between Livingston-Cressey and
Stefani Street between posted area only. (This parking will be designated two
hour parking only.); and
         (3)   North and south side of Crowell between Livingston-Cressey and
White Street: limited two hour parking only.
      4.   Private parking lot located to the rear of 2255 F Street. Property
owner must obtain a business permit through the city if fees are being charged
for any vehicle authorized to park within the lot.
      5.   Semitrailer parking.
         (a)   The parking of any detached semitruck trailer meeting the
guidelines set forth in subsection (E)1.(b) of this section shall not be
authorized at any time within the city except for the following reasons:
         (b)   Exceptions for any semitruck in the process of making a delivery
to a business in the immediate area: delivery must be made within a two-hour
period of the dropping of a trailer.
      6.   Violation; penalty. Any person who shall violate the provisions of
this subsection (E) shall be guilty of an infraction which shall be punishable
as follows:
         (a)   A fine of $50 for the first offense;
         (b)   A fine of $200 for a second offense within a 24-month period;
         (c)   A fine of $500 for a third or subsequent offense within a 24-
month period; and
         (d)   Subsequent offenses will be cited upon a separation period of 24
hours.
      7.   Vehicle removal.
         (a)   Any officer of the Police Department may remove or cause to be
removed any truck tractor or semitrailer found to be in violation of subsection
(E)1. of this section upon a third violation within a 24-month period. Such
violation must be associated with the same tractor or trailer.
         (b)   Costs of such removal shall be the responsibility of the
registered owner or vehicle assignee.
   (F)   It shall be unlawful for any motor vehicle at any time to be parked
within 15 feet of any fire hydrant within the corporate limits of the city; and
   (G)   Within a posted zone designated for semitractor/trailer parking only.
This section does not apply to the following: public utility vehicles while
performing a work operation.
(Ord. 468, passed 8-19-1997; Ord. 500, passed 8-1-2000; Ord. 535, passed 9-6-
2005)
§ 11-3-2 STANDING FOR LOADING ONLY IN CERTAIN PLACES.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for the operator of a vehicle to stop said
vehicle for a period of time longer than is necessary for the loading or
unloading of passengers or materials; provided, that the loading or unloading
of passengers shall not consume more than three minutes, nor shall the loading
or unloading of materials consume more than 20 minutes in any of the following
places:
      1.   In any alley;
      2.   In any loading zone;
      3.   At any curb within 50 feet of the entrance to any police station;
and
      4.   In any marked bus stop.
   (B)   The City Council shall determine the location of a loading zone and
shall cause to be marked by appropriate signs or as specifically required
herein those places where standing for loading only is permitted under this
section, subject to the following requirements and limitations:
      1.   Bus stops shall be designated by appropriate signs at those places
determined by the City Council except that a bus stop shall not exceed 50 feet
in length and shall not be placed adjacent to a safety zone at a streetcar
stop;
      2.   Every loading zone, also that portion of every curb reserved for
loading only for subsection (A)4. of this section, shall be designated by
yellow paint or yellow material upon the entire curb surface; and
      3.   Within the central traffic district or any business district not
more than one-half of the curb length in any one block may be set apart as a
loading zone.
(Ord. 15, passed 8-8-1927)
§ 11-3-3 RESTRICTED OR PROHIBITED PARKING ON CERTAIN STREETS AND CITY PARKING
LOTS.
   (A)   Parking prohibited at certain times on certain streets.
      1.   No person shall park a vehicle between the hours of 5:00 a.m. and 7:
00 a.m. of any Monday, Wednesday or Friday (excepting city holidays) upon any
of the following streets:
         (a)   Third Street between Front Street and F Street;
         (b)   B Street between Second Street and Fourth Street;
         (c)   C Street between Second Street and Fourth Street excepting the
south side of C Street between Second Street and the alley east of Second
Street; and
         (d)   D Street between Second Street and Fourth Street.
      2.   This regulation shall become effective when appropriate signs or
markings are in place giving notice of such regulations to the public.
   (B)   Twenty-four hour parking prohibited. No person shall park a vehicle
exceeding 24 hours of any day in the northern half of the city parking lot
located on Second Street between B Street and C Street.
   (C)   Parking time limited in central traffic district. Subject to the
prohibitions imposed under subsections (A) and (D) of this section, no person
shall park a vehicle longer than two hours in the central traffic district
between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m. of any day except Sunday. This
regulation shall become effective when appropriate signs or markings are in
place giving notice of such regulations to the public.
   (D)   Restriction or prohibition of parking by Chief of Police.
Notwithstanding any provision of this chapter to the contrary, the Chief of
Police may authorize, restrict or prohibit the stopping, standing or parking of
vehicles in designated streets, or portions thereof, in the city if the general
welfare and safety of the citizens so require it, which regulations shall
become effective when appropriate signs or markings are in place giving notice
of such regulations to the public.
(Ord. 253, passed 10-28-1982; Ord. 262, passed 1-26-1984; Ord. 444, passed 6-
20-1995)
§ 11-3-4 STANDING OR PARKING CLOSE TO CURB.
   (A)   The operator of a vehicle shall not stop, stand or park such vehicle
in a roadway other than parallel with the curb and with the two right hand
wheels of the vehicle within one foot of the regularly established curb line,
except that upon those streets which have been marked for angle parking, as
provided in this section, vehicles shall be parked at the angle to the curb
indicated by such marks.
   (B)   The City Council, by resolution, is hereby authorized to determine
upon what streets angle parking shall be permitted and to indicate such places
by the painting of white lines upon the surface of the roadway to indicate the
proper angle for parking; provided, that such lines not be placed upon, nor
shall any angle parking be permitted upon any street where such parking would
diminish the width of the roadway available for travel to less than 20 feet,
nor upon any street where there is less than 30 feet between the curb and the
nearest rail of any streetcar track, nor upon any street which is a
continuation or part of a county trunk line highway or a state highway unless a
clear width of 40 feet is left for the movement of vehicles when angle parking
is permitted.
   (C)   The City Council is hereby authorized to prohibit the parking of
vehicles, provided appropriate signs are placed and maintained to give notice
thereof, on one side of a street in any block where angle parking is permitted
on the opposite side of the street in such block.
(Ord. 15, passed 8-8-1927)
§ 11-3-5 PARKING VEHICLES FOR SALE.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person to park any vehicle upon any
street in a commercially zoned district while offering it for sale. The first
violation of this section as it relates to a commercial district shall be
punishable by a warning.
   (B)   It shall be unlawful for any person to park more than one vehicle at a
time upon any street in a residentially zoned district while offering it for
sale. Said vehicle must be registered to the person or persons occupying the
residence in front of which the vehicle is parked.
   (C)   For purposes of this section, offering it for sale shall be found when
the vehicle in question contains an advertisement displaying the words “FOR
SALE”.
(Ord. 357, passed 12-20-1988)
§ 11-3-6 REMOVAL OF PARKED VEHICLES.
   (A)   When any vehicle is parked or left standing under any of the following
circumstances, any city police officer, including any city reserve police
officer on duty, is authorized to remove and dispose of the vehicle in
accordance with the California Vehicle Code: when the vehicle is parked or left
standing in the city parking lot designated in §
11-3-3(B) of this chapter for 72 or more consecutive hours.
   (B)   No vehicle may be removed under this section unless appropriate signs
are posted giving notice that a violating vehicle may be removed.
   (C)   Nothing herein is intended to prohibit, restrict or otherwise limit
the authority of the city police to remove a vehicle under the California
Vehicle Code in those circumstances where the authority of a city ordinance or
resolution is not required to remove a vehicle.
(Ord. 253, passed 10-28-1982)
§ 11-3-7 REMOVAL OF ABANDONED VEHICLES.
   (A)   No person who owns or has possession, custody or control of any
vehicle shall park such vehicle upon any street or alley for a consecutive
period of more than 72 hours.
   (B)   In the event a vehicle is parked or left standing upon a street or
alley in excess of a consecutive period of 72 hours in violation of subsection
(A) of this section, any member of the Police Department authorized by the
Chief of Police may remove such vehicle from the street or alley in the manner
and subject to requirements of the California Vehicle Code.
(Ord. 315, passed 1-20-1987)
§ 11-3-8 VEHICLE RELEASE FEES.
   Vehicles impounded by the Police Department shall be held by the operator
until the vehicle is released, in writing, by the Police Department. A vehicle
release fee of $40 shall be collected from the person seeking the release to
cover the cost of processing and issuing the written release. A vehicle release
fee of $100 shall be collected from any person charged with driving under the
influence. Fees shall be set, from time to time, by resolution of the City
Council. Contents of vehicles stored shall not be removed without the prior
written approval of the Police Department. Stored vehicles shall be deemed to
be in the custody of the Police Department until released, in writing, by the
Police Department, and in the interim shall be stored for safekeeping by the
operator.
(Ord. 420, passed 6-1-1993)
CHAPTER 4: PEDESTRIANS
Section
11-4-1 Right-of-way at intersections
11-4-2 Limited use of roadway
11-4-3 Pedestrians to obey signals
§ 11-4-1 RIGHT-OF-WAY AT INTERSECTIONS.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for the operator of any vehicle to drive into any
crosswalk which is marked as provided in §
11-1-2-5 of this title while there is in such crosswalk upon the half of the
roadway upon which the said vehicle is traveling any pedestrian engaged in
crossing the roadway until such pedestrian shall have passed beyond the path of
the said vehicle.
   (B)   The operator of a vehicle shall stop before entering any crosswalk
when any other vehicle proceeding in the same direction is stopped at such
crosswalk.
   (C)   The foregoing provisions of this section shall not apply at
intersections where traffic is being directed by an officer or a traffic stop
and go signal, at which intersection the mutual rights of pedestrians and
operators of vehicles shall be exercised under the direction of the officer or
traffic signals.
(Ord. 15, passed 8-8-1927)
§ 11-4-2 LIMITED USE OF ROADWAY.
   (A)   When within the central traffic district or a business district, no
pedestrian shall cross a roadway other than in a crosswalk.
   (B)   Outside of the central traffic district or a business district no
pedestrian shall cross a roadway other than by a route at right angles to the
curb and when crossing at any place other than a crosswalk shall yield the
right-of-way to all vehicles upon the roadway.
   (C)   It shall be unlawful for any person to be in any roadway other than in
a safety zone or crosswalk; provided that this provision shall not be construed
to prevent the necessary use of the roadway by a pedestrian.
   (D)   It shall be unlawful for any person to stand in a roadway for the
purpose of or while soliciting a ride from the operator of any private vehicle.
(Ord. 15, passed 8-8-1927)
§ 11-4-3 PEDESTRIANS TO OBEY SIGNALS.
   At intersections where traffic is directed by a traffic officer or by a stop
and go signal, it shall be unlawful for any pedestrian to cross the roadway
other than with released traffic.
(Ord. 15, passed 8-8-1927)
CHAPTER 5: BICYCLE REGULATIONS
Section
11-5-1 Enforcement of regulations
§ 11-5-1 ENFORCEMENT OF REGULATIONS.
   As of September 2022, the city’s bicycle regulations, derived from Ordinance
10, Ordinance 50 and Ordinance 174, are no longer enforced.
(Ord. 10, passed 6-2-1924; Ord. 50, passed 1-6-1941; Ord. 174, passed 1-21-
1974)
CHAPTER 6: ABANDONED, WRECKED VEHICLES
Section
11-6-1 Nuisance declared
11-6-2 Definitions
11-6-3 Exceptions
11-6-4 Supplementary regulations
11-6-5 Administration and enforcement
11-6-6 Abatement and removal, procedure
11-6-7 Hearings, determination
11-6-8 Disposal of nuisance; notify Department Of Motor Vehicles
11-6-9 Failure to pay costs
11-6-10 Leaving vehicle on private property
11-6-11 Penalty
§ 11-6-1 NUISANCE DECLARED.
   In addition to and in accordance with the determination made and the
authority granted by the state under the Cal. Vehicle Code § 22660 to remove
abandoned, wrecked, dismantled or inoperative vehicles or parts thereof as
public nuisances, the City Council hereby makes the following findings and
declarations.
   (A)   The accumulation and storage of abandoned, wrecked, dismantled or
inoperative vehicles or parts thereof on private or public property not
including highways is hereby found to create a condition tending to reduce the
value of private property, to promote blight and deterioration, to invite
plundering, creating a hazard to the health and safety of minors, to create a
harborage for rodents and insects and to be injurious to the health, safety and
general welfare.
   (B)   Therefore, the presence of an abandoned, wrecked, dismantled or
inoperative vehicle or parts thereof, on private or public property not
including highways except as expressly hereinafter permitted, is hereby
declared to constitute a public nuisance which may be abated as such in
accordance with the provisions of this chapter.
(Ord. 167, passed 4-30-1973)
§ 11-6-2 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   HIGHWAY. A way or place of whatever nature, publicly maintained and open to
the use of the public for purposes of vehicular travel. HIGHWAY includes
street.
   OWNER OF THE LAND. The owner of the land on which the vehicle, or parts
thereof, is located, as shown on the last equalized assessment roll.
   OWNER OF THE VEHICLE. The last registered owner and legal owner of record.
   PUBLIC PROPERTY. This term does not include “highway”.
   VEHICLE. A device by which any person or property may be propelled, moved or
drawn upon a highway, except a device moved by human power or used exclusively
upon stationary rails or tracks.
(Ord. 167, passed 4-30-1973)
§ 11-6-3 EXCEPTIONS.
   (A)   This chapter shall not apply to:
      1.   A vehicle or parts thereof which are located behind a solid fence
six feet in height or which are not plainly visible from the public right-of-
way; or
      2.   A vehicle or parts thereof which are stored or parked in a lawful
manner on private property in connection with the business of a licensed
dismantler, licensed vehicle dealer, a junk dealer in commercially zoned
districts other than the downtown commercial district, as defined in §
5-3-6 of this code, or when such storage or parking is necessary to the
operation of a lawfully conducted business or commercial enterprise. Businesses
of this nature operating in the downtown commercial district shall be required
to store inoperable vehicles and parts thereof in such a manner that said items
are not visible within line of sight of the public right-of-way.
   (B)   Nothing in this section shall authorize the maintenance of a public or
private nuisance as defined under provisions of law other than the Cal. Vehicle
Code Chapter 10 (commencing with § 22650) of Division 11 and this chapter.
(Ord. 167, passed 4-30-1973; Ord. 470, passed 9-16-1997)
§ 11-6-4 SUPPLEMENTARY REGULATIONS.
   This chapter is not the exclusive regulation of abandoned, wrecked,
dismantled or inoperative vehicles within the city. It shall supplement and be
in addition to the other regulatory codes, statutes and ordinances heretofore
or hereafter enacted by the city, the state or any other legal entity or agency
having jurisdiction.
(Ord. 167, passed 4-30-1973)
§ 11-6-5 ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT.
   (A)   Except as otherwise provided herein, the provisions of this chapter
shall be administered and enforced by the Chief of Police. In the enforcement
of this chapter such officer and his or her deputies may enter upon private or
public property to examine a vehicle or parts thereof, or obtain information as
to the identity of a vehicle and to remove or cause the removal of a vehicle or
parts thereof declared to be a nuisance pursuant to this chapter.
   (B)   When the City Council has contracted with or granted a franchise to
any person, such person shall be authorized to enter upon property or public
property to remove or cause the removal of a vehicle or parts thereof declared
to be a nuisance pursuant to this chapter.
   (C)   The City Council shall from time to time determine and fix an amount
to be assessed as administrative costs (excluding the actual cost of removal of
any vehicle or parts thereof) under this chapter.
(Ord. 167, passed 4-30-1973)
§ 11-6-6 ABATEMENT AND REMOVAL, PROCEDURE.
   (A)   Authority of Chief of Police. Upon discovering the existence of an
abandoned, wrecked, dismantled or inoperative vehicle, or parts thereof, on
private property or public property within the city, the Chief of Police shall
have the authority to cause the abatement and removal thereof in accordance
with the procedure prescribed herein.
   (B)   Notice of intention. A ten-day notice of intention to abate and remove
the vehicle, or parts thereof, as a public nuisance shall be mailed by
registered mail to the owner of the land and to the owner of the vehicle;
unless the vehicle is in such condition that identification numbers are not
available to determine ownership.
   (C)   Public hearing.
      1.   Upon request by the owner of the vehicle or owner of the land
received by the Police Chief within ten days after the mailing of the notices
of intention to abate and remove, a public hearing shall be held by the City
Council on the question of abatement and removal of the vehicle or parts
thereof as an abandoned, wrecked, dismantled or inoperative vehicle, and the
assessment of the administrative costs and the cost of removal of the vehicle
or parts thereof against the property on which it is located.
      2.   If the owner of the land submits a sworn written statement denying
responsibility for the presence of the vehicle on his or her land within such
ten-day period, said statement shall be construed as a request for a hearing
which does not require his or her presence. Notice of hearing shall be mailed,
by registered mail, at least ten days before the hearing to the owner of the
land and to the owner of the vehicle, unless the vehicle is in such condition
that identification numbers are not available to determine ownership. If such a
request for hearing is not received within said ten days after mailing of the
notice of intention to abate and remove, the city shall have the authority to
abate and remove the vehicle or parts thereof as a public nuisance without
holding a public hearing.
   (D)   Exception. Upon discovering the existence of an abandoned, wrecked,
dismantled or inoperative vehicle, or parts thereof, on public or private
property within the city which creates an immediate or imminent threat to the
safety of any individual, the Chief of Police shall have the authority to cause
the immediate abatement and removal thereof.
(Ord. 167, passed 4-30-1973; Ord. 298, passed 4-1-1986)
§ 11-6-7 HEARINGS, DETERMINATION.
   (A)   All hearings under this chapter shall be held before the City Council
which shall hear all facts and testimony it deems pertinent. Said facts and
testimony may include testimony on the condition of the vehicle or parts
thereof and the circumstances concerning its location on the said private
property or public property. The City Council shall not be limited by the
technical rules of evidence. The owner of the land may appear in person at the
hearing or present a sworn written statement in time for consideration at the
hearing, and deny responsibility for the presence of the vehicle on the land,
with his or her reasons for such denial.
   (B)   The City Council may impose such conditions and take such other action
as it deems appropriate under the circumstances to carry out the purpose of
this chapter. It may delay the time for removal of the vehicle or parts thereof
if, in its opinion, the circumstances justify it. At the conclusion of the
public hearing, the City Council may find that a vehicle or parts thereof have
been abandoned, wrecked, dismantled or are inoperative on private or public
property and order the same removed from the property as a public nuisance and
disposed of as hereinafter provided and determine the administrative costs and
the cost of removal to be charged against the owner of the land. The order
requiring removal shall include a description of the vehicle or parts thereof
and the correct identification number and license number of the vehicle, if
available at the site. If it is determined at the hearing that the vehicle was
placed on the land without the consent of the owner and that he or she has not
subsequently acquiesced in its presence, the City Council shall not assess the
costs of administration or removal of the vehicle against the property upon
which the vehicle is located or otherwise attempt to collect such costs from
such owner of the land.
   (C)   If the owner of the land submits a sworn written statement denying
responsibility for the presence of the vehicle on his or her land but does not
appear, or if an interested party makes a written presentation to the City
Council but does not appear, he or she shall be notified in writing of the
decision.
(Ord. 167, passed 4-30-1973)
§ 11-6-8 DISPOSAL OF NUISANCE; NOTIFY DEPARTMENT OF MOTOR VEHICLES.
   (A)   Five days after adoption of the order declaring the vehicle or parts
thereof to be a public nuisance, or five days from the date of mailing of
notice of the decision if such notice is required by §11-6-7 of this chapter or
15 days after such action of the governing body authorizing removal, the
vehicle or parts thereof may be disposed of by removal to a scrap yard or
automobile dismantler’s yard. After the vehicle has been removed, it shall not
thereafter be reconstructed or made operable.
   (B)   Within five days after the date of removal of the vehicle or parts
thereof, notice shall be given to the Department of Motor Vehicles identifying
the vehicle or parts thereof removed. At the same time there shall be
transmitted to the Department of Motor Vehicles any evidence of registration
available, including registration certificates, certificates of title and
license plates.
(Ord. 167, passed 4-30-1973)
§ 11-6-9 FAILURE TO PAY COSTS.
   If the administrative costs and the cost of removal which are charged
against the owner of a parcel of land pursuant to §
11-6-7 of this chapter are not paid within 30 days of the date of the order, or
the final disposition of an appeal therefrom, such costs shall be assessed
against the parcel of land pursuant to the Cal. Gov’t Code § 38773.5 and shall
be transmitted to the tax collector for collection. Said assessment shall have
the same priority as other city taxes.
(Ord. 167, passed 4-30-1973)
§ 11-6-10 LEAVING VEHICLE ON PRIVATE PROPERTY.
   It shall be unlawful and a misdemeanor for any person to abandon, park,
store or leave or permit the abandonment, parking, storing or leaving of any
licensed or unlicensed vehicle or parts thereof which are in an abandoned,
wrecked, dismantled or inoperative condition upon any private property or
public property not including highways within the city for a period in excess
of 15 days unless such vehicle or parts thereof are completely enclosed within
a building in a lawful manner where it is not plainly visible from the street
or other public or private property, or unless such vehicle is stored or parked
in a lawful manner on private property in connection with the business of a
licensed dismantler, licensed vehicle dealer or a junkyard, as referred to in §
11-6-3 of this chapter, and upon conviction thereof shall be punished as
provided in §
1-4-1 of this code.
(Ord. 470, passed 9-16-1997)
§ 11-6-11 PENALTY.
   It shall be unlawful and a misdemeanor for any person to fail or refuse to
remove an abandoned, wrecked, dismantled or inoperative vehicle or part thereof
or refuse to abate such nuisance when ordered to do so in accordance with the
abatement provisions of this chapter or state law where such state law is
applicable and upon conviction thereof, shall be punished as provided in §
1-4-1 of this code.
(Ord. 167, passed 4-30-1973)
CHAPTER 7: TRUCK ROUTES
Section
11-7-1 Use of vehicles exceeding a maximum gross weight limit of five tons
prohibited; exception
11-7-1-1 Designated truck routes
11-7-1-2 Exception
11-7-1-3 Exemption
11-7-1-4 Truck routes; fines
§ 11-7-1 USE OF VEHICLES EXCEEDING A MAXIMUM GROSS WEIGHT LIMIT OF FIVE TONS
PROHIBITED; EXCEPTION.
   No person shall operate, or cause to be operated, any vehicle exceeding a
maximum gross weight limit of five tons upon any street, or portion thereof,
other than those streets, or portions thereof, designated as truck routes in §
11-7-1-1 of this chapter.
(Ord. 480, passed 9-1-1998)
§ 11-7-1-1 DESIGNATED TRUCK ROUTES.
   The following streets, or portions thereof, are designated as truck routes
for the purposes of this chapter, and the Public Works Director is hereby
authorized to post signs indicating same:
Designated Street Designated Portion
Designated Street       Designated Portion
B Street                Robin Avenue to Winton Parkway
Campbell Boulevard      Winton Parkway to Hammatt Avenue
F Street                Hammatt Avenue to Walnut Avenue
Hammatt Avenue          Walnut Avenue Southbound Highway 99 on ramp
Industrial Drive        Walnut Avenue to Hammatt Avenue
Livingston-Cressey Road Campbell Boulevard to north city limits
Robin Avenue            Westside Boulevard to B Street
Swan Street             Livingston-Cressey to Foster Farms main gate
Walnut Avenue           East city limits to Hammatt Avenue
Westside Boulevard      Lincoln to Robin Avenue
Winton Parkway          B Street to Campbell Boulevard
 
(Ord. 480, passed 9-1-1998)
§ 11-7-1-2 EXCEPTION.
   Nothing in this chapter shall prohibit the operation of any vehicle
exceeding a maximum gross weight limit of five tons coming from a truck route,
designated in §
11-7-1-1 of this chapter, having ingress and egress by direct route to and from
a nondesignated street, or portion thereof, for the purpose of:
   (A)   Making pick ups or deliveries of goods, wares and merchandise from or
to any building or structure located on such restricted streets if verification
or proof are provided. Such verification or proof may include, but is not
limited to, bill(s) of lading, work or purchase orders, pick up or delivery
invoices or documents and waybill(s);
   (B)   Delivering materials to be used in the actual and bona fide repair,
alteration, remodeling or construction of any building or structure upon such
restricted streets for which a building permit has previously been obtained
therefor, if verification or proof are provided. Such verification or proof may
include, but is not limited to, bill(s) of lading, work or purchase orders,
pick up or delivery invoices or documents and waybill(s);
   (C)   Maintenance, repairs or fueling if the location is a commercial
business having a current business license to perform such work and the
business location is within a Neighborhood Commercial District (C-1), Community
Commercial District (C-2), Limited Industrial District (M-1), General
Industrial District (M-2) or Planned Development Overlay District (PD); or
   (D)   Obtaining commercial lodging or commercial food services, if such
business is within a Neighborhood Commercial District (C-1), Community
Commercial District (C-2) or Planned Development Overlay District (PD), and the
commercial lodging or food service business is not located more than 2,000 feet
from an unrestricted street.
(Ord. 480, passed 9-1-1998)
§ 11-7-1-3 EXEMPTION.
   The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to:
   (A)   Passenger buses under the jurisdiction of the public utilities
commission of the state; or
   (B)   Vehicles owned by a public utility while necessarily in use in the
construction, installation or repair of any public utility.
(Ord. 480, passed 9-1-1998)
§ 11-7-1-4 TRUCK ROUTES; FINES.
   Every person convicted of an infraction for a violation of §
11-7-1 of this chapter shall be punished as follows:
   (A)   By a fine of at least $50, but not more than $100;
   (B)   For a second infraction occurring within one year of a prior
infraction which resulted in a conviction, by a fine of $200; and
   (C)   For a third or any subsequent infraction occurring within one year of
two or more prior infractions which resulted in convictions, by a fine of $500.
(Ord. 480, passed 9-1-1998)
PARALLEL REFERENCES
References to California Codes
References to Ordinances
REFERENCES TO CALIFORNIA CODES
Business and Professions Code
Section Code Section
Business and Professions Code
Section                                          Code Section
4601                                             10-10-2,
                                                 10-10-10
11004                                            6-2-2
16001                                            3-2-4
23004                                            3-12-1,
                                                 10-13-4
26000 et seq.                                    5-7-2
26001(ak)                                        5-7-2
26001(au)                                        5-7-2
26001(av)                                        5-7-2
26001(f)                                         5-7-2
26001(m)                                         5-7-2
26070(a)(3)(A)                                   5-7-2
Chapter 3, Part 2 of Division 4                  6-7-10,
                                                 6-8-10
Chapter 5 (commencing with § 2000 of Division 2)10-11-19
Chapter 9 of Division 3                          4-6-9
Chapter 11 of Division 3                         3-10-13
                                                 
 
Civil Code
Section Code Section
Civil Code
Section                                 Code Section
714(c)(3)                               4-8-1
801.5(a)(1) and (a)(2)                  4-8-1
Division 4, Part 5, Chapter 1,Article 2 6-9-2
4080                                    4-9-5
4105                                    6-2-2
 
Code of Civil Procedure
Section Code Section
Code of Civil Procedure
Section             Code Section
415.10              1-19-5
683.110 to 683.220  9-6-43
731                 10-4-7
                    3-2-4-17
1094.5              , 10-6-12,
                    10-6-15
                    3-2-4-17
                    ,
                    4-1-3-1,
1094.6              5-6-2,
                    5-6-5,
                    5-6-7,
                    5-6-9,
                    5-6-10
1285 through 1297.6 9-6-44
1822.50 et seq.     10-3-4
1985                1-5-8
                    
 
Code of Regulations
Section Code Section
Code of Regulations
Section                                                     Code Section
7585 through 7605, Title 17, Division 1, Chapter 5, Group 4 9-5-57
Title 8, Division 1, Chapter 4, Subchapter 7, §3203        10-11-2
Title 8, Division 1, Chapter 4, Subchapter 7, Group 16,
Article 109, §5193                                         10-11-2
Title 14, 17402(a)(11.5)                                    8-2-1
Title 14, 17402(a)(26.6)                                    8-2-1
Title 14, 17402.5(b)(4)                                     8-2-1
Title 14, 17855(a)(4)                                       8-2-1
Title 14,17896.2(a)(4)                                      8-2-1
Title 14, 18815.5(d)                                        8-2-1
Title 14, 18815.5(e)                                        8-2-1
Title 14, 18982(14.5)                                       8-2-1
Title 14, 18982(a)                                          8-2-1
Title 14, 18982(a)(14.5)(A) through 18982(a)(14.5)(B)       8-2-1
Title 14, 18982(a)(6)                                       8-2-1
Title 14, 18982(a)(7)                                       8-2-1
Title 14, 18982(a)(8)                                       8-2-1
Title 14, 18982(a)(18)                                      8-2-1
Title 14, 18982(a)(24)                                      8-2-1
Title 14, 18982(a)(25)                                      8-2-1
Title 14, 18982(a)(26)                                      8-2-1
Title 14, 18982(a)(27)                                      8-2-1
Title 14, 18982(a)(30)                                      8-2-1
Title 14, 18982(a)(31.5)                                    8-2-1
Title 14, 18982(a)(33)                                      8-2-1
Title 14, 18982(a)(35)                                      8-2-1
Title 14, 18982(a)(38)                                      8-2-1
Title 14, 18982(a)(39)                                      8-2-1
Title 14, 18982(a)(40)                                      8-2-1
Title 14, 18982(a)(41)                                      8-2-1
Title 14, 18982(a)(42)                                      8-2-1
Title 14, 18982(a)(43)                                      8-2-1
Title 14, 18982(a)(45)                                      8-2-1
Title 14, 18982(a)(46)                                      8-2-1
Title 14, 18982(a)(48)                                      8-2-1
Title 14,18982(a)(49)                                       8-2-1
Title 14, 18982(a)(51)                                      8-2-1
Title 14, 18982(a)(54)                                      8-2-1
Title 14,18982(a)(55)                                       8-2-1
Title 14,18982(a)(60)                                       8-2-1
Title 14,18982(a)(61)                                       8-2-1
Title 14,18982(a)(64)                                       8-2-1
Title 14,18982(a)(65)                                       8-2-1
Title 14, 18982(a)(71)                                      8-2-1
Title 14, 18982(a)(73)                                      8-2-1
Title 14, 18982(a)(74)                                      8-2-1
Title 14, 189852(a)(76)                                     8-2-1
Title 14, 18982.2(a)(29)                                    8-2-1
Title 14, 18983.1(b)                                        8-2-1
Title 14, 18984.1                                           8-2-38
Title 14, 18984.2                                           8-2-38
Title 14, 18984.3                                           8-2-38
Title 14, 18984.7                                           8-2-31
Title 14, 18984.8                                           8-2-31
Title 14, 18984.9(b)                                        8-2-31
Title 14, 18984.9(b)(3)                                     8-2-31
Title 14, 18984.9(c)                                        8-2-28
Title 14,18984.2(a)(1)(C)                                   8-2-1
Title 14, 18988.3                                           8-2-38
Title 14, 18989.1                                           8-2-37
Title 14, 18991.3                                           8-2-35
Title 14, 18991.3(b)                                        8-2-35,
                                                            8-2-36
Title 14, 18991.4                                           8-2-35
Title 14, 18991.5(a)(1)                                     8-2-36
Title 14, 18991.5(a)(2)                                     8-2-36
Title 14, 18995.4                                           8-2-1
Title 14, §18996.2                                         8-2-73
Title 14, Division 7, Chapter 12                            8-2-1
Title 14, Division 7, Chapter 12, Article 2                 8-2-37
Title 19                                                    7-1-2
Title 19, Division 1, Subchapter 1, Article 3, §3.05(a)    7-2-3
Title 22                                                    9-6-19
Title 22, Division 4.5, Chapter 15, Article 4, 66265.51 to  9-12-8
66265.56
Title 23, Division 2, Chapter 2.7                           8-2-1,
                                                            8-2-70
                                                            5-4-9-1,
Title 24                                                    5-4-9-2,
                                                            7-1-2
Title 24, Part 3, Article 625                               4-9-2,
                                                            4-9-6
Title 24, Part 11                                           8-2-69
Title 27                                                    8-2-1
 
 
Education Code
Section                                                         Code Section
Title 2, Division 4, Part 27, Chapter 9, Article 13 (commencing 8-2-35
with §49580)
 
 
Elections Code
Section      Code Section
1000 et seq. 1-5-3
 
Fish and Game Code
Section Code Section
Fish and Game Code
Section                               Code Section
2050 et seq.                          10-3-14
2116 et seq.                          10-3-14
2116                                  10-3-1
2118                                  10-3-1
2118 (j) and (k)                      10-3-1
Article 1 of Chapter 2 of Division 3  10-3-14
Division 3, Chapter 1.5, 2050 et seq. 10-3-14
 
Food and Agriculture Code
Section Code Section
Food and Agriculture Code
Section        Code Section
17063 to 17095 10-3-32
31604          10-3-1
31641          10-3-1
31642          10-3-1
31643          10-3-1,
               10-3-43
 
Gov’t Code
Section Code Section
Gov’t Code
Section                                                          Code Section
900 et seq.                                                      1-14-1
905                                                              1-14-1
910 through 915.2                                                1-14-1
935                                                              1-14-1
935(b)                                                           1-14-1
940 through 949                                                  1-14-1
945.4                                                            1-14-1
945.6                                                            1-14-1
950 through 951                                                  1-14-1
6250 et seq.                                                     8-2-72
7070                                                             10-14-1
7070, Subdivision (d)                                            10-14-1
7070 through 7075                                                10-14-1
12900 through 12996                                              5-6-12-1
27361                                                            6-12-3
27372                                                            6-12-3
36516                                                            1-5-2
36900(b)                                                         9-6-37
37201 to 37209                                                   1-6-9-3
37606                                                            1-5-11
37624.3                                                          1-5-11
38773.5                                                          11-6-9
40802                                                            1-6-9-3
40804                                                            1-6-9-3
40805                                                            1-6-9-3
50075.3                                                          3-17-17
51036                                                            3-2-4-1
                                                                 1-18-1,
53069.4                                                          1-18-4,
                                                                 1-18-13
53600 et seq.                                                    1-13-3
53601                                                            1-13-5
53601(a) through (e)                                             1-13-4
53601(g)                                                         1-13-4
53601(h)                                                         1-13-4
53601(i)                                                         1-13-4
53601(j)                                                         1-13-4
53607                                                            1-13-3
53630 et seq.                                                    1-13-5
53635                                                            1-13-4
53646(b)(1)                                                      1-13-11
53652                                                            1-13-8
54950 through 54963                                              1-5-11
54950 et seq.                                                    1-5-14
54956.7                                                          1-5-11
54956.7 et seq.                                                  1-5-10
54956.75                                                         1-5-11
54956.8                                                          1-5-11
54956.86                                                         1-5-11
54956.9                                                          1-5-11
54956.96                                                         1-5-11
54957                                                            1-5-11
54957.6 et seq.                                                  1-5-11
54957.6                                                          1-5-11
54957.8                                                          1-5-11
54961                                                            1-5-11
65090                                                            5-6-3
65091                                                            5-6-3
65302                                                            4-5-1-1
65452 to 65457                                                   5-6-8
65560                                                            4-5-1-1
65800                                                            4-5-1-1
65850.55                                                         4-8-3
65850.7                                                          4-9-1,
                                                                 4-9-4
65852.2(c)(2)(B)                                                 5-5-6
65852.22                                                         5-5-6
65852.26                                                         5-5-6
65852.150 through 65852.2                                        5-5-6
65860                                                            5-6-2
65864 through 65869.5                                            5-6-3
65867                                                            5-6-3
65915 et seq.                                                    5-7-2
65915                                                            5-5-1
65915(b)                                                         5-5-1
65915(c)                                                         5-5-1
65917                                                            5-5-1
66006                                                            4-7-13
66015                                                            4-8-3
66016                                                            4-8-3
66410 et seq.                                                    4-7-9,
                                                                 5-6-11-2
66410 through 66499.40                                           6-1-2
66428                                                            6-8-6
66434(f)                                                         6-7-12
66462(a)(2)                                                      6-12-2
66465                                                            6-8-10
66474.3                                                          6-5-7
66477                                                            6-9-2
66478                                                            6-9-3
66483                                                            6-9-5
66484                                                            6-9-6
66484(a)                                                         6-9-6
66484(a)(2)                                                      6-9-6
66484(a)(3)                                                      6-9-6
66484(a)(4)                                                      6-9-6
66484(a)(5)                                                      6-9-6
66484(a)(6)                                                      6-9-6
66485 et seq.                                                    6-9-7
66493                                                            6-12-4
66496                                                            6-7-25
66497                                                            6-7-25
66499.11 through 66499.20.3                                      6-13-1
66499.16                                                         6-7-24
66499.17                                                         6-7-24
66499.18                                                         6-7-24
66499.34                                                         6-14-4
66499.35                                                         6-14-2
66499.36                                                         6-14-5
Title 1, Division 3.6, Part 3, Chapter 1                         1-14-1
Title 5, Division 2, Part 1, Chapter 2, Article 4.5 (commencing  1-5-13
with 53296)
Title 5, Division 2, Part 1, Chapter 5, Article 7, 54203         1-11-1
Title 5, Division 2, Part 1, Chapter 5, Article 8, 54222         1-12-2,
                                                                 1-12-9
Title 5, Division 2, Part 1, Chapter 6                           9-5-27,
                                                                 9-6-27
Title 7, Division 2                                              6-2-2
Title 7, Chapter 3                                               2-2-1
Title 4, Division 2, Part 1, Chapter 4, Article 1, 34851 through 1-6-1
34859
Title 7, Division 2, Chapter 6                                   6-13-1,
                                                                 6-13-2
Title 7, Division 2, 66410 through 66499.40                      6-1-2
                                                                 
 
Health and Safety Code
Section Code Section
Health and Safety Code
Section                                                   Code Section
1461                                                      1-5-11
11018.5                                                   5-7-2
                                                          10-4-1,
11054                                                     10-6-14,
                                                          10-11-4
                                                          10-4-1,
11055                                                     10-6-14,
                                                          10-11-4
                                                          10-4-1,
11056                                                     10-6-14,
                                                          10-11-4
                                                          10-4-1,
11057                                                     10-6-14,
                                                          10-11-4
                                                          10-4-1,
11058                                                     10-6-14,
                                                          10-11-4
11353.1                                                   5-7-2
11362.5                                                   5-7-2
11362.7                                                   5-7-2
11362.7 through 11362.85                                  5-7-2
113783                                                    8-2-1
113789                                                    8-2-1
113841                                                    8-2-1
113842                                                    8-2-1
114079                                                    8-2-35
11550                                                     10-11-4
116900 et seq.                                            9-5-32
118215                                                    9-6-8
119303                                                    10-11-4
1596.750                                                  5-7-2
1596.76                                                   5-7-2
17951                                                     4-8-3
17958.1                                                   5-7-2
18007 and 18008                                           5-2-2
18551                                                     5-5-3-1
25117                                                     8-2-1
25249.8                                                   8-2-1,
                                                          9-5-1
25281(h)                                                  8-2-1,
                                                          9-5-1
25501(n)                                                  8-2-1,
                                                          9-5-1
32106                                                     1-5-11
32155                                                     1-5-11
33000 et seq.                                             1-16-1,
                                                          1-16-2
33333.6                                                   1-16-2
33334.5                                                   1-16-2
33411                                                     1-16-2
33411.1                                                   1-16-2
33413                                                     1-16-2
33413.5                                                   1-16-2
33670                                                     1-16-1,
                                                          1-16-2
Division 24, Part 1, Chapter 1, Article 3, 33030 et seq.  1-5-9
Division 24, Part 1, Chapter 1, Article 3, 33100          1-5-9
Division 24, Part 1, Chapter 1, Article 3, 33101          1-5-9
Division 24, Part 1, Chapter 3, Article 1, 33200          1-5-9
39730.5                                                   8-2-1
39730.6                                                   8-2-1
39730.7                                                   8-2-1
39730.8                                                   8-2-1
Division 20, Chapter 6.95 (commencing with 25500)         9-12-8
Division 104, Part 9, Chapter 8 (commencing with §114960)8-2-1
Division 104, Part 14, 117600 et seq.                     10-11-27
Division 104, Part 14 (commencing with §117600)          8-2-1
                                                          
 
 
Labor Code
Section Code Section
1102.5  1-5-13
 
Penal Code
Section Code Section
Penal Code
Section           Code Section
148               10-3-6
182               10-10-6
243.4             10-6-14
261               10-6-14
261.5             10-6-14
262               10-6-14
                  10-6-9,
266a              10-6-14,
                  10-10-6
                  10-6-9,
266b              10-6-14,
                  10-10-6
266c              10-6-9,
                  10-6-14
266d              10-6-14,
                  10-10-6
                  10-6-9,
266e              10-6-14,
                  10-10-6
266f              10-6-14,
                  10-10-6
                  10-6-9,
266g              10-6-14,
                  10-10-6
                  10-6-9,
266h              10-6-14,
                  10-11-4,
                  10-10-6
                  10-6-9,
266i              10-6-14,
                  10-11-4
267               10-6-14
                  10-6-11,
290               10-6-14,
                  10-10-6,
                  10-11-4
309               10-6-14
311               10-10-6
311 through 313.4 10-6-11
311.1             10-6-14
311.2             10-6-14
311.3             10-6-14
311.4             10-6-14
311.5             10-6-14
311.6             10-6-14
311.10            10-6-14
313               10-9-4
313.1             10-6-14
314               10-6-14,
                  10-11-4
                  10-6-9,
                  10-6-11,
315               10-6-14,
                  10-10-6,
                  10-11-4
                  10-6-9,
                  10-6-11,
316               10-6-14,
                  10-10-6,
                  10-11-4
                  10-6-11,
318               10-6-14,
                  10-10-6,
                  10-11-4
                  3-5-1,
326.5             3-5-4-1,
                  3-5-7
326.5(c)          3-5-6
370               10-3-22
415               10-11-4
597 et seq.       10-3-52
597.5(a)          10-3-1
599aa             10-3-1
                  10-6-9,
647(a)            10-6-14,
                  10-10-6,
                  10-11-4
                  10-6-9,
                  10-6-11,
647(b)            10-6-14,
                  10-10-6,
                  10-11-4
                  10-6-9,
647(d)            10-6-14,
                  10-10-6
647.6             10-6-14
647a              10-10-6
667.5             3-2-4-5,
                  3-2-4-15
667.5(c)          5-5-14
830.9             10-3-4
836.5             10-3-4
                  3-2-4-5,
1192.7(c)         3-2-4-15,
                  5-5-14
12071             3-3-3
30510             10-14-4
30515             10-14-4
                  
 
Public Resources Code
Section Code Section
Public Resources Code
Section                                                    Code Section
                                                           4-7-9,
21000 et seq.                                              6-3-2,
                                                           6-4-3
Division 12.1, 14500 et seq.                               5-6-9
Division 30                                                8-2-1
Division 30, 40000 through 49654                           8-8-1
40000 et seq.                                              8-2-67
Division 30, Part 1, Chapter 1, 40000 et seq.              8-2-68
Division 30, Part 3, Chapter 13.1 (commencing with §42652)8-2-1
40141                                                      8-2-1
40181                                                      8-2-1
40195.1                                                    8-2-1
41500 and 41802                                            8-2-1
41780                                                      8-2-54
41821                                                      8-2-54
 
Public Utilities Code
Section Code Section
Public Utilities Code
Section                   Code Section
230                       6-1-4,
                          6-8-1
Division 5, 10001 et seq. 9-5-32
10010                     9-5-32
10010.1                   9-5-32
21411                     3-17-11
                          
 
Revenue and Taxation Code
Section Code Section
Revenue and Taxation Code
Section                                              Code Section
401                                                  3-14-13
6067                                                 3-14-11,
                                                     3-17-10
6203                                                 3-14-10,
                                                     3-17-9
6366                                                 3-14-12,
                                                     3-17-11
6366.1                                               3-14-12,
                                                     3-17-11
6701                                                 3-14-10,
                                                     3-17-9
6702                                                 3-14-10
6702 (except last sentence thereof)                  3-17-9
6711                                                 3-14-10,
                                                     3-17-9
6715                                                 3-14-10,
                                                     3-17-9
6737                                                 3-14-10,
                                                     3-17-9
6797                                                 3-14-10,
                                                     3-17-9
6828                                                 3-14-10,
                                                     3-17-9
7202                                                 3-14-12
7202(i)(7)                                           3-14-12
7202(i)(8)                                           3-14-12
23701a                                               3-5-4-3,
                                                     3-5-4-6
23701b                                               3-5-4-3,
                                                     3-5-4-6
23701d                                               3-5-4-3,
                                                     3-5-4-6
23701e                                               3-5-4-3,
                                                     3-5-4-6
23701f                                               3-5-4-3,
                                                     3-5-4-6
23701g                                               3-5-4-3
237011                                               3-5-4-3
Division 1, Part 9, Chapter 5 (commencing with 5096) 1-10-5
Part 1 of Division 2                                 3-14-9,
                                                     3-14-10
Part 1 (commencing with 6001) of Division 2          3-17-8
                                                     3-14-4,
                                                     3-14-9,
Part 1.5 of Division 2                               3-14-12,
                                                     3-14-14,
                                                     3-14-15
                                                     3-17-3,
                                                     3-17-8,
Part 1.6 of Division 2                               3-17-11,
                                                     3-17-12,
                                                     3-17-13
Part 1.6 (commencing with 7251) of Division 2        3-17-3
Part 1.7 of Division 2                               3-17-12
Part 1.7 (commencing with 7285.9) of Division 2      3-17-3
Part 6.7 (commencing with 11901) of Division 2       1-10-6
Part 6.7 (commencing with 11901) of Division 2       1-10-4
Part 6.7 of Division 2                               1-10-4
                                                     
 
 
Streets and Highways Code
Section                                       Code Section
941                                           6-7-22
1020                                          6-10-44
Chapter 2 (commencing with 940) of Division 2 6-7-24
Part 3 (commencing with 8300) of Division 9   6-7-24
 
 
Vehicle Code
Section                                             Code Section
Chapter 1 (commencing with § 4000) of Division 3   3-17-11
Chapter 10 (commencing with § 22650) of Division 1111-6-3
Division 3.5 (commencing with § 9840)              3-17-11
22660                                               11-6-1
                                                    
 
 
Water Code
Section       Code Section
13000 et seq. 9-12-26
13263         9-6-2
 
Welfare and Institutions Code
Section                         Code Section
Division 4.5, 4500 through 4885 5-7-2
12304                           5-5-2
 
REFERENCES TO ORDINANCES
Ord. Date Passed/Eff. Code Section
Ord. Date Passed/Eff.                                    Code Section
                                                         9-1-4,
3    2-20-1923                                           10-1-5,
                                                         10-1-6,
                                                         11-5-1
                                                         11-1-1,
                                                         11-1-2-1—
                                                         11-1-2-6,
                                                         11-1-3—
                                                         11-1-8,
15   8-8-1927                                            11-2-1,
                                                         11-2-3—
                                                         11-2-10,
                                                         11-3-2,
                                                         11-3-4,
                                                         11-4-1—
                                                         11-4-3
37   4-1-1935                                            10-1-2
44   5-10-1937                                           10-1-7
50   1-6-1941                                            11-5-1
90   12-8-1955                                           9-1-3
160  5-8-1972                                            8-4-1—
                                                         8-4-4
                                                         11-6-1—
167  4-30-1973                                           11-6-9,
                                                         11-6-11
174  1-21-1974                                           11-5-1
180  11- -1974                                           9-1-1
222  1-22-1981                                           10-1-8
226  3-26-1981                                           10-4-1—
                                                         10-4-7
225  4-23-1981                                           10-1-3
237  9-9-1982                                            8-5-1—
                                                         8-5-7
253  10-28-1982                                          11-3-3,
                                                         11-3-6
262  1-26-1984                                           11-3-3
                                                         10-1-1,
283  4-11-1985                                           10-5-1—
                                                         10-5-7
                                                         3-1-1—
                                                         3-1-3,
                                                         3-1-5—
                                                         3-1-9,
                                                         3-1-11—
                                                         3-1-14,
                                                         3-1-16—
                                                         3-1-26,
                                                         3-1-28—
                                                         3-1-30,
                                                         3-2-1,
                                                         3-2-2,
                                                         3-3-1—
                                                         3-3-3,
                                                         3-4-1—
                                                         3-4-52,
                                                         3-5-1—
284  6-13-1985                                           3-5-3,
                                                         3-5-4-1—
                                                         3-5-4-6,
                                                         3-5-5—
                                                         3-5-7,
                                                         3-6-1—
                                                         3-6-16,
                                                         3-7-1—
                                                         3-7-6,
                                                         3-8-1—
                                                         3-8-6,
                                                         3-9-1—
                                                         3-9-16,
                                                         3-10-1—
                                                         3-10-13,
                                                         3-12-1—
                                                         3-12-11,
                                                         3-13-1—
                                                         3-13-3
287  9-12-1985                                           9-9-1—
                                                         9-9-10
288  9-12-1985, eff. 10-12-1985                          1-16-1
293  1-23-1986                                           9-2-1—
                                                         9-2-18
                                                         6-1-1—
                                                         6-1-10,
                                                         6-2-1,
                                                         6-2-2,
                                                         6-3-1—
                                                         6-3-3,
                                                         6-4-1—
                                                         6-4-3,
                                                         6-5-1—
                                                         6-5-9,
                                                         6-6-1—
                                                         6-6-13,
                                                         6-7-1—
295  2-4-1986                                            6-7-25,
                                                         6-8-1—
                                                         6-8-12,
                                                         6-9-1—
                                                         6-9-7,
                                                         6-10-1—
                                                         6-10-46,
                                                         6-11-1—
                                                         6-11-4,
                                                         6-12-1—
                                                         6-12-8,
                                                         6-13-1—
                                                         6-13-10,
                                                         6-14-1—
                                                         6-14-6
298  4-1-1986                                            11-6-6
299  5-6-1986                                            9-9-4
314  12-16-1986                                          10-1-3
315  1-20-1987                                           11-3-7
311  2-17-1987                                           10-1-4
316  2-17-1987                                           1-12-1—
                                                         1-12-9
318  4-7-1987                                            8-3-1—
                                                         8-3-8
                                                         1-1-1—
                                                         1-1-4,
                                                         1-5-2—
                                                         1-5-9,
                                                         1-6-1—
                                                         1-6-8,
                                                         1-6-9-1—
                                                         1-6-9-3,
331  5-19-1987                                           1-6-10,
                                                         1-7-1,
                                                         1-7-2,
                                                         1-7-4,
                                                         1-8-1,
                                                         1-10-1—
                                                         1-10-6,
                                                         1-11-1—
                                                         1-11-10
                                                         4-3-1—
335  6-2-1987                                            4-3-3,
                                                         4-3-5,
                                                         4-3-6
                                                         4-4-1,
338  7-7-1987                                            4-4-2,
                                                         4-4-4—
                                                         4-4-7
342  12-15-1987                                          1-13-1—
                                                         1-13-11
                                                         3-14-1—
                                                         3-14-16,
343  12-15-1987                                          3-15-1,
                                                         3-15-2,
                                                         3-15-4—
                                                         3-15-14
343  12-15-1987; amd. per correspondence dated 11-2-2004 3-15-3
356  11-15-1988                                          3-12-9
357  12-20-1988                                          11-3-5
368  11-7-1989                                           4-4-3
370  2-6-1990                                            11-2-11—
                                                         11-2-13
393  6-4-1990                                            9-4-2
387  11-20-1990                                          6-6-5,
                                                         6-8-8
392  6-4-1991                                            4-4-3
394  6-18-1991                                           9-10-1—
                                                         9-10-11
                                                         3-1-10,
                                                         3-1-20,
405  6-2-1992                                            3-1-23,
                                                         3-1-27,
                                                         3-2-2—
                                                         3-2-6
409  9-1-1992                                            1-6-5
413  1-5-1993                                            9-11-1—
                                                         9-11-10
419  6-1-1993                                            3-2-5
420  6-1-1993                                            11-3-8
421  7-20-1993                                           8-7-1—
                                                         8-7-5
424  11-16-1993                                          11-2-2
429  2-15-1994                                           3-2-8
430  2-15-1994                                           3-2-3
431  3-1-1994                                            3-12-9
436  8-16-1994                                           10-1-3
438  10-18-1994                                          1-7-5
                                                         8-6-1-1,
                                                         8-6-1-2,
                                                         8-6-2-1—
                                                         8-6-2-3,
439  1-17-1995                                           8-6-3-1,
                                                         8-6-3-2,
                                                         8-6-4-1—
                                                         8-6-4-7,
                                                         8-6-5-1—
                                                         8-6-5-7
440  3-7-1995                                            1-5-1
441  3-21-1995                                           1-7-3
442  6-6-1995                                            10-7-1—
                                                         10-7-11
444  6-20-1995                                           11-3-3
                                                         4-5-1-1—
                                                         4-5-1-4,
                                                         4-5-2,
                                                         4-5-3-1—
                                                         4-5-3-7,
445  8-1-1995                                            4-5-4-1—
                                                         4-5-4-4,
                                                         4-5-5-1—
                                                         4-5-5-4,
                                                         4-5-6-1—
                                                         4-5-6-3
447  11-7-1995                                           10-8-1—
                                                         10-8-4
456  6-4-1996                                            9-4-1
460  10-15-1996                                          3-12-8
                                                         1-2-1—
331  5-19-1997                                           1-2-4,
                                                         1-3-1—
                                                         1-3-3
464  5-20-1997                                           1-6-6
468  8-19-1997                                           11-3-1
469  9-2-1997                                            10-2-1—
                                                         10-2-7
470  9-16-1997                                           11-6-3,
                                                         11-6-10
474  12-16-1997                                          1-16-2
                                                         11-7-1,
480  9-1-1998                                            11-7-1-1—
                                                         11-7-1-4
482  9-1-1998                                            1-15-1,
                                                         1-15-2
485  10-20-1998                                          3-2-7
488  9-7-1999                                            10-1-3
493  4-18-2000                                           10-6-1—
                                                         10-6-33
494  4-18-2000                                           10-9-1—
                                                         10-9-5
495  4-18-2000                                           Title 3, Ch. 11
497  6-20-2000                                           9-6-1—
                                                         9-6-48
500  8-1-2000                                            11-3-1
501  8-15-2000                                           9-1-2
509  12-4-2001                                           3-16-1—
                                                         3-16-12
510  2-5-2002                                            4-3-4
511  6-18-2002                                           3-2-5
515  4-20-2004                                           9-3-11
525  4-1-2005                                            6-9-2
530  6-21-2005                                           3-1-4
                                                         5-1-1—
                                                         5-1-6,
                                                         5-2-1—
                                                         5-2-5,
                                                         5-3-1—
                                                         5-3-15,
                                                         5-3-17,
                                                         5-4-1,
                                                         5-4-1-1,
                                                         5-4-2—
                                                         5-4-5,
533  8-16-2005                                           5-4-5-1,
                                                         5-4-6—
                                                         5-4-8,
                                                         5-5-1,
                                                         5-5-2,
                                                         5-5-3-1,
                                                         5-5-4,
                                                         5-5-5,
                                                         5-5-7—
                                                         5-5-9,
                                                         5-7-1,
                                                         5-7-2
                                                         5-6-1—
                                                         5-6-4,
553  8-16-2005                                           5-6-6—
                                                         5-6-11,
                                                         5-6-11-1,
                                                         5-6-11-2
535  9-6-2005                                            11-3-1
536  9-20-2005                                           1-7-2
537  1-17-2006                                           10-10-1—
                                                         10-10-34
539  4-4-2006                                            10-11-1—
                                                         10-11-36
                                                         10-3-1,
                                                         10-3-4—
540  4-18-2006                                           10-3-21,
                                                         10-3-23—
                                                         10-3-51,
                                                         10-3-53
                                                         5-2-3,
541  4-18-2006                                           5-5-2,
                                                         5-5-11
543  5-24-2006                                           10-12-1—
                                                         10-12-3
544  5-24-2006                                           1-9-1,
                                                         1-9-2
549  8-15-2006                                           5-3-16
550  8-15-2006                                           1-18-1—
                                                         1-18-13
551  8-15-2006                                           1-17-1—
                                                         1-17-18
552  8-15-2006                                           1-4-1—
                                                         1-4-5
553  8-15-2006                                           1-19-1—
                                                         1-19-6
556  12-19-2006                                          5-7-2
560  7-3-2007                                            10-13-1—
                                                         10-13-15
561  11-20-2007                                          2-1-1—
                                                         2-1-5
                                                         2-2-1,
562  11-20-2007                                          2-2-3—
                                                         2-2-6
565  3-18-2008                                           5-5-3
566  4-1-2008                                            1-14-1
568  5-6-2008                                            1-20-1—
                                                         1-20-25
572  5-20-2008                                           8-1-1—
                                                         8-1-6
571  6-3-2008                                            1-5-10—
                                                         1-5-14
575  8-5-2008                                            8-1-5
                                                         9-5-1—
                                                         9-5-29,
576  12-16-2008                                          9-5-31—
                                                         9-5-70,
                                                         9-5-73
578  1-20-2009                                           4-6-1—
                                                         4-6-43
579  2-17-2009                                           2-1-2,
                                                         2-2-3
583  8-4-2009                                            9-5-27,
                                                         9-5-30
584  8-4-2009                                            9-6-27
585  2-2-2010                                            2-3-1—
                                                         2-3-6
587  6-15-2010                                           5-3-11
589  6-15-2010                                           5-2-3,
                                                         5-5-10
590  7-5-2011                                            5-6-5
591  8-2-2011                                            5-5-8
592  8-2-2011                                            5-6-9,
                                                         5-6-10
594  8-16-2011                                           5-3-4,
                                                         5-3-6
                                                         4-2-1—
                                                         4-2-7,
                                                         4-2-9-1—
                                                         4-2-9-3,
596  10-18-2011                                          4-2-10,
                                                         4-2-11-1,
                                                         4-2-11-2,
                                                         4-2-12—
                                                         4-2-19
600  3-19-2013                                           5-4-2
601  3-19-2013                                           5-6-2
602  3-19-2013                                           5-3-15,
                                                         5-5-12
604  4-16-2013                                           10-3-2—
                                                         10-3-53
605  6-4-2013                                            5-3-16,
                                                         5-3-16-1
607  8-20-2013                                           5-5-6
                                                         1-18-11,
                                                         4-2-9-2,
610  2-18-2014                                           4-6-3,
                                                         5-3-16,
                                                         5-4-7,
                                                         5-5-8
                                                         7-4-1—
611  3-4-2014                                            7-4-13,
                                                         7-4-15—
                                                         7-4-17
                                                         4-2-3,
                                                         4-2-8,
                                                         4-2-9-1—
                                                         4-2-9-3,
612  4-1-2014                                            4-2-10,
                                                         4-2-11-1,
                                                         4-2-11-2,
                                                         4-2-12—
                                                         4-2-19
613  5-20-2014                                           4-7-1—
                                                         4-7-14
                                                         7-1-1—
                                                         7-1-7,
                                                         7-2-1—
617  6-3-2014                                            7-2-5,
                                                         7-4-10,
                                                         7-4-14,
                                                         7-5-1
618  6-3-2014                                            Title 9, Ch. 7
                                                         5-2-6,
                                                         5-4-9-1,
619  6-17-2014                                           5-4-9-2,
                                                         5-6-1,
                                                         5-6-9,
                                                         5-7-2
621  1-20-2015                                           8-8-1—
                                                         8-8-4
                                                         5-2-3,
622  1-20-2015                                           5-2-4,
                                                         5-3-15,
                                                         5-5-13
623  5-5-2015                                            9-5-71,
                                                         9-5-72
624  10-20-2015                                          4-8-1—
                                                         4-8-4
                                                         9-12-1,
                                                         9-12-2,
625  12-1-2015                                           9-12-4,
                                                         9-12-5,
                                                         9-12-12—
                                                         9-12-28
626  1-19-2016                                           5-2-3,
                                                         5-7-2
                                                         5-6-12-1—
627  4-5-2016                                            5-6-12-6,
                                                         5-7-2
                                                         5-5-5,
629  2-21-2017                                           9-12-3,
                                                         9-12-6—
                                                         9-12-11
630  6-6-2017                                            8-9-1—
                                                         8-9-9
631  9-19-2017                                           4-9-1—
                                                         4-9-6
                                                         5-2-3,
632  12-19-2017                                          5-3-15,
                                                         5-5-14,
                                                         5-5-15
633  2-20-2018                                           2-4-1—
                                                         2-4-6
635  10-2-2018                                           4-2-8
636  12-4-2018                                           9-8-1—
                                                         9-8-4
637  3-19-2019                                           2-2-2
640  9-3-2019                                            2-4-2
A-33 2-1-2020                                            9-5-32
                                                         4-1-1—
                                                         4-1-3,
642  2-18-2020                                           4-1-3-1,
                                                         4-1-3-2,
                                                         4-1-4—
                                                         4-1-12
647  4-5-2022                                            10-14-1—
                                                         10-14-9
648  4-19-2022                                           8-2-1—
                                                         8-2-75
                                                         5-2-2,
649  6-21-2022                                           5-3-15,
                                                         5-5-6,
                                                         5-7-2
650  4-18-2023                                           4-1-1—
                                                         4-1-12
651  5-16-2023                                           1-4-3,
                                                         7-4-16
652  12-19-2023                                          1-7-6,
                                                         1-7-7
653  4-16-2024                                           9-3-1,
                                                         9-3-2
654  5-21-2024                                           7-4-16
655  6-4-2024                                            2-2-2
656  8-20-2024                                           3-2-4—
                                                         3-2-4-19
657  - -                                                 3-17-1—
                                                         3-17-20
658  1-21-2025                                           4-2-10
660  6-9-2025                                            Adopting Ordinance
                                                         5-3-15,
                                                         5-3-16,
661  10-21-2025                                          5-4-5,
                                                         5-6-7,
                                                         5-7-2
662  1-6-2026                                            1-21-1 —
                                                         1-21-12
                                                        
 
