CITY OF ONTARIO, CALIFORNIA
MUNICIPAL CODE
Municipal Code contains 2026 S-31 Supplement, current through
Ordinance 3311, passed 8-19-2025
 
Published by:
American Legal Publishing
525 Vine Street * Suite 310 * Cincinnati, Ohio 45202
1-800-445-5588 * www.amlegal.com
ADOPTING ORDINANCE
ORDINANCE NO. 2716
AN ORDINANCE ENACTING A CODE OF ORDINANCES FOR THE CITY OF ONTARIO, CALIFORNIA,
REVISING, AMENDING, RESTATING, CODIFYING AND COMPILING CERTAIN EXISTING GENERAL
ORDINANCES OF THE CITY DEALING WITH SUBJECTS EMBRACED IN SUCH CODE OF
ORDINANCES
   WHEREAS, the Acts of the Legislature of the State of California empower and
authorize the political subdivision to revise, amend, restate, codify and
compile any existing ordinances and all new ordinances not heretofore adopted
or published and to incorporate such ordinances into one ordinance in book
form; and
   WHEREAS, the last major revision and update of the Ontario Municipal Code
(OMC) occurred on September 5, 1968; and
   WHEREAS, a task force of City staff members undertook to update and revise
the OMC in March 1997; and
   WHEREAS, said update and revision has been the subject of thorough legal
review;
   NOW THEREFORE, be it ordained by the legislative authority of the City of
Ontario:
Section 1. The general ordinances of the City of Ontario as revised, amended,
restated, codified and compiled in book form are hereby adopted as and shall
constitute the Ontario Municipal Code.
Section 2. The Ontario Municipal Code shall incorporate by reference the
following secondary codes save and except such portions thereof as are deleted,
modified or amended by the provisions of the Ontario Municipal Code:
   The California Building Code, current edition;
   The California Electrical Code, current edition;
   The California Fire Code, current edition;
   The California Mechanical Code, current edition;
   The California Plumbing Code, current edition;
   The California State Historic Building Code, current edition
   The Ontario Subdivision Regulations, current edition
   The San Bernardino County Code, current edition;
   The Uniform Administrative Code, current edition;
   The Uniform Code for the Abatement of Dangerous Buildings, current edition;
   The Uniform Housing Code, current edition;
   The Uniform Swimming Pool Code, current edition; and
Prescribing certain penalties for the violation of the provisions thereof and
recalling certain ordinances as specified therein.
Section 3. Repeals.
   All prior ordinances pertaining to the subjects treated in such Ontario
Municipal Code shall be deemed repealed from and after the effective date of
this ordinance except as they are included and re-ordained in whole or in part
in such Code; provided, such repeal shall not affect any offense committed or
penalty incurred, or any right established prior to the effective date of this
ordinance.
Section 4. Exceptions to repeals.
   No rights, obligations, duties, privileges, or encumbrances arising from any
ordinance which is repealed by this ordinance relating to any of the following
matters shall be affected by the repealing provisions of this ordinance or of
the Ontario Municipal Code:
   (a)   The public debt or the public credit;
   (b)   The establishment, naming, width, grade, construction, improvement, or
vacation of a public street, sidewalk, alley, or other public property or
facility;
   (c)   The acquisition or disposition of any interest in real or personal
property;
   (d)   The annexation of territory;
   (e)   Any contract to which the City of Ontario is a party or any contract
inuring to the City's benefit;
   (f)   A municipal election;
   (g)   Any appropriation or expenditure of public funds;
   (h)   The levy or imposition of property taxes or fixing the tax rate;
   (i)   The levy of a special benefit assessment or the creation of a lien or
debt against the owner of any property or said property; or
   (j)   The grant of any franchise, license, or right by the City, which
franchise, license, grant, or power is legally in force and effect upon the
effective date of this ordinance. Every such franchise, license, grant, or
power shall expire as originally provided;
   (k)   Any other ordinance of a temporary or special nature, or pertaining to
subjects not contained in or covered by the Code.
Section 5. Savings provisions.
   The repealing provisions of this ordinance or of the Ontario Municipal Code
shall not affect or impair any act done or right vested or approved, or any
proceeding suit, or prosecution had or commenced in any cause before such
repeal shall take effect; but every such act done, or right vested or accrued,
or proceeding, suit, or prosecution had or commenced shall remain in full force
and effect to all intents and purposes as if the applicable provisions of the
ordinance, or part thereof, so repealed had remained in force and effect. No
offense committed and no liability, penalty, or forfeiture, either civilly or
criminally incurred prior to the time when any such ordinance, or part thereof,
shall be repealed or altered by the Code, shall be discharged or affected by
such repeal or alteration; but prosecutions and suits for such offenses,
liabilities, penalties, or forfeitures shall be instituted and proceeded with
in all respects as if such prior ordinance, or part thereof, had not been
repealed or altered.
Section 6. Violation of Code.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to violate any provisions or fail to
comply with any requirement of the Ontario Municipal Code. Any person violating
any of the provisions or failing to comply with any of the mandatory
requirements of the Code shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. Any person convicted
of a misdemeanor under the provisions of the Code shall be punishable by a fine
which is fixed from time to time by resolution of the City Council, or by the
laws of the State of California, or by imprisonment in the County Jail as
appropriate and in place through municipal law and/or statute at the time of
the violation, or by both such fine and imprisonment. Each such person shall be
guilty of a separate offense for each and every day during any portion of which
any violation of any provision of the Code is committed, continued, or
permitted by such person and shall be punishable accordingly.
   In addition to the penalties provided above, any condition caused or
permitted to exist in violation of any of the provisions of the Code shall be
deemed a public nuisance and may be, at the direction of the City Council,
summarily abated, and each day such condition continues shall be regarded as a
new and separate offense.
Section 7. Presumptive Evidence.
   Such Code shall be in full force and effect as provided in Section 6, and
such Code shall be presumptive evidence in all courts and places of the
ordinance and all provisions, sections, penalties and regulations therein
contained as of the date of passage, and that the same is properly signed,
attested, recorded, and approved and that any public hearings and notices
thereof as required by law have been given.
Section 8. Effective date.
   Such Ontario Municipal Code and all Codes as referenced and adopted therein
shall remain on file in the Office of the City Clerk. The provisions of this
ordinance shall take effect thirty (30) days from the date of adoption.
Section 9. Publications.
   The Mayor shall sign this Ordinance and the City Clerk shall attest to the
same, and the City Clerk shall cause the same to be published within fifteen
(15) days after its passage, at least once in a newspaper of general
circulation, published and circulated in the City of Ontario.
   APPROVED AND ADOPTED this 18th day of July, 2000.
AYES:      Council Member Dubois, King, Leon, Wapner; Mayor Ovitt
NOES:      None
ABSTAIN:   None
ABSENT:   None
    /s/ Gary C Ovitt
   Mayor of the City of Ontario
ATTEST:
/s/ Mary E. Wirtes, MMC
City Clerk
VOLUME I
TITLE 1. GENERAL PROVISIONS
      Chapter
         
1.   ADOPTION OF CODE
         
2.   PENALTY PROVISIONS
         
3.   RULES OF CONSTRUCTION
         
4.   APPEALS
         
5.   ADMINISTRATIVE CITATIONS
CHAPTER 1: ADOPTION OF CODE
   
1-1.01   Title: Reference to Code
   
1-1.02   Authority
   
1-1.03   Effective date
   
1-1.04   Effect of Code on past actions and obligations
   
1-1.05   Reference to specific ordinances
   
1-1.06   Validity of Code
   
1-1.07   Repeal of ordinances
   
1-1.08   Maintenance of Code
   
1-1.09   Administrative Code
Sec. 1-1.01. Title: Reference to Code.
   This Code shall be known as the “Ontario Municipal Code.” It shall be
sufficient to refer to this Code as the Ontario Municipal Code in any
prosecution for the violation of any provision thereof. It shall also be
sufficient to designate any ordinance adding to, amending, or repealing this
Code, or portions thereof, as an addition or amendment to, or a repeal of, the
Ontario Municipal Code, or a portion thereof.
Sec. 1-1.02. Authority.
   Except as otherwise herein or hereafter provided, this Code consists of all
the regulatory, penal, and administrative laws of general application of the
City of Ontario, codified pursuant to the authority contained in Article 2 of
Chapter 1 of Part 1 of Division 1 of Title 5 of the Government Code of the
State of California (commencing with Cal. Gov't Code § 50020).
Sec. 1-1.03. Effective date.
   This Code shall take effect upon the effective date of the ordinance
adopting this Code by reference.
Sec. 1-1.04. Effect of Code on past actions and obligations.
   Neither the adoption of this Code nor the repeal hereby of any ordinance of
the City shall in any manner affect the prosecution for violations of
ordinances, which violations were committed prior to the effective date of this
Code, nor be construed as a waiver of any license or penalty at said effective
date due and unpaid under such ordinances, nor be construed as affecting any of
the provisions of such ordinances relating to the collection of any such
license or penalty or the penal provisions applicable to any violation thereof,
nor to affect the validity of any bond or cash deposit in lieu thereof required
to be posted, filed, or deposited pursuant to any ordinance, and all vested
rights and obligations thereunder appertaining shall continue in full force and
effect.
Sec. 1-1.05. Reference to specific ordinances.
   The provisions of this code shall not in any manner affect deposits or other
matters of record which refer to, or are otherwise connected with, ordinances
which are therein specifically designated by number or otherwise and which are
included within this Code, but such reference shall be construed to apply to
the corresponding provisions contained within this Code.
Sec. 1-1.06. Validity of Code.
   If any section, subsection, sentence, clause or phrase of this Code is for
any reason held to be unconstitutional, such decision shall not affect the
validity of the remaining portions of this Code. The Council hereby declares
that it would have passed this Code and each section, subsection, sentence,
clause, and phrase thereof irrespective of the fact that any one or more
sections, subsections, sentences, clauses, or phrases be declared
unconstitutional.
Sec. 1-1.07. Repeal of ordinances.
   All ordinances of the City in force upon the effective date of this Code are
hereby repealed except as follows:
   (a)   Ordinances relating to matters of a special or temporary nature
(referred to in
Table 2 of the Appendix of this Code); and
   (b)   Ordinances which have been suspended.
Sec. 1-1.08. Maintenance of Code.
   Not less than two (2) copies of this Code shall be filed for use and
examination by the public in the office of the City Clerk. Additional copies of
the Code shall be distributed to the departments and divisions of the City as
shall be prescribed by the City Manager.
   Upon the adoption of any amendment or addition to this Code, or upon the
repeal of any of its provisions, the City Clerk shall certify thereto and shall
make an appropriate notation in the official volumes of this Code of the taking
of such action, noting thereon the number and date of the ordinance pursuant to
which such action is taken.
   Duly certified copies of each ordinance making changes in the Code shall be
filed in the office of the City Clerk in books for such purpose, duly indexed
for ready reference.
   At least quarterly the City Clerk shall cause the loose leaf pages of this
Code in which changes have been made to be reproduced, including the notation
as to the ordinance number and date pursuant to which such change is adopted,
and distributed in order that the loose leaf copies of the Code, prepared for
the use and convenience of the officers and employees of the City and the
general public, may be brought up to date.
Sec. 1-1.09. Administrative Code.
   The City Manager is hereby authorized and directed to establish and
implement an Administrative Code. The Administrative Code shall contain, among
other desirable provisions, administrative policies and procedures for the
implementation and administration of this Code.
CHAPTER 2: PENALTY PROVISIONS
   
1-2.01   Punishment for violation
   
1-2.02   Prohibited acts
   
1-2.03   Imposition of penalties
   
1-2.04   Determination of punishment
   
1-2.05   Place of confinement
   
1-2.06   Fees, charges, and taxes made a civil debt
   
1-2.07   Late charges on delinquent accounts receivable
   
1-2.08   Charges for checks and credit cards unpaid
   
1-2.09   Collection, lien
   
1-2.10   Civil penalties
Sec. 1-2.01. Punishment for violation.
   (a)   It shall be unlawful for any person to violate any provision or to
fail to comply with any of the requirements or provisions of this Code
heretofore or hereafter enacted or the provisions of any Code adopted by
reference by this Code, or any condition of any permit, license, or other
entitlement issued pursuant to this Code. Any person violating any such
provision or failing to comply with any of the mandatory requirement of this
Code, or any Code adopted by reference by this Code, shall be guilty of a
misdemeanor, unless the citing official or the prosecuting attorney determines
that it would in the interests of justice to prosecute the offense as an
infraction. All violations or failures to comply that are specifically declared
to be infractions elsewhere in this Code, or any Code adopted by reference by
this Code, shall be prosecuted as infractions unless the citing official or the
prosecuting attorney determines that it would be in the interests of justice to
prosecute the offense as a misdemeanor.
   (b)   Any person convicted of an infraction under the provisions of this
Code, or any Code adopted by reference by this Code, shall be punished by:
      (1)   A fine not exceeding One Hundred Dollars ($100.00) for a first
violation;
      (2)   A fine not exceeding Two Hundred Dollars ($200.00) for a second
violation of the same provision within one (1) year; and
      (3)   A fine not exceeding Five Hundred Dollars ($500.00) for each
additional violation of the same provision within one (1) year.
   (c)   Any person convicted of a misdemeanor shall be punished by a fine of
not more than One Thousand Dollars ($1,000.00), or by imprisonment in the
County jail for a period not exceeding six (6) months, or by both such fine and
imprisonment.
   (d)   Each such person shall be guilty of a separate offense for each and
every day during any portion of which any violation of or failure to comply
with any provision of this Code, or the provisions of any Code adopted by
reference by this Code, is committed, continued, or permitted by such person
and shall be punishable accordingly.
   (e)   In addition to the penalties provided by this section, or elsewhere in
this Code, or in any Code adopted by reference by this Code, any condition
caused or permitted to exist in violation of any of the provisions of this
Code, or the provisions of any Code adopted by reference by this Code, shall be
deemed a public nuisance and may be abated by the City, and each day such
condition continues shall be regarded as a new and separate offense.
   (f)   A prevailing party in any judicial action, administrative proceeding,
or special proceeding to abate, or cause the abatement of, a violation of this
code or any public nuisance, or in any appeal or other judicial action arising
therefrom, is entitled to recover reasonable attorneys' fees. Attorney's fees
are not recoverable by any party as a prevailing party unless the City elects
in writing to seek recovery of the city's attorney's fees at the initiation of
that individual action or proceeding. Failure to make such an election
precludes any entitlement to, or award of, attorneys' fees in favor of any
party. Unpaid attorney's fees shall constitute a debt that is collectible in
any manner allowed by law.
   (g)   Any person who violates any provision or fails to comply with any
requirement or provision of this Code heretofore or hereafter enacted or any
provision of any Code adopted by reference by this Code shall be liable for a
civil penalty not to exceed One Thousand Dollars ($1,000.00) for each
violation. Where the conduct constituting a violation is of a continuing
nature, each day of such conduct is a separate and distinct violation. In
determining the amount of the civil penalty, the court shall consider all
relevant circumstances, including, but not limited to, the extent of the harm
caused by the conduct constituting a violation, the nature and persistence of
such conduct the length of time over which the conduct occurred, the assets,
liabilities and net worth of the person, whether corporate or individual, and
any corrective action taken by the defendant. The civil penalty prescribed by
this subsection shall be assessed and recovered and a civil action brought by
the City Attorney in any court of competent jurisdiction. The civil penalty
prescribed by this section may be sought in addition to injunctive relief,
specific performance or any other remedy; provided, however, that a civil
penalty shall not be sought for any violation for which a criminal prosecution
has been commenced.
(§ 1, Ord. 2094, eff. August 14, 1980, as amended by § 1, Ord. 2274, eff. May
31, 1984, § 1, Ord. 2468, eff. July 5, 1990, § 1, Ord. 2469, eff. July 5, 1990,
§ 1, Ord. 2843, eff. November 19, 2006, § 2, Ord. 3230, eff. January 19, 2023,
§ 2, Ord. 3311, eff. September 18, 2025)
Sec. 1-2.02. Prohibited acts.
   Wherever in this Code any act or omission is made unlawful, it shall include
causing, permitting, aiding, abetting, suffering, or concealing the fact of
such act or omission.
Sec. 1-2.03. Imposition of penalties.
   The provisions of this Code which declare certain crimes to be punishable as
therein mentioned devolve a duty upon the court authorized to pass sentence to
determine and impose the punishment described.
Sec. 1-2.04. Determination of punishment.
   Wherever in this Code the punishment for a crime is left undetermined
between certain limits, the punishment to be inflicted in a particular case
shall be determined by the court authorized to pass sentence, within such
limits as may be prescribed by this Code.
Sec. 1-2.05. Place of confinement.
   Every person found guilty of violating any of the provisions of this Code
and sentenced to imprisonment shall be imprisoned in the County Jail.
Sec. 1-2.06. Fees, charges, and taxes made a civil debt.
   The amount of any fee, service charge, utility charge, license, or tax of
any nature whatsoever imposed by any provision of the Municipal Code shall be
deemed a civil debt owing to the City. The City may assign any debt older than
sixty (60) days to a collection agency. Any fees or interest charged by the
collection agency will be added to the debt and become part of the total due.
An action may be commenced in the name of the City in any court of competent
jurisdiction for the collection of the amount of any such delinquent or unpaid
fee, service charge, utility charge, license, or tax, together with any
penalties applicable thereto as prescribed by this Code. The remedy prescribed
by this section shall be accumulative, and the use of an action to collect such
an amount as a debt by civil action shall not bar the use of any other remedy
provided by this Code or by law for the purposes of enforcing provisions
thereof.
(Amended by § 3, Ord. 2785, eff. November 16, 2003)
Sec. 1-2.07. Late charges on delinquent accounts receivable.
   (a)   Any fee, service charge, or other charge of any nature whatsoever,
imposed by any provision of the Municipal Code, which is not paid by the date
the obligation becomes past due shall be deemed a delinquent account
receivable. Any person obligated to pay a delinquent account receivable to the
City shall also pay, as a late charge, a sum equal to ten percent (10%) of the
amount of the delinquent account receivable for the first month delinquent, and
said late charge may be collected in the manner provided in §
1-2.06 of the Municipal Code. In addition to the late charge, the City will
charge a penalty of one-half of one percent (0.5%) per month on all obligations
older than thirty (30) days from the past due date. This is in accordance with
Cal. Gov’t Code § 54348.
   (b)   Any utility charge imposed by any provision of the Municipal Code,
which is not paid by the date the obligation becomes past due, shall be deemed
a delinquent account receivable. Any person obligated to pay a delinquent
account receivable to the City shall also pay, as a late charge, a sum equal to
ten percent (10%) of the amount of the delinquent account receivable for the
first month delinquent, and said late charge may be collected in the manner
provided in §
1-2.06 of the Municipal Code. In addition to the late charge, the City will
charge a penalty of one and one-half of one percent (1.5%) per month on all
obligations older than thirty (30) days from the past due date. This is in
accordance with Cal. Health and Safety Code § 5473.10.
   (c)   Nothing contained in this section shall limit, restrict or otherwise
affect the imposition of greater late charges, interest, penalties or other
charges for late payments as provided for by other sections of the Municipal
Code, or by the laws of the State of California, it being the purpose of this
section to establish a minimum late charge.
(§ 1, Ord. 2461, eff. January 18, 1990; as amended by § 3, Ord. 2785, eff.
November 16, 2003)
Sec. 1-2.08. Charges for checks and credit cards unpaid.
   (a)   Any check presented as payment that is returned unpaid by any
financial institution is subject to a service fee in the amount set forth in
the current Citywide Fee Schedule.
   (b)   Any credit card payment that is stopped by the card user is subject to
a services fee in the amount set forth in the current Citywide Fee Schedule.
(§ 4, Ord. 2785, eff. November 16, 2003, as amended by § 2, Ord. 3211, eff.
July 1, 2022)
Sec. 1-2.09. Collection, lien.
   Any authorized utility fees which remain unpaid for a period of six (6) or
more months after the date upon which they were billed may be collected
thereafter by the City as provided as follows:
   (a)   The City Council shall cause a report of delinquent utility fees to be
prepared periodically. The City Council shall fix a time, date and place for
hearing the report and any objections or protests thereto;
   (b)   The City Council shall cause notice of the hearing to be mailed to
property owners listed on the report not less than fourteen (14) calendar days
prior to the date of the hearing;
   (c)   At the hearing the City Council shall hear any objections or protests
of property owners liable to be assessed for delinquent fees. The City Council
may make such revisions or corrections to the report as it deems just, after
which, by resolution, the report shall be confirmed; and
   (d)   The delinquent fees set forth in the report as confirmed shall
constitute special assessments against the respective parcels of land and are a
lien on the property for the amount of such delinquent fees plus late charges
and cost of lien. A certified copy of the confirmed report shall be filed with
the City Clerk, or auditor appointed by the City Council, for the amount of the
respective assessments against the respective parcels of land as they appear on
the current assessment role. The lien created attaches upon recordation, in the
office of the San Bernardino County Recorder, of a certified copy of the
resolution of confirmation. The assessment may be collected at the same time
and in the same manner as ordinary City ad valorem property taxes are collected
and shall be subject to the same penalties and the same procedure and sale in
case of delinquency as provided for such taxes. All laws applicable to the
levy, collection and enforcement of City ad valorem property taxes shall be
applicable to such assessment.
(§ 4, Ord. 2785, eff. November 16, 2003)
Sec. 1-2.10. Civil penalties.
   (a)   The Council finds that there is a need for alternative methods of
enforcement of the Ontario Municipal Code and applicable state codes in
addition to the penalties provided by §
1-2.01. The Council further finds that the assessment of civil penalties is a
necessary alternative method of code enforcement. The administrative assessment
of civil penalties established in this section is in addition to any other
remedies established by law which may be pursued to address Municipal Code or
state law violations.
   (b)   Civil penalties may be assessed against a responsible party for
continued violations of the Municipal Code or applicable state codes, whether
of the same section or any combination, that reflect a continuing disregard for
the requirements of such laws. The Code Enforcement Director or his or her
designee may issue a notice to the responsible party stating the violation,
including a description of the conditions that give rise to the violation, and
assessing a civil penalty pursuant to this section. The civil penalty shall not
begin to accrue until thirty (30) days after the date of the notice. The notice
shall state the City's intention to assess a civil penalty and the amount of
such penalty. The civil penalty may be enforced as a lien or special assessment
pursuant to subsection (e) of this section. The imposition of civil penalties
authorized under this section may be combined with other notices issued under
this Code in the discretion of the City.
   (c)   Notwithstanding subsection (b), the City may provide less than thirty
(30) days' notice to remedy a condition before imposing a civil fine if the
City determines that a specific condition of the property threatens public
health or safety and provided that notice of that determination and time for
compliance is given.
   (d)   Civil penalties may be assessed at a daily rate not to exceed One
Thousand Dollars ($1,000) per day. The actual amount assessed, up to One
Thousand Dollars ($1,000) per day, shall be set by the Code Enforcement
Director, based upon a civil penalties schedule set by the City Manager. In
determining the amount to be imposed on a daily rate, or the actual final
amount to be assessed, the Code Enforcement Director or his or her designee
shall consider the following factors:
      (1)   Duration of the violation.
      (2)   Frequency or occurrence of the violation or other similar
violations.
      (3)   Seriousness of the violation in relation to its threat or impact
upon public health, welfare, or safety.
      (4)   History of violations.
      (5)   Activity taken by the responsible party to obstruct or interfere
with correction of the violation.
      (6)   Good faith or bad faith efforts by responsible party to comply.
      (7)   The impact of the violation on the surrounding property and
community.
      (8)   The financial ability of the responsible party to have corrected
the violation in a timely fashion.
   (e)   Civil penalties, as confirmed by resolution of the City Council, shall
constitute a special assessment against the property to which it relates, and
after its recording, as thus made and confirmed, the same shall constitute a
lien on the property in the amount of such assessment. The notices of such
special assessment, and any other notice required by this section, shall be
provided to the owner by certified mail, as determined from the County
Assessor's or County Recorder's records. The assessment shall be collected at
the same time and in the same manner as ordinary city taxes are collected, and
shall be subject to the same penalties and the same procedure and sale in case
of delinquency as provided for ordinary city taxes. All laws applicable to the
levy, collection and enforcement of city taxes shall be applicable to the
special assessment. If any real property to which the cost of abatement relates
has been transferred or conveyed to a bona fide purchaser for value, or if a
lien of a bona fide encumbrance for value has been created and attaches
thereon, prior to the date on which the first installment of the taxes would
become delinquent, then the cost of abatement shall not result in a lien
against the real property but instead shall be transferred to the unsecured
roll for collection. The City may conduct a sale of vacant residential
developed property for which the payment of such assessment made pursuant to
this subdivision is delinquent. Notices or instruments relating to the
abatement proceeding or special assessment may be recorded.
   (f)   Appeals. Upon request by the owner, lessee, occupant, or person having
charge of the affected premises and if received by the Code Enforcement
Director within ten (10) days after mailing the final notice and order or
notice of violation, which includes the imposition of civil penalties to be
assessed, the City Manager or his or her designee shall hold a hearing, which
shall be open to the public. The City Manager or his or her designee shall hear
and consider objections and/or protests from any owner, lessee, occupant,
person having charge of the affected premises, or other interested persons
relative to the accrual of civil penalties. The City Manager or his or her
designee shall hear and receive all relevant evidence and testimony relative to
the violations upon which the civil penalties are based and shall consider all
of the factors listed in subsection (d) of this section. This hearing may be
continued from time to time. Upon or after the conclusion of the hearing, the
City Manager or his or her designee shall determine the amount of civil
penalties to be assessed. This decision shall be final.
   (g)   Unpaid civil penalties may be assessed against the affected premises
as specified in §
1-4.05.
   (h)   Fines and penalties collected resulting from enforcement of this
section shall be placed in the general fund and used solely for the purpose of
the code enforcement program in order to ensure and maintain the character and
well-being of the City.
(§ 1, Ord. 2905, eff. June 5, 2009, as amended by § 2, Ord. 2920, eff. May 20,
2010, § 2, Ord. 3230, eff. January 19, 2023)
CHAPTER 3: RULES OF CONSTRUCTION
   
1-3.01   Scope of chapter
   
1-3.02   Provisions construed as restatements and continuations
   
1-3.03   Tenure of officers preserved
   
1-3.04   Effect of headings
   
1-3.05   Meaning of section and subsection
   
1-3.06   References to acts or omissions within the City
   
1-3.07   Acts by deputies
   
1-3.08   Writing
   
1-3.09   References to ordinances: Application to amendments
   
1-3.10   Service of notices
   
1-3.11   Service of notices: Proof
   
1-3.12   Statute of limitations
   
1-3.13   Definitions
   
1-3.14   No mandatory duty
Sec. 1-3.01. Scope of chapter.
   Unless the provisions of this Code otherwise specifically provide, or the
context of this Code indicates to the contrary, the general provisions, rules
of construction, and definitions set forth in this chapter shall govern the
construction of this Code. The provisions of this Code and all proceedings
under it are to be construed with a view to effect its objects and to promote
justice.
Sec. 1-3.02. Provisions construed as restatements and continuations.
   The provisions of this Code insofar as they are substantially the same as
existing ordinances relating to the same subject matter, shall be construed as
restatements and continuations and not as new enactments.
Sec. 1-3.03. Tenure of officers preserved.
   All persons who, at the time this Code takes effect, hold office under any
of the ordinances repealed by this Code, which offices are continued by this
Code, shall continue to hold them according to their former tenure.
Sec. 1-3.04. Effect of headings.
   Title, chapter, article, and section headings contained in this Code shall
not be deemed to govern, limit, modify, or in any manner affect the scope,
meaning, or intent of the provisions of any title, chapter, article, or section
of this Code.
Sec. 1-3.05. Meaning of section and subsection.
   “Section” shall mean a section of this Code, unless some other source is
specifically mentioned. “Subsection” shall mean a subsection of the section in
which the term occurs, unless some other section is expressly mentioned.
Sec. 1-3.06. References to acts or omissions within the City.
   This Code shall refer only to the omission or commission of acts within the
territorial limits of the City and to that territory outside the City over
which the City has jurisdiction or control by virtue of the Constitution of the
State of California or any law, or by reason of ownership or control of
property.
Sec. 1-3.07. Acts by deputies.
   Whenever a power is granted to, or a duty is imposed upon, a public officer
or employee, the power may be exercised or the duty may be performed by a
deputy of such officer or employee or by a person otherwise duly authorized
pursuant to law or ordinance, unless this Code expressly provides otherwise.
Sec. 1-3.08. Writing.
   Writing includes any form of recorded message capable of comprehension by
ordinary visual means. Whenever any notice, report, statement, or record is
required or authorized by this Code, it shall be made in writing in the English
language unless it is expressly provided otherwise.
Sec. 1-3.09. References to ordinances: Application to amendments.
   Whenever any reference is made to an ordinance, the reference shall apply to
such ordinance of the City unless otherwise specifically provided. Whenever any
reference is made to any portion of this Code, or to any ordinances of the
City, the reference shall apply to all amendments and additions now or
hereafter made.
Sec. 1-3.10. Service of notices.
   Whenever a notice is required to be given under this Code, unless different
provisions are otherwise specifically made in the Code, such notice may be
given either by personal delivery thereof to the person to be notified or by
deposit in the United States mail in a sealed envelope, postage prepaid,
addressed to such person to be notified at his last known business or residence
address as the same appears in the public records of the City or other records
pertaining to the matter to which such notice is directed. Service by mail
shall be deemed to have been completed at the time of deposit in the post
office.
Sec. 1-3.11. Service of notices: Proof.
   Proof of giving any notice may be made by the certificate of any officer or
employee of the City or by affidavit of any person over the age of eighteen
(18) years, which affidavit shows service in conformity with this Code or other
provisions of law applicable to the subject matter concerned.
Sec. 1-3.12. Statute of limitations.
   When a limitation or period of time prescribed in any existing ordinance or
statute for acquiring a right or barring a remedy, or for any other purpose has
begun to run before this Code goes into effect, the time which has already run
shall be deemed a part of the time prescribed as such limitation.
Sec. 1-3.13. Definitions.
   For the purposes of this Code, unless otherwise apparent from the context,
certain words and phrases used in this Code are defined as follows:
   (a)   “Calendar year” shall mean from January 1 through December 31 of any
given year.
   (b)   “City” shall mean the City of Ontario.
   (c)   “Council” shall mean the City Council of the City of Ontario.
   (d)   “County” shall mean the County of San Bernardino.
   (e)   “Fiscal year” shall mean from July 1 of any given year through June 30
of the following year.
   (f)   “Gender.” The masculine gender shall include the feminine and neuter
genders.
   (g)   “May” shall be permissive.
   (h)   “Month” shall mean a calendar month unless otherwise expressed.
   (i)   “Number.” The singular number shall include the plural, and the plural
number shall include the singular.
   (j)   “Oath” shall include affirmation.
   (k)   “Office.” The use of the title of any officer, employee, office, or
ordinance shall mean such officer, employee, office, or ordinance of this City,
unless otherwise specified.
   (l)   “Official time standard.” Wherever certain hours are named in this
Code, they shall mean standard time or daylight saving time as may be in
current us in the City.
   (m)   “Owner” applied to a building or land, shall include any part owner,
joint owner, tenant, tenant in common, or joint tenant of the whole or a part
of such building or land.
   (n)   “Person” shall include any person, firm, company, corporation,
partnership, association, any public corporation, political subdivision, city
(excepting the City of Ontario), the County of San Bernardino, district in the
County of San Bernardino, the State of California or the United States of
America, or any department or agency of any thereof, unless this Code expressly
provides otherwise.
   (o)   “Personal property” shall include money, goods, chattels, things in
action, and evidences of debt.
   (p)   “Property” shall include both real and personal property.
   (q)   “Quarterly,” where used to designate a period of time, shall mean the
first three (3) calendar months of any given year or any succeeding period of
three (3) calendar months.
   (r)   “Real property” shall include lands, tenements, and hereditaments.
   (s)   “Shall” is mandatory except in reference to acts or omissions of the
City of Ontario or any officer or employee of the City of Ontario, in which
cases “shall” is directory only.
   (t)   “State” shall mean the State of California.
   (u)   “Street” shall include all streets, highways, avenues, boulevards,
alleys, courts, places, squares, or other public ways in the City which have
been or may hereafter be dedicated and open to public use, or such other public
property so designated in any law of this State.
   (v)   “Tenant or occupant,” applied to a building or land, shall include any
person who occupies the whole or a part of such building or land, whether alone
or with others.
   (w)   “Tenses.” The present tense shall include the past and future tenses,
and the future tense shall include the present tense.
(§ 1, Ord. 2266, eff. January 19, 1984)
Sec. 1-3.14. No mandatory duty.
   Notwithstanding any other provision of law, no provision of this Code, of
any ordinance of the City or any code adopted by reference by this Code or any
ordinance of the City, of any resolution of the Council, or of any
administrative regulations having the force of law, whether the same was
heretofore or is hereafter enacted, shall be deemed to create or impose a
mandatory duty for or upon the City, any department, board or commission of the
City, or any officer or employee of the City who is acting within the scope of
such office or employment.
(§ 2, Ord. 2266, eff. January 19, 1984)
CHAPTER 4: APPEALS
   
1-4.01   Right to appeal
   
1-4.02   Time limit for filing
   
1-4.03   Hearings: Notices
   
1-4.04   Hearings
   
1-4.05   Appeal hearing for special assessments
Sec. 1-4.01. Right to appeal.
   Except where an appeals procedure is otherwise specifically provided in this
Code, any person excepting to the denial, suspension, or revocation of a permit
applied for or held by him pursuant to any of the provisions of this Code, or
to any administrative decision made by any official of the City, if the denial,
suspension, or revocation of such permit or the determination of such
administrative decision involves the exercise of administrative discretion or
personal judgment exercised pursuant to any of the provisions of this Code, may
appeal in writing to the Council by filing with the City Clerk a written notice
of such appeal, setting forth the specific grounds.
   No appeal may be taken to any such administrative decision made by an
official of the City pursuant to the provisions of this chapter unless such
decision to appeal has been first taken up with the department head concerned.
   No right of appeal to the Council from any administrative decision made by
an official of the City pursuant to any of the provisions of this Code shall
exist when such decision is ministerial and thus does not involve the exercise
of administrative discretion or personal judgment exercised pursuant to any of
the provisions of this Code, whether the administrative decision involves the
denial, suspension, or revocation of a permit or any other administrative
decision.
Sec. 1-4.02. Time limit for filing.
   (a)   The appellant shall file a notice of appeal with the City Clerk within
fourteen (14) days after service of the notice of the administrative decision
concerned, or, if there is no such service or none is required, no later than
fourteen (14) days after the date of the decision that is the subject of the
appeal.
   (b)   A written notice of appeal must contain the following information:
      (1)   The full name, mailing address, e-mail address, and telephone
number of the appellant;
      (2)   A description of the specific action or decision being appealed,
including the date of the action; and
      (3)   The grounds for appeal in sufficient detail to enable the hearing
officer to understand the nature of the controversy.
   (c)   If the City Clerk does not receive a timely notice of appeal, if the
notice of appeal is incomplete, or if the notice of appeal does not comply with
all of the requirements set forth in this section, the right to appeal the
action is waived. In this event, the action is final and binding. A failure to
file a timely or proper notice of appeal also constitutes a failure to exhaust
administrative remedies.
(§ 3, Ord. 3230, eff. January 19, 2023)
Sec. 1-4.03. Hearings: Notices.
   Upon receipt of the filing of the notice of appeal in proper form, the City
Clerk shall place the matter as soon as reasonably possible on the Council
agenda for a regular meeting of the City Council which will be held no later
than thirty (30) days from the date of the filing of the notice of appeal.
Except in cases of emergency when the Council may determine the matter
immediately, the Council shall set the matter for hearing at the next regularly
scheduled meeting. The City Clerk shall cause written notice of the hearing to
be given to the applicant not less than ten (10) days prior to such hearing,
unless such notice is waived in writing by the applicant.
(§ 3, Ord. 3230, eff. January 19, 2023)
Sec. 1-4.04. Hearings.
   action appealed from should not be approved. The formal rules of evidence
and discovery do not apply. The rules of privilege are effective to the same
extent that they are now or hereafter may be recognized in civil actions.
Irrelevant and unduly repetitious evidence may be excluded. The standard of
proof applicable to the hearing is proof by a preponderance of the evidence.
The Council may continue the hearing from time to time, and its findings on the
appeal shall be final and conclusive in the matter.
(§ 3, Ord. 3230, eff. January 19, 2023)
Sec. 1-4.05. Appeal hearing for special assessments.
   Wherever the Ontario Municipal Code provides for collection of a citation,
fee, fine, penalty, or reimbursement of costs by special assessment as allowed
by Cal. Gov’t Code § 38773.5, § 53069.4, or § 54988, notice and hearing shall
be as specified in this section.
   (a)   Notice. The notice of assessment shall be served, by certified mail,
to the property owner, if the property owner’s identity can be determined from
the County Assessor’s or County Recorder’s records. The notice of assessment
shall specify that the property may be sold after three or more years by the
tax collector for unpaid delinquent assessments, in accordance with state law
or San Bernardino county ordinance. The notice of assessment shall also provide
that the person receiving the notice is entitled to request a hearing to
contest the assessment as provided in §
1-4.05(b), so long as such request is received by the Code Enforcement Director
within thirty (30) days after mailing the notice of assessment.
   (b)   Hearing. Upon request by any person or entity entitled to notice
pursuant to §
1-4.05(a) and if received by the Code Enforcement Director within thirty (30)
days after mailing the notice of assessment, the City Manager or his or her
designee shall hold a hearing, which shall be open to the public. The City
Manager or his or her designee shall hear and consider objections and/or
protests to the assessment itself or the amount of the assessment. The City
Manager or his or her designee shall hear and receive all relevant evidence and
testimony relative to the assessment of costs, fees, fines, or penalties. This
hearing may be continued from time to time. Upon or after the conclusion of the
hearing, the City Manager or his or her designee shall, based upon the evidence
presented at the hearing, determine whether all or part of the abatement costs,
fees, fines, or penalties shall be assessed against the affected parcel. The
decision of the City Manager or his or her designee shall be provided either at
the hearing or in writing to the person or entity requesting the appeal at the
address provided in the request for appeal and shall be final. Any further
appeals shall be in accord with Cal. Code of Civil Proc. §§ 1094.5 or 1094.6,
and/or Cal. Gov’t Code § 53069.4, as applicable.
   (c)   Resolution and assessment. If the City Manager or his or her designee
determines that the property should be assessed, and the amount to be assessed
has not been paid within thirty (30) days of the final decision, the City
Council may approve the amount of the special assessment, as determined by the
City Manager or his or her designee, by resolution, and cause the same to be
recorded on the assessment roll. The assessment shall be collected at the same
time and in the same manner as ordinary municipal taxes are collected, and
shall be subject to the same penalties and the same procedure and sale in case
of delinquency as provided for ordinary municipal taxes. All laws applicable to
the levy, collection and enforcement of city taxes shall be applicable to the
special assessment. Notices or instruments relating to the abatement proceeding
or special assessment may be recorded with the County Recorder.
(§ 2, Ord. 2920, eff. May 20, 2010)
CHAPTER 5: ADMINISTRATIVE CITATIONS
   
1-5.01   Applicability
   
1-5.02   Definitions
   
1-5.03   Administrative citation
   
1-5.04   Amount of fines
   
1-5.05   Payment of a fine
   
1-5.06   Initial review request
   
1-5.07   Hearing officer
   
1-5.08   Hearing procedure
   
1-5.09   Hearing officer's decision
   
1-5.10   Recovery of Code abatement costs
   
1-5.11   Right to judicial review
   
1-5.12   Advance deposit hardship waiver
   
1-5.13   Notices
Sec. 1-5.01. Applicability.
   (a)   This chapter provides for administrative citations which are in
addition to all other legal remedies, criminal or civil, which may be pursued
by the City to address any violation of the Municipal Code or applicable state
codes.
   (b)   The administrative citations process set forth in this chapter applies
to both transient and continuing violations.
   (c)   Use of this chapter shall be at the sole discretion of the City.
(Ord. 2628, eff. March 6, 1997)
Sec. 1-5.02. Definitions.
   As used in this chapter:
   (a)   “Code Enforcement Manager” shall mean any individual or his/her
designee responsible for the day to day management of the Code Enforcement
Division.
   (b)   “Continuing violation” shall mean a building, plumbing, electrical, or
other similar structural, or zoning violation which does not create an
immediate danger to health or safety.
   (c)   “Enforcement Officer” shall mean any individual employed, or otherwise
charged, by the City of Ontario to enforce codes, ordinances, mandates,
regulations, or laws adopted by City Council or other regulatory bodies.
   (d)   “General penalty” shall mean a penalty assessed to a violation which
constitutes a public nuisance to the aesthetics of the community and presents a
detriment to property values in the area. For example: trash and debris,
dilapidated or damaged sheds or fences, overgrown vegetation, graffiti,
unmaintained yards, illegal wall/fence, living in garages/trailers/sheds,
illegal business, illegal commercial signs, and other similar type violations.
   (e)   “Health and safety penalty” shall mean a penalty assessed to a
violation which constitutes any threat to life, health or the safety of
individuals or the public at large. For example: collapsing structures, broken
and/or dilapidated fence or gate protecting swimming pool/spa area, stagnant
pools, exposed electrical, sewage outflow, no heat, no water, unsecured
buildings, subsidence or surface water draining, no smoke detectors, plumbing
leaks, filthy conditions, rodent and pest infestations, and other similar type
violations.
   (f)   “Minor penalty” shall mean a penalty assessed to a lesser violation
which does not warrant assessment of a general penalty. For example: trash
containers stored in public view, Christmas lights displayed for longer than
ninety (90) days, pet violations (including chickens and roosters), illegal
home business, illegal vendors, banners, pennants, and other similar type
violations.
   (g)   “Transient violation” shall mean a violation which is of a brief or
nonpermanent nature, and which can be remedied rapidly.
(Ord. 2628, eff. March 6, 1997)
Sec. 1-5.03. Administrative citation.
   (a)   Whenever an Enforcement Officer charged with the enforcement of any
provision of the Municipal Code determines that a transient violation of the
provision has occurred, the Enforcement Officer shall have the authority to
issue an administrative citation to any person responsible for the violation.
   (b)   Whenever an Enforcement Officer charged with the enforcement of any
provision of the Municipal Code determines that a continuing violation of that
provision had occurred, the Enforcement Officer shall provide a reasonable
period of time, but no more than twenty-one (21) days, for a person responsible
for a continuing violation to correct or otherwise remedy the violation prior
to the imposition of administrative fines or penalties, when the violation
pertains to building, plumbing, electrical or other similar structural or
zoning issues that do not create an immediate danger to health or safety.
   (c)   Each administrative citation shall contain the following information:
      (1)   The date of the violation;
      (2)   The address or a definite description of the location where the
violation occurred;
      (3)   The section of the Code violated and a description of the
violation;
      (4)   A description of the action required to correct the violation;
      (5)   The type of penalty and the amount of the fine for the Code
violation;
      (6)   A description of the fine payment process, including a description
of the time within which and the place to which the fine shall be paid;
      (7)   An order prohibiting the continuation or repeated occurrence of the
Code violation described in the administrative citation;
      (8)   A description of the administrative citation review process,
including the time within which the administrative citation may be contested
and the place from which a request for an initial review form to contest the
administrative citation may be obtained; and
      (9)   The name and signature of the citing Enforcement Officer.
      (10)   A statement that unpaid fines and late payment fees are subject to
lien or special assessment collection procedures and that property subject to a
special assessment may be sold after three (3) or more years by the tax
collector for unpaid delinquent assessments.
(Ord. 2628, eff. March 6, 1997, as amended by § 3, Ord. 2920, eff. May 20,
2010)
Sec. 1-5.04. Amount of fines.
   The amount of fines pursuant to this chapter shall be set forth and amended
by resolution of the City Council.
(Ord. 2628, eff. March 6, 1997, as amended by § 1, Ord. 2942, eff. December 1,
2011)
Sec. 1-5.05. Payment of a fine.
   (a)   The fine shall be paid to the City within thirty (30) days from the
date of the administrative citation.
   (b)   A late payment fee of Twenty Dollars ($20.00) shall be charged if the
fine is not paid within fifty (50) days from the date of the administrative
citation.
   (c)   Any administrative citation fine paid pursuant to subsection (a) of
this section shall be refunded in accordance with §
1-5.09 if it is determined, after a hearing, that the person charged in the
administrative citation was not responsible for the violation or that there was
no violation as charged in the administrative citation.
   (d)   Payment of a fine under this chapter shall not excuse or discharge any
continuation or repeated occurrence of the Code violation that is the subject
of the administrative citation.
   (e)   The City shall use all available means to collect any past due fines
and other related costs, including but not limited to, the use of property
liens and special assessments in accordance with §
1-5.13(c).
(Ord. 2628, eff. March 6, 1997, as amended by § 3, Ord. 2920, eff. May 20,
2010)
Sec. 1-5.06. Initial review request.
   (a)   Any recipient of an administrative citation may contest that there was
a violation of the Code or that he or she is the responsible party by
completing a request for initial review form and returning it to the City
within fifteen (15) days from the date of the administrative citation.
   (b)   A request for initial review may be made to the Code Enforcement
Division by telephone, in writing by mail, or in person. There is no charge for
this review.
   (c)   After the initial review, if the Code Enforcement Division is
satisfied that the Code violation did not occur, or the recipient of the
administrative citation is not responsible for the violation, or that unique
circumstances make dismissal of the citation appropriate in the interest of
justice, the Code Enforcement Division shall cancel the administrative
citation.
   (d)   The Code Enforcement Division shall mail the results of the initial
review to the person contesting the notice.
   (e)   If the person is not satisfied with the results of the initial review,
this person may request a hearing of the violation no later than fifteen (15)
days following the mailing of the results of the Code Enforcement Division's
initial review.
   (f)   The request for a hearing may be made by telephone, in writing by
mail, or in person. The person requesting the hearing shall deposit the amount
of the fine specified on the administrative citation with the Code Enforcement
Division within seven (7) days from the date of the request.
(Ord. 2628, eff. March 6, 1997)
Sec. 1-5.07. Hearing officer.
   The Hearing Officer for the administrative citation hearing shall be
designated by the City Manager. In addition to any other requirements of
employment, the Hearing Officer shall demonstrate those qualifications,
training, and objectivity prescribed by the City Manager as are necessary and
which are consistent with the duties and responsibilities of such Hearing
Officer.
(Ord. 2628, eff. March 6, 1997)
Sec. 1-5.08. Hearing procedure.
   (a)   The person requesting the hearing shall be notified of the time and
place set for the hearing at least ten (10) days prior to the date of the
hearing.
   (b)   No hearing to contest an administrative citation before a Hearing
Officer shall be held unless the fine has been deposited in advance in
accordance with §
1-5.06(f) or an advance deposit hardship waiver has been issued in accordance
with §
1-5.12.
   (c)   A hearing before the Hearing Officer shall be set for a date that is
not less than fifteen (15) days and not more than fifty (50) days from the date
that the request for hearing is filed in accordance with the provisions of this
chapter.
   (d)   If the Enforcement Officer submits an additional written report
concerning the administrative citation to the Hearing Officer for consideration
at the hearing, then a copy of this report shall also be served on the person
requesting the hearing at least five (5) days prior to the date of this
hearing.
   (e)   At the hearing, the party contesting the administrative citation shall
be given the opportunity to testify and to present evidence concerning the
administrative citation.
   (f)   The failure of the recipient of an administrative citation to appear
at the administrative citation hearing shall constitute forfeiture of the fine
and a failure to exhaust his/her administrative remedies.
   (g)   The administrative citation and any additional report submitted by the
Enforcement Officer shall constitute prima facie evidence of the respective
facts contained in those documents.
   (h)   The Hearing Officer may continue the hearing and request additional
information from the Enforcement Officer or the recipient of the administrative
citation prior to issuing a written decision.
   (i)   The Hearing Officer is not required to provide transcriptions of
hearings, but is required to make available tapes of hearings for a fee.
(Ord. 2628, eff. March 6, 1997)
Sec. 1-5.09. Hearing officer's decision.
   (a)   After considering all of the testimony and evidence submitted at the
hearing, the Hearing Officer shall issue a written decision to uphold or cancel
the administrative citation and shall list in the decision the reasons for that
decision. The decision of the Hearing Officer shall be final.
   (b)   If the Hearing Officer determines that the administrative citation
should be upheld, then the fine amount on deposit with the City shall be
retained by the City.
   (c)   If the Hearing Officer determines that the administrative citation
should be upheld and the fine has not been deposited pursuant to an advance
deposit hardship waiver, the Hearing Officer shall set forth in the decision a
payment schedule for the fine.
   (d)   If the Hearing Officer determines that the administrative citation
should be canceled and the fine was deposited with the City, then the City
shall promptly refund the amount of the deposited fine.
   (e)   The recipient of the administrative citation shall be served with a
copy of the Hearing Officer's written decision.
   (f)   The employment, performance evaluation, compensation and benefits of
the Hearing Officer shall not be directly or indirectly conditioned upon the
amount of administrative citation fines upheld by the Hearing Officer.
(Ord. 2628, eff. March 6, 1997)
Sec. 1-5.10. Recovery of Code abatement costs.
   The administrative citation process described in this chapter does not
preclude the City from recovering any Code violation abatement costs incurred
by the City in performing its Code enforcement efforts pursuant to §§
5-22.07 and
5-22.08 of this Code.
(Ord. 2628, eff. March 6, 1997)
Sec. 1-5.11. Right to judicial review.
   Any person aggrieved by an administrative decision of a Hearing Officer on
an administrative citation may obtain review of the administrative decision by
filing a petition for review with the Superior Court in San Bernardino County
in accordance with the timeliness and provisions set forth in Cal. Gov't Code §
53069.4.
(Ord. 2628, eff. March 6, 1997, § 4, Ord. 3230, eff. January 19, 2023)
Sec. 1-5.12. Advance deposit hardship waiver.
   (a)   Any person who intends to request a hearing to contest the results of
the initial review and who is financially unable to make the advance deposit of
the fine as required in §
1-5.06(f) may file a request for an advance deposit hardship waiver.
   (b)   The request shall be filed with the Code Enforcement Division on an
advance deposit hardship waiver application form, available from the Code
Enforcement Division, within seven (7) days of the date of the request for a
hearing.
   (c)   The requirement for depositing the full amount of the fine as
described in §
1-5.06(f) shall be sustained unless or until the Code Enforcement Manager makes
a determination to issue the advance deposit hardship waiver.
   (d)   The Code Enforcement Manager may waive the requirement of an advance
deposit set forth in §
1-5.06(f) and issue the advance deposit hardship waiver only if the cited party
submits to the Code Enforcement Manager a sworn affidavit, together with any
supporting documents or materials, demonstrating to the satisfaction of the
Code Enforcement Manager the person's actual financial inability to deposit
with the City the full amount of the fine in advance of the hearing.
   (e)   If the Code Enforcement Manager determines not to issue an advance
deposit hardship waiver, the person shall remit the deposit to the City within
ten (10) days of that decision or thirty (30) days from the date of the
administrative citation, whichever is later.
   (f)   The Code Enforcement Manager shall issue a written determination
listing the reasons for his or her determination to issue or not issue the
advance deposit hardship waiver. The written determination of the Code
Enforcement Manager shall be final.
   (g)   The written determination of the Code Enforcement Manager shall be
served upon the person who applied for the advance deposit hardship waiver.
(Ord. 2628, eff. March 6, 1997)
Sec. 1-5.13. Notices.
   (a)   The administrative citation and all notices required given by this
chapter shall be served on the responsible party by personal delivery or first
class mail to the citee at his or her last-known business or residence address
as same appears in public records of the City, the San Bernardino County Tax
Assessor's Office, and/or the Secretary of State. Service by mail is deemed
complete upon deposit with the United States Postal Service. If service cannot
be accomplished personally or by mail for citations involving a real property-
related violation of the Code, the officer shall post the citation on the real
property where the violation is alleged to have occurred.
   (b)   Failure to receive any notice specified in this chapter does not
affect the validity of proceedings conducted hereunder.
   (c)   The City may elect to issue administrative citation penalties that may
be collected through means of property liens and special assessments in
accordance with §
1-4.05 of this Code for special assessments or in the manner provided in §
5-22.07(b) of this Code for liens. Upon the issuance of any administrative
penalty citation in accordance with this subsection (c), the City may file in
the office of the San Bernardino County Recorder a notice of the pendency of
the administrative action.
(Ord. 2628, eff. March 6, 1997, as amended by § 3, Ord. 2920, eff. May 20,
2010, § 4, Ord. 3230, eff. January 19, 2023)
TITLE 2. ADMINISTRATION
      Chapter
         
1.   CITY COUNCIL
         
2.   COMMISSIONS AND BOARDS
         
3.   DEPARTMENTS, OFFICERS, AND EMPLOYEES
         
4.   CUSTODY AND USE OF OFFICIAL CITY SEAL AND CITY INSIGNIA
         
5.   PUBLIC LIBRARY
         
6.   PURCHASING SYSTEM
         
7.   MERIT SYSTEM FOR PERSONNEL ADMINISTRATION
         
8.   INELIGIBILITY FOR EMPLOYMENT
         
9.   PUBLIC MUSEUM
         
10.   ELECTIONS
         
11.   CODE ENFORCEMENT OFFICERS
CHAPTER 1: CITY COUNCIL
Article 1. Meetings
   
2-1.101   Place
   
2-1.102   Time
Article 2. Salaries
   
2-1.201   Authority
   
2-1.202   Estimate of population of City
   
2-1.203   Payment
   
2-1.204   Expense reimbursements
   
2-1.205   Operative date
Article 3. City Council Electoral System
   
2-1.301   City Council Electoral System
Article 1. Meetings
Sec. 2-1.101. Place.
   All meetings of the Council shall be held in the Council Chambers of the
City Hall, located at 303 East “B” Street in the City, or at such other place
as may be designated in the agenda calling the meeting.
(§ 3, Ord. 1020, eff. September 1, 1954, as amended by § 1, Ord. 1857, eff.
June 21, 1975, § 1, Ord. 2056, eff. November 6, 1979, Ord. 2663, eff. June 18,
1998,§ 1, Ord. 2808, eff. March 31, 2005)
Sec. 2-1.102. Time.
   The time for holding the regular meetings of the Council shall be at the
hour of 6:30 p.m. on the first and third Tuesdays of each and every month.
(§ 2, Ord. 1020, eff. September 1, 1954, as amended by § 1, Ord. 1150, eff.
June 13, 1956, Ord. 2676, eff. February 4, 1999)
Article 2. Salaries
Sec. 2-1.201. Authority.
   This article is enacted pursuant to the provisions of Cal. Gov't Code §§
36516 and 36516.1, authorizing the Council to provide by ordinance that each
member of the Council shall receive a salary, the maximum amount of which is
determined pursuant to Cal. Gov't Code § 36516.
(§ 1, Ord. 1622, eff. April 20, 1966, amended by § 1, Ord. 2319, eff. April 16,
1986, and § 1, Ord. 2578, eff. November 3, 1994)
Sec. 2-1.202. Estimate of population of City.
   The estimate of the population of the City is set forth in the most recent
annual estimate issued by the California Department of Finance.
(§ 2, Ord. 1622, eff. April 20, 1966, amended by § 1, Ord. 2319, eff. April 16,
1986)
Sec. 2-1.203. Payment.
   (a)   Each member of the Council shall receive as salary the sum of Two
Thousand-Five-Hundred-Fifty Dollars ($2,550) per month.
   (b)   Said salaries shall be payable from and after the operative date of
this section at the same time and in the same manner as salaries are paid to
other officers and employees of the City.
(§ 3A, Ord. 1622, eff. April 20, 1966, as amended by § 1, Ord. 2319, eff. April
16, 1986, § 1, Ord. 2344, eff. April 16, 1986, § 1, Ord. 2393, eff. July 22,
1987, § 2, Ord. 2578, eff. November 3, 1994, § 1, Ord. 2638, eff. December 2,
1998, §§ 1 and 2,Ord. 2718, eff. December 6, 2000, § 1, Ord. 2857, eff. March
22, 2007, § 1, Ord. 2826, eff. December 6, 2006, § 1, Ord. 2886, eff. November
15, 2008, § 1, Ord. 2898, eff. February 19, 2009, § 1, Ord. 2900, eff. March
19, 2009, § 1, Ord. 2910, eff. August 21, 2009, § 1, Ord. 2987, eff. November
4, 2014, § 2, Ord. 3065, eff. February 16, 2017, § 2, Ord. 3244, eff. April 23,
2023 and November 5, 2024, § 2, Ord. 3287, eff. November 14, 2024)
Sec. 2-1.204. Expense reimbursements.
   The salaries prescribed in this article shall be exclusive of any amounts
payable to each member of the Council as reimbursement for acts and necessary
expenses incurred by him or her in the performance of official duties for the
City.
(§ 3C, Ord. 1622, eff. April 20, 1966, as amended by § 1, Ord. 2319, eff. April
16, 1986)
Sec. 2-1.205. Operative date.
   The salaries established by §
2-1.203 shall become operative on the sooner of:
   (a)   The date one or more members of the Council begin a new term of office
following the general municipal election; or
   (b)   The earliest date any member of the Council could receive such
increased salary under State law now in effect or hereafter enacted.
(§ 3D, Ord. 1622, eff. April 20, 1966, as amended by § 1, Ord. 2319, eff. April
16, 1986)
Article 3. City Council Electoral System
Sec. 2-1.301. City Council Electoral System
   (a)    At-large election - Mayor. Pursuant to Cal. Gov’t Code § 34886, the
mayor shall be voted on at-large.
   (b)   City Council districts established. Four City Council districts are
hereby established in the City of Ontario. The boundaries and identifying
number of each district shall be as described on the Council District Map 17
attached to Ord. 3224 as Exhibit "A" and incorporated herein by this reference.
   (c)   Election of members of the City Council by district.
      (1)   Following the effective date of the ordinance codified in this
section and upon the commencement of "by district" elections in the order
established in section (d) of this § 2-1.301, members of the City Council shall
be elected "by district" as defined in Cal. Gov’t Code § 34871 or any successor
statute. Except for the Mayor, a person shall not be eligible to be elected to
be a member of the City Council unless he or she is otherwise qualified as
required by law and resided in the district, and both resided in the
geographical area making up the district from which he or she is nominated to
be elected and was a registered voter of the City of Ontario at the time
nomination papers are issued to the candidate as provided for in § 10227 of the
Cal. Elections Code. It is the intent of the City Council, in enacting this
article, that no term of any member of the City Council that commences on or
prior to the effective date of the ordinance codified in this section shall be
affected prior to its expiration date.
      (2)   Registered voters signing nomination papers or voting for a member
of the City Council shall be residents of the geographical area making up the
district from which the member is to be elected.
      (3)   The terms of the office of each member elected to the City Council,
including the Mayor, shall remain four years.
   (d)   Commencement of district elections. It is the intent of the City
Council, in enacting this article, that this section shall not affect any term
of office in existence or commencing on or before the effective date of the
ordinance codified in this section. Commencing with the general municipal
election in November of 2024 and thereafter, the voters in districts 1 (one)
and 4 (four) shall elect members of the City Council by district for full four-
year terms. At the general municipal election in 2026 and thereafter, the
voters in districts 2 (two) and 3 (three) shall elect members of the City
Council and the Mayor shall be elected at large for full four-year terms.
   (e)   Adjustment of boundaries.
      (1)   Pursuant to Elections Code § 21601, as it may be amended, the City
Council shall, by ordinance or resolution, adjust the boundaries of any or all
of the districts following each decennial federal census. Using the census as a
basis, the City Council shall adjust the boundaries so that the districts shall
be as nearly equal in population as practicable and in compliance with all
applicable provisions of law. Any adjustment of district boundaries shall be
made by ordinance or resolution, adopted by the City Council before the first
day of November of the year following the year in which each decennial federal
census is taken. Prior to the public hearing approving the adjustment of the
district boundaries, the City Council shall hold at least one public hearing on
the proposed district boundaries as required by Election Code § 21607.
      (2)   At the time of any annexation of territory to the City, the City
Council shall designate, by resolution adopted by a vote of at least a majority
of the City Council, the contiguous district to which the annexed territory
shall be a part and shall amend the district boundaries if necessary in
accordance with Election Code § 21603, as it may be amended.
      (3)   Pursuant to Elections Code § 21606, the term of office of any
Council member who has been elected and whose term of office has not expired
shall not be affected by any change in the boundaries of the district from
which he or she was elected. At the first election for Council following
adjustment of the boundaries of the districts, a person meeting the
requirements of Gov’t Code § 34882 shall be elected to the City Council for
each district under the readjusted district plan that has the same district
number as a district whose incumbent's term on the Council is due to expire.
   (f)   Implementation. If necessary to facilitate the implementation of this
article, the City Clerk is authorized to make technical adjustments to the
district boundaries that do not substantively affect the populations in the
districts, the eligibility of candidates, or the residence of elected officials
within any district. The City Clerk shall consult with the City Manager and
City Attorney concerning any technical adjustments deemed necessary and shall
advise the City Council of any such adjustments required in the implementation
of the districts.
(§ 1, Ord. 3224, eff. January 19, 2023)
CHAPTER 2: COMMISSIONS AND BOARDS
Article 1. General
   
2-2.101   Appointment, number, removal, terms and vacancies of regular and at-
large members of commissions, committees and boards
Article 2. Membership
   
2-2.201   Organization
   
2-2.202   Restrictions
Article 3. Planning Commission
   
2-2.301   Established
   
2-2.302   Membership: Compensation
   
2-2.303   Membership: Powers and duties
Article 4. Recreation and Parks Commission
   
2-2.401   Established
   
2-2.402   Powers and duties
   
2-2.403   Meetings
Article 5. Community Services Commission
   (Repealed)
Article 6. Community Relations Commission
   (Repealed)
Article 7. Senior Citizens Affairs Commission
   (Repealed)
Article 8. Ontario Industrial Development Authority
   
2-2.801   Established
   
2-2.802   Powers
   
2-2.803   Organization
Article 9. Public Works Advisory Commission
   (Repealed)
Article 10. Ontario Redevelopment Agency
   
2-2.1001   Established
   
2-2.1002   Need
   
2-2.1003   Powers
Article 11. Ontario Housing Authority Commission
   
2-2.1101   Established
   
2-2.1102   Powers and duties
   
2-2.1103   Organization
Article 1. General
Sec. 2-2.101. Appointment, number, removal, terms and vacancies of regular and
at-large members of commissions, committees and boards.
   (a)   All members of the City’s committees, commissions and boards shall be
appointed and removed and shall serve subject to the terms set forth in this
section, unless specifically otherwise provided. This section shall not apply
to ad hoc committees, commissions or boards which are established from time to
time by the City Council other than by means of adoption of an ordinance. This
section shall, however, apply to the following committees, commissions and
boards which have been created within the City and which are provided for in
the Code as indicated below:
      (1)   Planning Commission (
Title 2, Chapter 2, Article 3).
      (2)   Recreation and Parks Commission (
Title 2, Chapter 2, Article 4).
      (3)   Ontario Public Library Board of Trustees (
Title 2, Chapter 5).
      (4)   Ontario Museum of History and Art Board of Trustees (
Title 2, Chapter 9).
   (b)   All committees, commissions and boards shall consist of not more than
five (5) members, except:
      (1)   The Recreation and Parks Commission shall consist of seven (7)
regular members and one (1) non-voting student member. The seven (7) regular
members shall include two (2) school representatives, one from the high school
level and one from the elementary school level, and these two (2) shall be at-
large members appointed under the process described in subsection (d)(4). The
application process, selection, term and duties of the student member shall be
consistent with the Recreation and Parks Commission’s administrative policy, as
amended from time to time.
      (2)   The Planning Commission shall consist of seven (7) members, two (2)
of which shall be at-large members appointed under the process described in
subsection (d)(4).
      (3)   The Ontario Housing Authority Commission shall consist of seven (7)
members. The seven (7) members shall include five (5) regular members appointed
by each of the five (5) City Council members and, if the Housing Authority has
tenants, two (2) tenant members, who are tenants of the Housing Authority, one
(1) of which shall be over sixty-two (62) years of age, if the Housing
Authority has tenants over that age, and these two (2) shall be at-large
members appointed under the process described in subsection (d)(4).
   (c)   Members of each committee, commission and board shall be residents of
the City, but shall not otherwise be employees of the City while serving on
such committee, commission or board.
   (d)   With the exception of the non-voting student member of the Recreation
and Parks Commission, members of each of the City’s committees, commissions and
boards shall be appointed in accordance with the following procedures:
      (1)   Any resident desiring appointment to a committee, commission or
board must complete a formal application to be filed with the City Clerk.
      (2)   Immediately after the regular municipal election, the City Clerk
shall solicit applications for at-large seats. The City Clerk shall also
solicit applications for individual City Council- nominated seats, should any
City Council member so request. Said solicitations shall be published at least
once in a local newspaper of general circulation.
      (3)   Each of the five (5) City Council members shall submit to the Mayor
the name of one (1) person proposed for appointment to a committee, commission
or board; said nominees shall be eligible for appointment only if a formal
application is on file with the City Clerk, and upon approval of such
appointment by the Mayor and concurrence of the City Council, the name of the
appointee shall be recorded in the minutes of the City Council meeting. If the
City Council member responsible for the original nomination fails to make a
successful nomination within sixty (60) days following the beginning of that
City Council member’s term, the City Council may itself appoint an individual
to fill that position.
      (4)   The City Council, by a majority vote, shall appoint two (2) of its
members to serve as a Nominations Committee to bring forward nominees from the
applicant pool to serve as the at-large members on committees, commissions or
boards. These nominees must be approved by the Mayor and the concurrence of the
City Council.
      (5)   In the case of a vacancy on committees, commissions or boards, the
City Council member who made the original nomination shall have the right to
nominate a person to fill the vacancy subject to the approval of the Mayor and
the concurrence of the City Council in accordance with subsection (d)(3). If
the City Council member who made the original nomination fails to make a
successful nomination following the vacancy, the City Council may itself
appoint an individual to fill that position. If the vacancy occurs by an at-
large member appointed through the process in subsection (d)(4), then the
nomination of a replacement shall be made in accordance with that subsection.
   (e)   A City Council member may submit to the Mayor the name of an appointee
proposed for removal by a commission, committee or board, and upon approval of
such name by the Mayor and concurrence of the City Council, such appointee’s
removal shall be recorded in the minutes of the City Council meeting.
   (f)   Any member of any committee, commission or board may be removed by a
majority vote of the City Council.
(§§ 1 and 3, Ord. 2693, eff. August 5, 1999 as amended by § 1, Ord. 2754, eff.
April 4, 2002, §§ 1 and 2, Ord. 2899, eff. February 19, 2009, §§ 1 and 2, Ord.
2996, eff. July 31, 2014, § 2, Ord. 3047, eff. May 19, 2016)
Article 2. Membership
Sec. 2-2.201. Organization.
   Within a reasonable time after their appointment, members of the City
committees, commission and boards shall meet in regular session and elect from
their members a chairman and a vice chairman and shall appoint a member or
nonmember as secretary. Their duties shall respectively be such as are usually
carried by such officers and shall not conflict with current State statutes.
Officers shall hold office for one (1) year or until their successors are
elected, beginning January 1 of each year, unless such terms of office are
determined by state statutes.
(§§ 2 and 4, Ord. 2693, eff. August 5, 1999)
Sec. 2-2.202. Restrictions.
   No person may simultaneously serve on two or more City committees,
commissions or boards. This section shall not apply to the Mayor, City Council
members and City personnel. This section shall not prevent any person who is
serving on two or more City committees, commissions or boards on the date of
adoption of this section from completing his or her current term of office.
(§ 1, Ord. 2660, eff. May 20, 1998, as amended by §§ 2 and 4, Ord. 2693, eff.
August 5, 1999)
Article 3. Planning Commission
Sec. 2-2.301. Established.
   Pursuant to the provisions of the Planning and Zoning Law, Chapter 3 of
Title 7 of the Government Code of the State (commencing with Cal. Gov't Code §
65100), there is hereby created and established in the City a Planning
Commission.
(§ 1, Ord. 1006, eff. July 7, 1954)
Sec. 2-2.302. Membership: Compensation.
   The City Council shall from time to time by Resolution set the compensation
amount for each voting member of the Planning Commission for attendance at each
publicly noticed meeting of the Commission, including publicly noticed
workshops and briefings.
(§ 2, Ord. 3025, eff. September 17, 2015)
Sec. 2-2.303. Membership: Powers and duties.
   The members of the Planning Commission shall organize in accordance with the
provisions of the Planning and Zoning Law referred to in §
2-2.301 of this article, and their powers and duties shall be as set forth in
said Law.
   The Council may, by motion or resolution, refer and submit to the Planning
Commission matters other than those which come within the jurisdiction of the
Commission pursuant to said Planning and Zoning Law; provided, however, in all
such matters so referred or submitted, the Planning Commission shall have no
authority to take action thereon but shall make investigations and report its
findings to the Council on the matters so submitted.
(§§ 4 and 5, Ord. 1006, eff. July 7, 1954, as amended by § 1, Ord. 1044, eff.
April 1, 1955)
Article 4. Recreation and Parks Commission
Sec. 2-2.401. Established.
   There is hereby created and established an advisory Recreation and Parks
Commission.
(§ 1, Ord. 1607, eff. June 17, 1965, § 3, Ord. 2899, eff. February 19, 2009)
Sec. 2-2.402. Powers and duties.
   The duties and responsibilities of the Recreation and Parks Commission shall
be as follows:
   (a)   To act in an advisory capacity to the Council and City Manager in all
matters concerning recreation and parks in order to coordinate all public
agencies and civic organizations to provide sound recreation and parks planning
and programming;
   (b)   To coordinate with the Recreation and Community Services Director in
formulating policies on recreation services for approval by the Council and to
recommend:
      (1)   To the Council and pertinent school district governing bodies the
best joint use of recreation facilities; and
      (2)   To the Council the advisability of acquiring and/or utilizing
various parcels of land for recreation and parks purposes;
   (c)   To advise the Recreation and Community Services Director on problems
of administration and development of recreation areas, facilities, programs,
and recreation services;
   (d)   To recommend the adoption of standards on organization, personnel,
areas and facilities, and program and financial support of recreation and park
activities;
   (e)   To make periodic inventories of recreation services which exist or may
be needed and interpret the needs of the public to the Council and the
Recreation and Community Services Director;
   (f)   To advise the Recreation and Community Services Director in the
preparation of the annual budget request and on the long range recreation and
parks capital improvement program;
   (g)   To consider all requests for permanent facilities to be erected on
park areas; and
   (h)   To interpret the policies and functions of the Recreation and
Community Services Department to the public.
(§ 3, Ord. 1607, eff. June 17, 1965, § 3, Ord. 2899, eff. February 19, 2009)
Sec. 2-2.403. Meetings.
   (a)   Procedure. The Recreation and Parks Commission shall adopt rules and
regulations to govern procedure.
   (b)   Regular meetings. The Commission shall, by vote, set a time for
regular meetings which shall be held at least once each month.
   (c)   Special meetings. The Commission shall determine the manner in which
special meetings may be held and due notice given of such meetings.
   (d)   Quorum. A majority of the regular members shall constitute a quorum.
   (e)   Absences. Absence from three (3) consecutive regular meetings [two (2)
for the non-voting student member] without the formal consent of the Commission
shall be deemed to constitute the resignation of such member and the position
declared vacant.
   (f)   Minutes. Minutes of the meetings of the Commission shall be filed with
the City Clerk, City Manager and Recreation and Community Services Director.
(§ 2, Ord. 1607, eff. June 17, 1965, as amended by § 3, Ord. 2754, eff. April
4, 2002, § 3, Ord. 2899, eff. February 19, 2009)
Article 5. Community Services Commission
   (Repealed)
(Sections
2-2.501 through
2-2.506, codified from Ord. 2198, eff. November 19, 1982 repealed by § 1, Ord.
2407, eff. December 31, 1987)
Article 6. Community Relations Commission
   (Repealed)
(Sections
2-2.601 through
2-2.606, codified from Ord. 1750, eff. February 4, 1971 repealed by § 2, Ord.
2198, eff. November 19, 1982)
Article 7. Senior Citizens Affairs Commission
   (Repealed)
(Sections
2-2.701 through
2-2.705, codified from Ord. 1830, eff. May 2, 1974 repealed by § 3, Ord. 2198,
eff. November 19, 1982)
Article 8. Ontario Industrial Development Authority
Sec. 2-2.801. Established.
   The City Council of the City of Ontario, California hereby declares that
there is a need for an industrial development authority to be created and to
function within the City. There is hereby established an “authority,” as
defined in the Industrial Development Financing Act, being Cal. Gov't Code §§
91500 et seq., which shall be authorized to transact business and exercise its
powers as provided in the Act.
(§ 1, Ord. 2145, eff. September 17, 1981)
Sec. 2-2.802. Powers.
   The industrial development authority created pursuant both hereto and by the
powers granted pursuant to the Act shall hereafter be known as the “Ontario
Industrial Development Authority.” The Ontario Industrial Development Authority
shall exercise all powers as presently permitted or as may hereafter be
provided pursuant to State law, including, but not limited to, the provisions
of the Act.
(§ 2, Ord. 2145, eff. September 17, 1981)
Sec. 2-2.803. Organization.
   The City or the Ontario Municipal Development Authority, as appropriate, may
on or after the date of final adoption of the ordinance codified in this
article, approve by resolution all other items necessary for the Ontario
Industrial Development Authority to transact business and conduct its other
affairs as provided by the Act, including the appointment of directors or board
members.
(§ 3, Ord. 2145, eff. September 17, 1981)
Article 9. Public Works Advisory Commission
   (Repealed)
(Sections
2-2.901 through
2-2.907, codified from Ord. 2697, eff. September 16, 1999, repealed by
implication, Ord. 2693, eff. August 5, 1999)
Article 10. Ontario Redevelopment Agency
Sec. 2-2.1001. Established.
   The City Council of the City of Ontario, California hereby declares that
there is in each community a public body, corporate and politic, known as the
redevelopment agency of the community. There is hereby established a
Redevelopment Agency as defined by Part 1 of Division 24 of the Health and
Safety Code of the State of California (commencing with Cal. Health & Safety
Code § 33000), also known as the Community Redevelopment Law.
(Ord 1771, eff. December 16, 1971)
Sec. 2-2.1002. Need.
   Pursuant to Cal. Health & Safety Code § 33101, this City Council hereby
declares there is need for a Redevelopment Agency in the City of Ontario to
function as provided for in Part 1 of Division 24 of the Health and Safety Code
of the State of California (commencing with Cal. Health & Safety Code § 33000),
also known as the Community Redevelopment Law, and it is found and declared
that there exists in the City of Ontario blighted areas which constitute either
social or economic liabilities or both, requiring redevelopment in the
interests of health, safety and general welfare of the people of this city, and
that these blighted areas are characterized by one or more of the conditions
set forth in Cal. Health & Safety Code §§ 33031 to 33034, inclusive, of said
Community Redevelopment Law.
(Ord. 1771, eff. December 16, 1971)
Sec. 2-2.1003. Powers.
   Pursuant to Cal. Health & Safety Code § 33200 of the Community Redevelopment
Law, this City Council as legislative body declares itself to be the
Redevelopment Agency of the City of Ontario with all rights, powers, duties,
privileges, and immunities vested by said Community Redevelopment Law.
(Ord. 1771, eff. December 16, 1971)
Article 11. Ontario Housing Authority Commission
Sec. 2-2.1101. Established.
   Pursuant to the provisions of Cal. Health & Safety Code § 34291, there is
created a housing commission for the City of Ontario, which shall be known as
the “Ontario Housing Authority Commission.”
(§ 2, Ord. 3047, eff. May 19, 2016)
Sec. 2-2.1102. Powers and duties.
   The Ontario Housing Authority Commission shall serve in an advisory capacity
to the Ontario Housing Authority and shall review and make recommendations on
all matters to come before the Ontario Housing Authority prior to authority
action, except emergency matters and matters which, by resolution, are excluded
from its review.
(§ 2, Ord. 3047, eff. May 19, 2016)
Sec. 2-2.1103. Organization.
   The Ontario Housing Authority Commission, as appropriate, may on or after
the date of final adoption of the ordinance codified in this article, approve
by resolution all other items necessary or beneficial for the Ontario Housing
Authority Commission to transact business and conduct its affairs.
(§ 2, Ord. 3047, eff. May 19, 2016)
CHAPTER 3: DEPARTMENTS, OFFICERS, AND EMPLOYEES
Article 1. City Manager
   
2-3.101   Office established
   
2-3.102   Appointment: Qualifications: Term
   
2-3.103   Appointment: Eligibility of Council members
   
2-3.104   Absence or disability
   
2-3.105   Relationship with Council
   
2-3.106   Salary
   
2-3.107   Powers and duties
Article 2. Police Department
   
2-3.201   Established
   
2-3.202   Membership
   
2-3.203   Membership: Suspension and removal: Hearings
   
2-3.204   Appointments: Terms
   
2-3.205   Appointments: Qualifications
   
2-3.206   Appointments: Probationary period
   
2-3.207   Appointments: Eligibility lists
   
2-3.208   Appointments: Emergency, temporary, and part-time
   
2-3.209   Police Chief: Powers and duties
   
2-3.210   Deputy Police Chief and Captains: Powers and duties
   
2-3.211   Certain Vehicle Code violations: Enforcement by appointed employees
Article 3. Fire Department
   
2-3.301   Established
   
2-3.302   Membership
   
2-3.303   Membership: Volunteer firefighters (Repealed)
   
2-3.304   Membership: Suspension and removal: Hearings
   
2-3.305   Appointments: Terms
   
2-3.306   Appointments: Qualifications
   
2-3.307   Appointments: Probationary period
   
2-3.308   Appointments: Eligibility lists
   
2-3.309   Appointments: Emergency
   
2-3.310   Fire Chief: Powers and duties
   
2-3.311   Deputy Fire Chiefs: Powers and duties
   
2-3.312   Company officers: Powers and duties
   
2-3.313   Fire school
   
2-3.314   Drills
   
2-3.315   Inspection of premises: Right of entry
Article 4. Director of Finance
   
2-3.401   Office established
   
2-3.402   Appointment
   
2-3.403   Powers and duties
Article 5. Salaries of City Clerk and City Treasurer
   
2-3.501   City Clerk: Deputies
   
2-3.502   City Treasurer: Deputies
   
2-3.503   Insurance benefits
   
2-3.504   Full-time employment required (Repealed)
Article 6. Bonds
   
2-3.601   Scope of provisions
   
2-3.602   Bond: required
Article 7. Office Hours, Holidays, and Records
   
2-3.701   Offices: Records
   
2-3.702   Office hours
   
2-3.703   Holidays
   
2-3.704   Deposit of moneys: Reports
Article 8. Training of Law Enforcement Officers
   
2-3.801   Declaration of qualifications
   
2-3.802   Declaration of adherence to standards
   
2-3.803   Definitions
   
2-3.804   Intent
   
2-3.805   Standards
   
2-3.806   POST inquiries
Article 9. Distress Duties of Police Officers and Fire Fighters
   
2-3.901   Services in addition to regular duties
   
2-3.902   State compensation and safety laws: Applicability
Article 10. Recreation and Community Services Department
   
2-3.1001   Established
   
2-3.1002   Functions
   
2-3.1003   Recreation Director: Powers and duties
Article 11. City Clerk
   
2-3.1101   Mandatory legal powers and duties of the City Clerk
   
2-3.1102   Discretionary powers and duties of the City Clerk and Deputies
   
2-3.1103   Municipal election oversight and reporting responsibilities
Article 12. Records Management Department
   
2-3.1201   Records Management Department created; functions; organization
   
2-3.1202   Functions of the Records Management Department manager
   
2-3.1203   Program established; manual
Article 1. City Manager
Sec. 2-3.101. Office established.
   The office of City Manager for the City is hereby established.
(§ 1(a), Ord. 730, eff. July 5, 1944)
Sec. 2-3.102. Appointment: Qualifications: Term.
   (a)   Qualifications. The City Manager shall be appointed by the Council
solely on the basis of his executive and administrative qualifications.
   (b)   Term. He shall hold office during the pleasure of the Council.
(§ 1(a), Ord. 730, eff. July 5, 1944)
Sec. 2-3.103. Appointment: Eligibility of Council members.
   No person elected to membership on the Council shall, subsequent to such
election, be eligible for appointment as City Manager until one year has
elapsed following the expiration of the last term for which he was elected.
(§ 1(a), Ord. 730, eff. July 5, 1944)
Sec. 2-3.104. Absence or disability.
   During the absence or disability of the City Manager, the Council may
designate some properly qualified person to perform the duties of the office of
City Manager.
(§ 1(b), Ord. 730, eff. July 5, 1944)
Sec. 2-3.105. Relationship with Council.
   Except for the purpose of inquiry, the Council and its members shall deal
with the administrative service solely through the City Manager, and neither
the Council nor any member thereof shall give orders to any of the subordinates
of the City Manager.
(§ 3, Ord. 730, eff. July 5, 1944)
Sec. 2-3.106. Salary.
   The City Manager shall receive such salary as the Council shall from time to
time determine and fix by resolution or motion.
(§ 4, Ord. 730, eff. July 5, 1944)
Sec. 2-3.107. Powers and duties.
   The City Manager shall be the administrative head of the City government,
under the direction and control of the Council, except as otherwise provided by
law. He shall be responsible to the Council for the efficient administration of
all the affairs of the City which are under his control and shall devote his
entire time to the duties and interests of the City. In addition to the City
Manager's general powers as administrative head, and not as a limitation
thereon, it shall be his duty, and he shall have the power:
   (a)   Law enforcement. To see that all laws and regulations are duly
enforced;
   (b)   Administrative control of departments and employees.
      (1)   To employ, discipline, or remove all heads of departments and all
subordinate officers and employees of the City, to transfer employees from one
department to another, and to consolidate or combine offices, positions,
departments, or units under his jurisdiction with the approval of the Council
in each instance; provided, however, the provisions of this subsection shall
not apply to the City Clerk, City Attorney, or City Treasurer; and
      (2)   To exercise control over all departments and divisions of the City
government and over all appointive officers and employees thereof, subject to
the approval of the Council, except as provided in this section;
   (c)   Attendance at Council and committee meetings. To attend all meetings
of the Council and its committees unless excused therefrom by the Council or
the committee and except when his removal is under consideration by the
Council;
   (d)   Legislature recommendations. To recommend to the Council for adoption
such measures and ordinances as he deems necessary or expedient;
   (e)   Financial reports. To keep the Council at all times advised as to the
financial conditions and needs of the City;
   (f)   Budgets. To prepare and submit to the Council the annual budget;
   (g)   Salary plans. To prepare and recommend to the Council a salary plan;
   (h)   Purchase of supplies. To purchase all supplies for all the departments
or divisions of the City, and no expenditures shall be submitted or recommended
to the Council except upon the report or approval of the City Manager;
   (i)   Investigations.
      (1)   To make investigations into the affairs of the City, or any
department or division thereof, or any contract or the proper performance of
any obligation running to the City; and
      (2)   To investigate all complaints in relation to all matters concerning
the administration of the government of the City and in regard to the service
maintained by public utilities in the City and to see that all franchises,
permits, and privileges granted by the City are faithfully observed;
   (j)   Supervision of public property. To exercise general supervision over
all public buildings, public parks and streets, and other public property which
are under the control and jurisdiction of the Council;
   (k)   Supervision of public works. To superintend the construction of all
public works within the City;
   (l)   Departmental organization plans. To prepare and submit to the Council
an organization chart showing the organization plan for all departments of the
City government;
   (m)   Issuance of licenses and permits. To issue on behalf of the Council
all licenses and permits not otherwise provided for by law; and
   (n)   Council instructions. To perform such other duties and exercise such
other powers as may be delegated by ordinance or motion of the Council.
(§ 2, Ord. 730, eff. July 5, 1944, as amended by § 1, Ord. 1461, eff. April 5,
1962)
Article 2. Police Department
Sec. 2-3.201. Established.
   There shall be a Police Department for the City under the administrative
supervision of the City Manager.
(§ 1, Ord. 1462, eff. April 5, 1962)
Sec. 2-3.202. Membership.
   The Police Department shall consist of the following:
   (a)   The Police Chief;
   (b)   Captains;
   (c)   Lieutenants;
   (d)   Sergeants;
   (e)   Detectives;
   (f)   Corporals;
   (g)   Officers;
   (h)   Reserve Officers;
   (i)   Non-Sworn Personnel; and
   (j)   Volunteer civilian staff that may be required.
(§ 2, Ord. 1462, eff. April 5, 1962)
Sec. 2-3.203. Membership: Suspension and removal: Hearings.
   (a)   Suspension and removal: Reports by Police Chief. Whenever the Police
Chief shall find it necessary to suspend or remove any member of the Police
Department, the Police Chief shall at once report the same to the City Manager
and the cause therefor.
   (b)   Hearings: Requests. Within five (5) days after the member has
exhausted the appropriate administrative appeal process, the member so
suspended or removed may make demand in writing for a hearing before the City
Council.
   (c)   Hearings: Council trial board. The Council is hereby constituted a
trial board for the purpose of hearing, determining, and trying charges made
against members or officers of the Police Department and for the violation of
any and all rules and regulations governing such members or officers.
   (d)   Hearings; Council trial board decisions. If such trial board, upon
investigation, finds the accused guilty, the trial board may confirm the action
of the Police Chief in removing or suspending such accused person or inflict
such other punishment as, in its judgment, is adequate and fair. In all cases
the decisions of the Council shall be final.
(§ 5, Ord. 1462, eff. April 5, 1962)
Sec. 2-3.204. Appointments: Terms.
   (a)   Police Chief. The Police Chief shall be appointed by the City Manager
for an indefinite term, subject to confirmation by the Council.
   (b)   Captains and other officers. Captains and other officers of the Police
Department shall be appointed by the Police Chief, subject to the approval of
the City Manager, for an indefinite term, and in the appointment of such
officers, their ability and service records shall be considered.
(§ 4, Ord. 1462, eff. April 5, 1962)
Sec. 2-3.205. Appointments: Qualifications.
   Appointments of new men/women into the Police Department shall be made with
the object of improving the operation and the general efficiency of the
manpower. In the selection of men/women consideration shall be given to the
following rules:
   (a)   Age requirements. The age of applicants shall not be less than twenty-
one (21) years at the time of appointment.
   (b)   Mental and physical requirements. All applicants shall pass a physical
examination. Such applicants shall also pass a psychological examination to
determine their fitness for police service. Such examinations shall be given
under the direction of the Police Chief and Personnel Officer.
(§ 4, Ord. 1462, eff. April 5, 1962)
Sec. 2-3.206. Appointments: Probationary period.
   All new officers shall serve for a probationary period of one year before
permanent appointment in the Police Department. During such probationary
period, the officers shall be under the observation of the Police Chief with
the view of deciding whether or not the applicants will be successful police
officers. Once appointed, officers shall be secure in their positions during
good behavior and proper performance of their duties as police officers.
(§ 4(d), Ord. 1462, eff. April 5, 1962)
Sec. 2-3.207. Appointments: Eligibility lists.
   An eligibility list shall be provided, which list shall contain the names of
applicants who have passed the examination and from which list may be selected
new members when needed.
(§ 4(e), Ord. 1462, eff. April 5, 1962)
Sec. 2-3.208. Appointments: Emergency, temporary, and part-time.
   The City Manager may make emergency appointments of special police officers,
temporary appointments, and permanent part-time appointments of police
officers, age requirements may be waived under special circumstances.
(§ 4(f), Ord. 1462, eff. April 5, 1962)
Sec. 2-3.209. Police Chief: Powers and duties.
   The Police Chief shall be the chief executive officer of the Police
Department and shall be vested with the following authorities and duties:
   (a)   Supervision of Department personnel: To have direct control,
management, and direction of all sworn and non-sworn personnel of the Police
Department and to detail any of them to such public service as he may see fit,
looking to the best interests and efficiency of the Department;
   (b)   Enforcement of Department regulations: To carry out strictly the
enforcement of the rules and regulations of the Police Department and to
suspend or remove from service any sworn or non-sworn department member for
cause in the manner provided in such regulations;
   (c)   Enforcement of laws: To generally see that the laws of the City and
the State are enforced;
   (d)   Investigation of complaints: To investigate all complaints of
violations of the laws of the City and the State; and
   (e)   Annual reports: To make a complete annual report in writing concerning
the Police Department in general, giving a description of the condition of the
Department, making such suggestions and recommendations for major improvements
as he may deem advisable, and report on the activities of the Police Department
during the year.
(§§ 1 and 3, Ord. 1462, eff. April 5, 1962)
Sec. 2-3.210. Deputy Police Chief and Captains: Powers and duties.
   (a)   Deputy Police Chief.
      (i)   The Deputy Police Chief shall rank next to the Police Chief and
shall have similar qualifications. The Deputy Police Chief shall take complete
charge of the Police Department in the absence of the Police Chief and shall be
vested with the same authorities and duties while so acting.
      (ii)   Arrangements shall be made so that the Deputy Police Chief will
always be present in the absence of the Police Chief. In the presence of the
Police Chief, it shall be the duties of the Deputy Police Chief to aid the
Police Chief in every possible manner to maintain discipline and insure the
efficient operation of the Police Department.
   (b)    Captains.
      (i)   Captains shall rank next to the Deputy Police Chief and shall have
similar qualifications. A Captain shall take complete charge of the Police
Department in the absence of the Police Chief and the Deputy Police Chief and
shall be vested with the same authorities and duties while so acting.
      (ii)   Arrangements shall be made so that a Captain will always be
present in the absence of the Police Chief and the Deputy Police Chief. In the
presence of the Police Chief and the Deputy Police Chief, it shall be the
duties of a Captain to aid the Police Chief and the Deputy Police Chief in
every possible manner to maintain discipline and insure the efficient operation
of the Police Department.
(§ 3, Ord. 1462, eff. April 5, 1962 as amended by § 2, Ord. 3238, eff. January
19, 2023)
Sec. 2-3.211. Certain Vehicle Code violations: Enforcement by appointed
employees.
   (a)   The Police Chief may appoint specified nonsworn employees of the
Police Department to enforce the registration, insurance, license and
mechanical requirements of the Vehicle Code. A person so appointed shall have
the authority and duty to enforce the registration, insurance, license and
mechanical requirements of the Vehicle Code.
   (b)   A person appointed pursuant to subsection (a) of this section is
authorized, pursuant to Cal. Penal Code §§ 19.7 and 836.5, and by this section,
to arrest a person without a warrant whenever a person so appointed has
reasonable cause to believe that the person to be arrested has committed a
misdemeanor or an infraction in the presence of the person so appointed which
is a violation of the registration, license or mechanical requirements of the
California Vehicle Code.
   (c)   The arrest procedure shall be as set forth in Cal. Veh. Code § 40610.
   (d)   A person appointed pursuant to subsection (a) of this section shall
not carry or use firearms in the performance of his or her duties.
(§ 1, Ord. 2560, eff. December 16, 1993)
Article 3. Fire Department
Sec. 2-3.301. Established.
   There shall be a Fire Department for the City under the administrative
supervision of the City Manager.
(§ 1, Ord. 1463, eff. April 5, 1962)
Sec. 2-3.302. Membership.
   The Fire Department shall consist of the following:
   (a)   The Fire Chief;
   (b)   The Deputy Chiefs; and
   (c)   As many other officers and firefighters as may be appointed as
provided in this article.
(§ 2, Ord. 1463, eff. April 5, 1962)
Sec. 2-3.303. Membership: Volunteer firefighters
   (Repealed).
(§ 9, Ord. 1463, eff. April 5, 1962, repealed)
Sec. 2-3.304. Membership: Suspension and removal: Hearings.
   Suspension and removal: Reports by Fire Chief. Whenever the Fire Chief shall
find it necessary to suspend or remove any member of the Fire Department, the
Fire Chief shall at once report the same to the City Manager and the cause
therefor.
(§ 10, Ord. 1463, eff. April 5, 1962)
Sec. 2-3.305. Appointments: Terms.
   (a)   Fire Chief. The Fire Chief shall be appointed by the City Manager for
an indefinite term, subject to confirmation by the Council, and shall be
removed for cause after a proper hearing or in accordance with the applicable
provisions in the Employment Agreement.
   (b)   Deputy Chiefs and other officers. The Deputy Chiefs, Battalion
Supervisors and company officers shall be appointed by the Fire Chief, subject
to the approval of the City Manager, for an indefinite term, and in the
appointment of such officers, their seniority, ability, and service records
shall be considered.
(§ 6, Ord. 1463, eff. April 5, 1962 as amended by § 1, Ord. 1564, eff. June 18,
1964)
Sec. 2-3.306. Appointments: Qualifications.
   Appointments of new firefighters into the Department shall be made with the
object of improving the operation, efficiency, and general excellence of the
manpower. In the selection of firefighters, consideration shall be given to the
following rules:
   (a)   Age requirements. The age of applicants shall not be less than
eighteen (18) years.
   (b)   Mental and physical requirements. All applicants shall pass a physical
examination which shall not be inferior to the physical examination given by
the United States Army for recruits. Such applicants shall also pass a mental
and physical examination to determine their qualifications. Such examination
shall be given under the supervision of the Fire Chief.
(§ 6, Ord. 1463, eff. April 5, 1962 as amended by § 1, Ord. 1564, eff. June 18,
1964)
Sec. 2-3.307. Appointments: Probationary period.
   All new firefighters shall serve for a probationary period of one (1) year
before permanent appointment in the Fire Department. During such probationary
period, the firefighters shall be under the observation of the Fire Chief with
a view of deciding whether or not the applicants will be successful
firefighters. Once appointed, appointees shall be secure in their positions
during good behavior and proper performance of their duties as firefighters.
(§ 6(d), Ord. 1463, eff. April 5, 1962)
Sec. 2-3.308. Appointments: Eligibility lists.
   An eligibility list shall be provided, which list shall contain the names of
applicants who have passed the examination and from which list may be selected
new members for the Fire Department when needed.
(§ 6(e), Ord. 1463, eff. April 5, 1962)
Sec. 2-3.309. Appointments: Emergency.
   The City Manager may make emergency appointments of special firefighters
without regard to age.
(§ 6(f), Ord. 1463, eff. April 5, 1962)
Sec. 2-3.310. Fire Chief: Powers and duties.
   The Fire Chief shall be the chief executive officer of the Fire Department
and shall be vested with the following authorities and duties:
   (a)   Supervision of Department personnel. To have direct control,
management, and direction of all officers and personnel of the Fire Department
and to detail any of them to such public service as he/she may see fit, looking
to the best interests and efficiency of the Department;
   (b)   Supervision at fires. To exercise supreme command over the Fire
Department at fires and over all equipment belonging to the Department, to
cause to be extinguished all fires with the least possible danger to life and
property and prevent unnecessary damage by water at fires, and to see that the
premises on which fires occur are left in such condition that the fires will
not rekindle and cause further damage to life and property;
   (c)   Investigation of fires. To make a complete investigation of each fire,
keeping a record of, and determining the cause of, the fire, the amount of loss
to buildings and contents, the amount of insurance coverage and insurance paid,
and the number and description of each building destroyed, together with the
names of the owners and occupants;
   (d)   Enforcement of Department regulations. To carry out strictly the
enforcement of the rules and regulations of the Fire Department and suspend or
remove from service any officer or fire employee for cause in the manner
provided in such regulations;
   (e)   Monthly reports. To observe the general condition of the Fire
Department and apparatus and make a monthly report to the City Manager
concerning the same, together with a complete report of the activities of the
Department; and
   (f)   Annual reports. To make a complete annual report concerning the Fire
Department in general, giving a description of the condition of the Department,
making such suggestions and recommendations for major improvements as he/she
may deem advisable, and reporting on the activities of the Fire Department
during the year.
(§§ 1 and 3, Ord. 1463, eff. April 5, 1962)
Sec. 2-3.311. Deputy Fire Chiefs: Powers and duties.
   (a)   The Deputy Fire Chiefs shall rank next to the Fire Chief and shall
have similar qualifications. The Deputy Fire Chiefs shall take complete charge
in the absence of the Fire Chief and be vested with the same authorities and
duties while so acting.
   (b)   Arrangements shall be made so that a Deputy Fire Chief will always be
present in the absence of the Fire Chief. In the presence of the Fire Chief, it
shall be the duties of the Deputy Fire Chiefs to aid the Fire Chief in every
possible manner to maintain strict discipline and ensure the efficient
operation of the Department.
(§ 4, Ord. 1463, eff. April 5, 1962)
Sec. 2-3.312. Company officers: Powers and duties.
   A company officer shall be provided for each company in the Fire Department.
Such officers shall, under the direction of the Fire Chief, have absolute
command and control of their respective companies and shall be held responsible
for discipline and the proper maintenance and condition of equipment.
(§ 5, Ord. 1463, eff. April 5, 1962)
Sec. 2-3.313. Fire school.
   A fire school is hereby established which shall be conducted by the Fire
Chief in cooperation with the drillmaster. Such school shall consist of a study
of modern and generally well-recognized methods of fire extinguishment, a plan
for drills to be carried on during the month, and examinations testing
firefighters on general knowledge attained at the fire school.
(§ 7, Ord. 1463, eff. April 5, 1962)
Sec. 2-3.314. Drills.
   (a)   The Fire Department shall be drilled and maintained to the end that
fires shall be controlled immediately at their start to the extent possible.
Drills shall be in charge of a competent officer or firefighter who shall be
responsible for the proper training and drilling of firefighters and the
standardization of methods.
   (b)   Strict discipline shall at all times be maintained for the purpose of
contributing as a necessary factor to the smoothness of operation and
efficiency of the Department.
   (c)   Training drills shall be held frequently at the order of the Fire
Chief, or any person who may be so designated to call for training drills.
(§ 8, Ord. 1463, eff. April 5, 1962)
Sec. 2-3.315. Inspection of premises: Right of entry.
   (a)   Inspections required. The Fire Chief, or any member of the Fire
Department the Fire Chief may so designate, is hereby authorized, empowered,
and required to inspect from time to time, but not less frequently than once-a-
year, all buildings and premises where accumulations of combustible materials
or other hazardous conditions are likely to exist, and to order such changes or
removals as, in his/her opinion, are necessary for safety from fire,
principally in business and industrial sections.
   (b)   Right of entry. For the purpose of such inspections, the Fire Chief
and such designated members are hereby empowered to enter any and all buildings
and premises at any reasonable hour.
(§ 7, Ord. 1463, eff. April 5, 1962)
Article 4. Director of Finance
Sec. 2-3.401. Office established.
   The office of Executive Director of Finance is hereby established.
(§ 1, Ord. 1638, eff. October 20, 1966 as amended by § 2, Ord. 3096, eff. May
31, 2018)
Sec. 2-3.402. Appointment.
   The Executive Director of Finance shall be appointed by the City Manager,
subject to ratification by the Council.
(§ 1, Ord. 1638, eff. October 20, 1966 as amended by § 2, Ord. 3096, eff. May
31, 2018)
Sec. 2-3.403. Powers and duties.
   (a)   Supervision of Financial Services Agency. The Executive Director of
Finance shall direct the Financial Services Agency and perform related work as
required. The Financial Services Agency shall include the following services:
      (1)   Accounting;
      (2)   Budgeting;
      (3)   Purchasing and stores;
      (4)   Central billing;
      (5)   Licensing; and
      (6)   Other related central services.
   (b)   Transfer from City Clerk. The Executive Director of Finance shall
exercise all the powers and be subject to all the duties granted to and imposed
upon the City Clerk by the provisions of Article 1 of Chapter 4 of Part 2 of
Division 3 of Title 4 of the Government Code of the State (commencing with Cal.
Gov't Code § 37200) and Cal. Gov't Code §§ 40802 through 40805. The City Clerk
shall be relieved of all of such duties upon the appointment of the Executive
Director of Finance.
(§§ 2 through 4, Ord. 1638, eff. October 20, 1966 as amended by § 2, Ord. 3096,
eff. May 31, 2018)
Article 5. Salaries of City Clerk and City Treasurer
Sec. 2-3.501. City Clerk: Deputies.
   (a)   City Clerk. The salary of the City Clerk shall be fixed from time to
time by resolution of the City Council.
   (b)   Deputies. The salary of any deputy of the City Clerk may be fixed by
the Council at its pleasure.
(§ 1, Ord. 1531, eff. September 19, 1963 as amended by § 1, Ord. 2095, eff.
September 4, 1980, § 1, Ord. 2129, eff. May 21, 1981, § 3, Ord. 2720, eff.
August 17, 2000)
Sec. 2-3.502. City Treasurer: Deputies.
   (a)   City Treasurer. The salary of the City Treasurer shall be fixed from
time to time by resolution of the City Council.
   (b)   Deputies. The salary of any deputy of the City Treasurer may be fixed
by the Council at its pleasure.
(§ 2, Ord. 1531, eff. September 19, 1963, as amended by § 2, Ord. 2095, eff.
September 4, 1980, § 2, Ord. 2129, eff. May 21, 1981, § 1, Ord. 2390, eff. July
10, 1987)
Sec. 2-3.503. Insurance benefits.
   In addition to the salaries set forth in this article, the City Clerk and
the City Treasurer shall be entitled to all benefits of any group life and
health insurance provided by the City, and the premium therefor shall be paid
by the City in the same manner as the premiums for other City employees.
(§ 3, Ord. 1531, eff. September 19, 1963)
Sec. 2-3.504. Full-time employment required
   (Repealed).
(§ 4, Ord. 1531, eff. September 19, 1963, repealed by § 2, Ord. 2390, eff. July
10, 1987)
Article 6. Bonds
Sec. 2-3.601. Scope of provisions.
   For the purposes of this article, the term and title “City Manager” shall
also include the office, responsibility, and accountability of Purchasing
Agent.
(§ 2, Ord. 1393, eff. March 31, 1960)
Sec. 2-3.602. Bond: required.
   The officers and employees of the City enumerated in this section shall be
bonded in the amounts set forth in subsections (a) and (b) of this section.
Such bonding shall be conditioned on the faithful performance of their duties
by such officers and employees.
   (a)   Separate bonds. The officers and/or employees enumerated in this
subsection shall each be bonded by separate position bonds in the amount of Two
Hundred Thousand Dollars ($200,000.00):
      (1)   City Treasurer.
   (b)   Blanket bond. The officers and/or employees enumerated in this
subsection shall be incorporated in one (1) blanket position bond in the amount
of Two Hundred Thousand Dollars ($200.000.00):
      (1)   City Manager;
      (2)   Assistant City Manager;
      (3)   Administrative Services Director (finance);
      (4)   City Engineer;
      (5)   City Clerk;
      (6)   Deputy City Treasurers;
      (7)   Revenue Manager; and
      (8)   All other employees.
(§ 1, Ord. 1393, eff. March 31, 1960, as amended by § 1, Ord. 2315, eff. August
1, 1985)
Article 7. Office Hours, Holidays, and Records
Sec. 2-3.701. Offices: Records.
   The offices of all City employees shall be maintained at designated City-
owned and operated facilities within the established boundaries of the City;
and all books, documents, papers and effects of current operational value shall
be kept therein. Semi-active and inactive records may be maintained at a
central facility designated for such purpose in accordance with the provisions
of Cal. Gov't Code § 34090 and/or until such time as they are no longer needed
as determined by Retention Schedules approved and adopted by Resolution of the
City Council.
Sec. 2-3.702. Office hours.
   City Hall offices shall remain open Monday through Thursday from 7:30 a.m.
to 5:30 p.m., and on Friday from 8:00 a.m. to 5:00 p.m. except for legal
holidays as specified in the Personnel Rules and Regulations of the City. All
other City agencies shall maintain office hours as posted and approved by the
City Manager.
Sec. 2-3.703. Holidays.
   The following days shall be legal holidays for the City:
   (a)   New Year’s Day (January 1st);
   (b)   Martin Luther King’s Birthday (3rd Monday in January);
   (c)   President's Day (3rd Monday in February);
   (d)   Memorial Day (Last Monday in May);
   (e)   Independence Day (July 4th);
   (f)   Labor Day (1st Monday in September);
   (g)   Columbus Day (2nd Monday in October);
   (h)   Veteran’s Day (November 11th);
   (i)   Thanksgiving Day (4th Thursday in November);
   (j)   Day after Thanksgiving Day (4th Friday in November);
   (k)   Christmas Eve (December 24th);
   (l)   Christmas Day (December 25th);
   (m)   New Year’s Eve (December 31st).
   On such dates all offices in the City Hall shall be closed.
(§§ 1 and 2, Ord. 1657, eff. August 17, 1967, as amended by § 1, Ord. 2847,
eff. January 4, 2007)
Sec. 2-3.704. Deposit of moneys: Reports.
   It shall be the duty of every City official and employee receiving any
moneys from the public by virtue of his office or employment, for or on behalf
of the City, to render an account thereof to the Council on the last day of
each month and to pay such moneys to the City Cashier and take a receipt
therefor.
(§ 5, Ord. 1020, eff. September 1, 1954)
Article 8. Training of Law Enforcement Officers
Sec. 2-3.801. Declaration of qualifications.
   The City hereby declares that it desires to qualify to receive aid from the
State pursuant to the provisions of Chapter 1 of Title 4 of Part 4 of the Penal
Code of the State (commencing with Cal. Penal Code § 13500).
(§ 1, Ord. 1419, eff. February 2, 1961)
Sec. 2-3.802. Declaration of adherence to standards.
   Pursuant to the provisions of Cal. Penal Code § 13522, the City, when
receiving aid from the State pursuant to said Chapter 1, shall adhere to the
standards for recruitment and training established by the California Commission
on Peace Officer Standards and Training.
(§ 2, Ord. 1419, eff. February 2, 1961)
Sec. 2-3.803. Definitions.
   For the purpose of this chapter, unless otherwise apparent from the context,
certain words and phrases used in this chapter are defined as follows:
   (a)   “Chief of Police” and “Police Department” shall mean the Police Chief
and the Police Department, respectively, of the City of Ontario, California.
   (b)   “POST” or “P.O.S.T.” shall mean the Peace Officer Standards and
Training.
(§ 1, Ord. 2445, eff. May 4, 1989)
Sec. 2-3.804. Intent.
   The intent of this section is to express the desire of the City to
participate in the POST Public Safety Dispatcher Program as outlined in the
current pertinent POST Bulletin 88-7.
(§ 1, Ord. 2445, eff. May 4, 1989)
Sec. 2-3.805. Standards.
   The City shall adhere to the selection and training requirements of the
Peace Officers Standards and Training Commission.
(§ 1, Ord. 2445, eff. May 4, 1989)
Sec. 2-3.806. POST inquiries.
   The City and the Police Department shall allow a representative of POST to
make necessary inquiries from time to time to determine adherence to POST
Commission regulations as they relate to Public Safety Dispatchers.
(§ 1, Ord. 2445, eff. May 4, 1989)
Article 9. Distress Duties of Police Officers and Firefighters
Sec. 2-3.901. Services in addition to regular duties.
   In addition to the performance of their regular and ordinary duties, it
shall be the duty of all police officers and firefighters at all times and
under all circumstances, to go to the aid of all persons, animals, or property
in immediate danger or distress in the City and render them such help and
assistance as lies within the power of such police officers and firefighters.
They shall also render such assistance outside the City upon the order of the
Fire Chief or the Police Chief.
(§ 1, Ord. 517, eff. May 6, 1931)
Sec. 2-3.902. State compensation and safety laws: Applicability.
   In the event any police officer or firefighter is injured or killed while
rendering any of the additional services set forth in §
2-3.901 of this article, he/she shall be deemed to have been injured or killed
in the course of his employment, and the provisions of the Workmen's
Compensation, insurance, and safety laws of the State shall be applicable to
all such cases.
(§ 2, Ord. 517, eff. May 6, 1931)
Article 10. Recreation and Community Services Department
Sec. 2-3.1001. Established.
   The Recreation and Community Services Department is hereby established for
the City.
(§ 4A, Ord. 1607, eff. June 17, 1965)
Sec. 2-3.1002. Functions.
   The functions of the Recreation and Community Services Department shall be
as follows:
   (a)   To provide opportunities for wholesome, year-round public recreation
service for every age group;
   (b)   To develop and maintain in an attractive and safe manner the
recreation areas and facilities of the City; and
   (c)   To insure that such facilities are suitable for a wide variety of
recreation purposes.
(§ 4B, Ord. 1607, eff. June 17, 1965)
Sec. 2-3.1003. Recreation Director: Powers and duties.
   (a)   The Recreation Director shall function under the supervision of the
City Manager. He shall attend meetings of the Recreation Commission, may serve
as secretary to the Commission, and shall make such reports to the Commission
or the Council as shall be required.
   (b)   The Recreation Director shall:
      (1)   Employ, under the direction of the City Manager, the required
personnel, such as assistants, supervisors, leaders, and clerical employees, in
conformity with the personnel rules and regulations of the City and supervise
such personnel in the performance of their various duties;
      (2)   Administer, operate, and maintain all parks and recreation areas
and facilities, plan for the acquisition, development, and operation of
proposed facilities in accordance with policies approved by the Council, and
perform like duties in other designated areas, such as civic promotional
activities and similar activities;
      (3)   Inform the general public of the services and facilities provided
by the Recreation and Community Services Department;
      (4)   Cooperate, as directed by the Council, with governmental and
voluntary organizations and agencies in the furtherance of recreation
opportunities and approve the use of all recreation facilities by various
organizations;
      (5)   Prepare manuals, bulletins, and reviews on recreation problems and
keep adequate records of participants in each activity, as well as spectator
attendance;
      (6)   Conduct studies of local conditions and needs for recreation
services and assist with recruitment and training of department personnel; and
      (7)   Prepare, in cooperation with the City Manager's office for the
approval of the Council, a budget request for the operation and capital
improvements for parks and for recreational programs and facilities.
(§ 5, Ord. 1067, eff. June 17, 1965)
Article 11. City Clerk
Sec. 2-3.1101. Mandatory legal powers and duties of the City Clerk.
   The City Clerk shall have those legal responsibilities described in Cal.
Gov't Code §§ 40800, et seq., as may be amended from time to time.
Specifically, the City Clerk, or such deputies as may be appointed by the City
Clerk, shall attend all meetings of the City Council, keep accurate records of
City Council proceedings, retain custody of the City Seal, keep an ordinance
and resolution book, and record all ordinances and resolutions in it with
certifications attached. At the request of a member of the City Council, the
City Clerk shall enter the ayes and noes into the book.
(§ 1, Ord. 2720, eff. August 17, 2000)
Sec. 2-3.1102. Discretionary powers and duties of the City Clerk and Deputies.
   The City Clerk may appoint deputies, for whose acts the City Clerk and his
or her bondsperson are responsible. The deputies shall hold office at the
pleasure of the City Clerk. If the City Clerk utilizes the personnel provided
by the City as part of its Records Management Department, pursuant to §
2-3.1201, those deputies shall receive such compensation as is provided by the
City Council. The City Clerk and his or her deputies may administer oaths or
affirmations and take and certify affidavits and depositions pertaining to City
affairs and business which may be used in any court or proceedings in the
state. The acknowledgment of an instrument may be made before the City Clerk or
his or her deputies only within the City.
(§ 1, Ord. 2720, eff. August 17, 2000)
Sec. 2-3.1103. Municipal election oversight and reporting responsibilities.
   (a)   The City Clerk shall independently review all aspects of the City's
municipal elections and, should the City Clerk have any concerns regarding the
conduct of said municipal elections, immediately report the same to the City
Council.
   (b)   For the purposes of receipting and certifying nomination papers,
canvassing the results of all municipal elections, signing and delivering
certificates of election, and administering the oath to all elected municipal
officers, the City Clerk shall act as the City's Election Officer.
(§ 1, Ord. 2720, eff. August 17, 2000)
Article 12. Records Management Department
Sec. 2-3.1201.  Records Management Department created; functions; organization.
   The Records Management Department of the City of Ontario is hereby
established. All duties or tasks of the City Clerk not otherwise performed by
the City Clerk as described in §§
2-3.1101 and
2-3.1102 of this chapter shall be performed by the Records Management
Department. The Records Management Department shall be administered by a
manager and staff personnel, one or more of whom may be appointed deputies by
the City Clerk as provided in §
2-3.1102. The manager shall receive all administrative direction from and shall
report directly to the City Manager.
(§ 2, Ord. 2720, eff. August 17, 2000)
Sec. 2-3.1202. Functions of the Records Management Department manager.
   The Records Management Department manager shall be responsible for and
perform all functions necessary for the efficient operations and maintenance of
the Records Management Department and those of the City Clerk, except for those
mandatory duties performed by the City Clerk as stated in §§
2-3.1101 and
2-3.1102. In addition, the manager of the Department of Records Management
shall have the following functions:
   (a)   Develop, plan, and implement the goals and objectives of the City
Clerk, and to recommend and administer policies and procedures affecting the
activities of the City Clerk.
   (b)   Supervise and coordinate City elections, aid the public with county
and school elections, train election staff, and order and maintain election
supplies and equipment.
   (c)   Coordinate activities of the City Clerk with those of other
departments and outside agencies and organizations, provide staff assistance to
the City Council and City Manager, and prepare and present staff reports and
other necessary correspondence.
   (d)   Direct, oversee and participate in the development of the work plan of
the City Clerk; assign work activities, projects and programs; monitor work
flow; prepare and maintain a procedures manual for the City Clerk; and review
and evaluate work products, methods and procedures.
   (e)   Supervise and participate in the development and administration of the
elected officials, boards and commissions, and of the departmental budgets;
direct the forecast for additional funds needed for staffing, equipment,
materials and supplies; monitor and approve expenditures; and implement mid-
year adjustments.
   (f)   Select, train, motivate and evaluate personnel; provide and coordinate
staff training; work with employees to correct deficiencies; implement
discipline and termination procedures.
   (g)   Serve as Filing Officer for city appeals as designated by various
sections of the Ontario Municipal Code.
     (h)   Prepare and update the City's conflict of interest code, and serve
as Filing Officer for the Fair Political Practices Commission.
   (i)   Receive and open all sealed bids and formally release bid bonds.
   (j)   Receive, process and maintain claims, summonses and complaints; and
notify claimants of any action on claims received.
   (k)   Plan and direct the maintenance, updating and filing of official
municipal documents and records, including maintaining an active continuing
program for the economical and efficient management of these documents and
records; direct the publication, filing, indexing and safekeeping of all
proceedings of the city council; supervise codification of ordinances; and
supervise the preparation of city council and commission minutes and other
documents.
   (l)   Supervise the publication of all legal advertising.
   (m)   Assist the public and City staff by providing information and research
assistance.
   (n)   Certify documents and record affidavits with the county recorder.
   (o)   Provide information and organize material in compliance with federal,
state and local laws, regulations and policies.
   (p)   Direct the retention and destruction of official records in accordance
with applicable laws and regulations.
   (q)   Communicate clearly and concisely, both orally and in writing.
   (r)   Perform any other tasks or functions deemed necessary by the City
Manager or the City Council to support the daily operations of the City.
(§ 2, Ord. 2720, eff. August 17, 2000)
Sec. 2-3.1203. Program established; manual.
   The Records Management Department manager shall establish and maintain an
active continuing program for the economical and efficient management of the
records of the City. Compliance with the regulations, standards and procedures
issued by the Records Management Department shall be required of all City
departments. A copy of the citywide records management manual shall be
maintained in the Records Management Department.
(§ 2, Ord. 2720, eff. August 17, 2000)
CHAPTER 4: CUSTODY AND USE OF OFFICIAL CITY SEAL AND CITY INSIGNIA
   
2-4.01   Purpose
   
2-4.02   Definitions
   
2-4.03   Official City seal established
   
2-4.04   Custodian of official City seal
   
2-4.05   Use of the City seal and City insignia
   
2-4.06   Unauthorized use of the official City seal or City insignia is
prohibited
   
2-4.07   Penalties
Sec. 2-4.01. Purpose.
   The purpose of this chapter is to specify permissible uses of the official
City seal and City insignia of the City.
(§ 2, Ord. 3066, eff. March 9, 2017)
Sec. 2-4.02. Definitions.
   The following words or phrases as used in this chapter shall have the
following meanings:
   (a)   "City Insignia" is defined as the City seal, City flag, and City logo,
as designated from time to time by resolution of the City Council, as well as
all other logos, website banners, letterhead, business cards, or emblems
depicting or including City insignia, or any marketing marks as approved by the
City Manager.
   (b)   "City Staff" is defined as all employees, agents, and designees of the
City.
   (c)   "Official City Seal" is defined as the seal established herein in Sec.
2-4.03.
(§ 2, Ord. 3066, eff. March 9, 2017)
Sec. 2-4.03. Official City seal established.
   The official City seal of the City is hereby established. The inscription on
the center of the seal shall read "Incorporated December, 1891," and around the
outer edge thereof, the inscription shall read "City of Ontario, California."
The official City seal is set forth below:
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/c56901bb46348e8a42ec85392209a953c828cba6/
IMAGES/0-0-0-27590.jpg]
 
(§ 2, Ord. 3066, eff. March 9, 2017)
Sec. 2-4.04. Custodian of official City seal.
   The City Clerk shall have custody of the official City seal.
(§ 2, Ord. 3066, eff. March 9, 2017)
Sec. 2-4.05. Use of official City seal and City insignia.
   (a)   The City seal and City insignia shall be used only for purposes
directly connected with the official business of the City and its City Council
and officers, or for those matters expressly approved by the City Manager.
   (b)   The City Manager shall promulgate an administrative policy regarding
the use of the City seal and City insignia by City staff.
(§ 2, Ord. 3066, eff. March 9, 2017)
Sec. 2-4.06. Unauthorized use of the official City seal or City insignia is
prohibited.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to use or allow to be used any
reproduction or facsimile of the official City seal or City insignia, including
any design so closely resembling the official City seal or City insignia as to
be apt to deceive, except for those uses expressly authorized in Sec.
2-4.05.
(§ 2, Ord. 3066, eff. March 9, 2017)
Sec. 2-4.07. Penalties.
   Any person who, for malicious or commercial purposes, engages in the
unauthorized use of the Official City Seal or City Insignia, shall be subject
to a civil administrative fine not to exceed One-Thousand Dollars ($1,000.00)
and shall be guilty of a misdemeanor offense.
(§ 2, Ord. 3066, eff. March 9, 2017)
CHAPTER 5: PUBLIC LIBRARY
   
2-5.01   Established
Sec. 2-5.01. Established.
   A public library in and for the City is hereby established pursuant to the
provisions of an Act of the Thirty-fourth legislature of the State, approved
March 23, 1901, entitled “An Act to Provide for the Establishment and
Maintenance of Public Libraries within Municipalities,” being Cal. Educ. Code
§§ 18900 et seq., the provisions of which are hereby incorporated and made a
part of this chapter.
(§ 1, Ord. 103, eff. March 13, 1902)
CHAPTER 6: PURCHASING SYSTEM
   
2-6.01   Adopted: Purposes
   
2-6.02   Definition of Terms
   
2-6.03   Ethics Statement
   
2-6.04   Centralized Purchasing Program
   
2-6.05   Purchasing Officer
   
2-6.06   Supplemental Regulations
   
2-6.07   Use of Electronic Means
   
2-6.08   Exemptions from Centralized Purchasing
   
2-6.09   Inspection and Testing
   
2-6.10   Purchase Requisitions
   
2-6.11   Purchase Orders
   
2-6.12   Budgeted Funds Required
   
2-6.13   Public Projects
   
2-6.14   Services
   
2-6.15   Qualifications Based Services
   
2-6.16   Goods
   
2-6.17   Formal Bid Procedure
   
2-6.18   Informal Bid Procedure
   
2-6.19   Alternative Bid Procedure
   
2-6.20   Rejection of Bids; Options on Rejection and When No Bids or Equal Bids
are Received
   
2-6.21   Design Build
   
2-6.22   Local Preference
   
2-6.23   Exceptions
   
2-6.24   Emergency Procurements
   
2-6.25   Identification of Capital Assets
   
2-6.26   Execution of Instruments
   
2-6.27    Conflicts of Interest
   
2-6.28   Gifts and Gratuities
   
2-6.29   Cooperative Purchasing Programs
   
2-6.30   Use of Recycled Materials
   
2-6.31   Disposition of Surplus Personal Property
Sec. 2-6.01. Adopted: Purposes
   A centralized purchasing system is hereby adopted for the following
purposes:
   (a)   To establish procedures for the efficient procurement of goods,
services and public projects required by City;
   (b)   To purchase goods and services offering the best value to the City;
   (c)   To exercise responsible financial control over purchases;
   (d)   To provide for identification of capital assets acquired for the City;
   (e)   To establish policy and procedures for the disposition of surplus
goods;
   (f)   To provide for and encourage the standardization of goods, thereby
promoting efficiencies in the delivery of services to the residents, taxpayers
and businesses within the City, consistent with the “or equal” provisions
contained in Cal. Pub. Contract Code § 3400;
   (g)   To clarify for all City departments the law with respect to
competitive bidding requirements;
   (h)   To provide all qualified bidders with a fair opportunity to enter the
bidding process, thereby stimulating competition in a manner conducive to sound
fiscal practices;
   (i)   To maintain the highest ethical standards in the awarding of public
contracts;
   (j)   To encourage competition for public contracts and to aid public
officials in the efficient administration of public contracting, to the maximum
extent possible;
   (k)   To clearly define the authority of the purchasing function; and
   (l)   To provide guidance in the appropriate use of sole sourcing for the
purchase of non-public works related equipment, materials, supplies, and
services.
(§ 3, Ord. 3054, eff. August 18, 2016)
Sec. 2-6.02. Definition of Terms.
   The terms listed below, and their variants, whenever used in the chapter,
unless indicated otherwise in this chapter or defined otherwise by state
statute, shall be construed as follows:
   (a)   "Alternative procedure" means purchasing goods, services or public
projects by negotiated contract, purchase order or any other procedure outlined
in the City's purchasing and bidding policies and procedures manual approved by
the City Manager and consistent with this chapter. A type of alternative
procedure may include, but is not limited to, what will be referred to as a
"simplified pricing procedure" wherein the authorized contracting party, or
his/her designee, obtains written or oral price quotes from one or more
potential contractors or suppliers, and accepts the quote that is determined to
be in the best interests of the City. Job order contracts, requests for
proposals or requests for qualifications are other forms of "alternative
procedure" for purposes of this section.
   (b)   "Best Value" means a value determined by evaluation of objective
criteria that may include, but not be limited to price, features, functions,
life-cycle costs, experience, and past performance. A best value determination
may involve the selection of the lowest cost proposal meeting the interests of
the local agency and meeting the objectives of the project, selection of the
best proposal for a stipulated sum established by the procuring agency, or a
tradeoff between price and other specified factors.
   (c)   "Bid" means the response submitted by a bidder to an invitation for
bids issued by the City for goods, services or public projects needed by the
City.
   (d)   "City" means City of Ontario. For purposes of this chapter, the term
"City" shall also include any entity affiliate with the City of Ontario,
including the Ontario Housing Authority, to the extent such entity adopts a
resolution subjecting itself to the Uniform Public Construction Cost Accounting
Act.
   (e)   "Commission" means the California Uniform Construction Cost Accounting
Commission.
   (f)   "Competitive Bidding" means the process whereby bids are solicited
from potential bidders in accordance with applicable law, under the direction
of the Purchasing Division, to foster cost effective competition within the
private sector providing goods, services, or public projects to the City.
   (g)   "Conflict of Interest" means a clash between the public interest and
the private pecuniary interest of the individual concerned. A conflict of
interest arises when a City employee's personal or financial interest conflicts
or appears to conflict with his/her official responsibility.
   (h)   "Contract" means an agreement between competent parties with binding
legal force.
   (i)   "Controller" means the State Controller of the State of California.
   (j)   "Cooperative Purchasing" means a purchasing method whereby the
procurement requirements of two or more governmental entities are combined to
obtain the benefits of volume pricing, reduction in administrative costs, or
both.
   (k)   "Emergency" means a sudden, unexpected occurrence that poses a clear
and imminent danger, requiring immediate action to prevent or mitigate the loss
or impairment of life, health, property, or essential public services.
   (l)   "Facility" means any plant, building, structure, ground facility,
utility system (subject to the limitation found in Cal. Pub. Contract Code §
22002), real property, streets and highways, or other public work improvement.
   (m)   "Formal Bid" means a bid that is, subject to §
2-6.07, advertised in a local newspaper; submitted in a sealed envelope and in
conformance with a prescribed format; and publicly opened at a specified place,
date and time.
   (n)   "Goods" means supplies, materials, equipment and other commodities
(other than services and real property) included in Cal. Commercial Code §
2105.
   (o)   "Informal Bid or Quotation" means a competitive bid that is submitted
by a bidder for procurement of goods or services for which formal bidding is
not required.
   (p)   "Job Order Contract" means a contract that is based upon prices or
charges contained in a unit price book, sometimes published by independent
commercial sources, which detail repair and construction tasks, specifications,
units of measurement and unit prices for each task.
   (q)   "Maintenance Work" as defined in Cal. Pub. Contract Code § 22002.
   (r)   "Personal Property" means any property, other than real property,
including any furniture, fixtures or equipment that is attached to real
property in such a way that it can be removed without causing significant
damage to the real property.
   (s)   "Procurement" means purchasing, leasing, or otherwise acquiring any
goods, services, or public project construction, including all of the functions
that pertain to the acquisition.
   (t)   "Professional Services" means advisory, consulting, architectural,
engineering, computer, telecommunications, legal, financial, surveying or any
service which involves the exercise of professional discretion or independent
judgment based on an advanced or specialized knowledge, expertise or training
gained by formal studies or experience.
   (u)   "Public Project" as defined in Cal. Pub. Contract Code § 22002.
   (v)   "Purchase Order" means the City's written document provided to a
vendor formalizing the terms and conditions associated with the ordering of the
goods, services, or public project required by the City.
   (w)   "Purchase Requisition" means a written request submitted to Purchasing
by a Using Agency to initiate the procurement process for specified goods,
services or a public project.
   (x)   "Purchasing Officer" means the position defined within the City's
organizational structure responsible for overseeing the Purchasing Division.
The person occupying such position may delegate to such other person or entity
as he/she deems advisable such duties and responsibilities as have been
provided to him/her under this chapter.
   (y)   "Recycled Goods" means finished manufactured products containing
recycled materials in the production thereof.
   (z)   "Repair" means to mend an old thing, not to make a new thing; to
restore to a sound state something which has become partially dilapidated, not
to create something that has no existence; to make whole an existing article
and not the manufacture of something new. The term presupposes a thing in
existence to be repaired.
   (aa)   "Responsive Bid" means a bid which meets all of the specifications
set forth in the request for bid proposal.
   (bb)   "Responsible Bidder" means a bidder who has demonstrated the
attribute of trustworthiness, as well as quality, fitness, capacity, and
experience to satisfactorily perform the public works contract.
   (cc)   "Services" means the furnishing of labor, time or effort by a
contractor or vendor, which may involve to a lesser degree, the delivery or
supply of products. The term does not include services rendered by City
officers and employees, nor private firms offering professional services.
   (dd)   "Sole Source" means a non-competitive procurement decision whereby
acceptable justification exists to support public works or non-public works
related purchases provided by one particular supplier.
   (ee)   "Surplus Personal Property" means any personal property that is
unneeded, obsolete or otherwise unsuitable for use by the Using Agency.
   (ff)   "Using Agency" means any department, affiliate, agency or other unit
of City government that requisitions any good, service, or public project
through a centralized purchasing organization.
   (gg)   "Writing" means any handwriting, typewriting, printing, photostating,
photographing, photocopying, transmitting by electronic mail or facsimile, and
every other means of recording upon any tangible thing any form of
communication or representation, including letters, words, pictures, sounds, or
symbols, or combinations thereof, and any record thereby created, regardless of
the manner in which the record has been stored.
(§ 3, Ord. 3054, eff. August 18, 2016)
Sec. 2-6.03. Ethics Statement.
   It is of the highest importance that the taxpayers, residents and businesses
of the City of Ontario have complete confidence in the integrity of their
public servants. This need is especially critical in the procurement of goods,
services and public projects for the City's operational requirements. All City
employees are required to exemplify high standards of integrity in their
individual conduct and are responsible to ensure that they transact procurement
activity consistent with City policies and procedures and applicable federal,
state and local laws and regulations.
(§ 3, Ord. 3054, eff. August 18, 2016)
Sec. 2-6.04. Centralized Purchasing Program.
   There is hereby created a Purchasing Division of the Administrative Services
Agency in which is vested the authority for the centralized procurement of
goods, services and public projects for the City.
(§ 3, Ord. 3054, eff. August 18, 2016)
Sec. 2-6.05. Purchasing Officer.
   There is hereby created the position of Purchasing Officer who shall oversee
the following activities:
   (a)   Solicitation of Competition. Obtain the best value on all purchases
and award only to responsible bidders. Discourage uniform bidding and endeavor
to obtain the highest level of open competition feasible on all purchases.
   (b)   Procurement. Purchase goods, services and public projects required by
Using Agencies in accordance with the rules and regulations prescribed by the
City Council; administrative procedures approved by the City Manager; and the
purchasing procedures implemented by the Administrative Services Agency or as
otherwise provided by law.
   (c)   Contractual Commitments. Manage the purchasing program using contracts
as permitted by law including, but not limited to, equipment service contracts,
lease purchase agreements and rental agreements, subject to the restrictions
set forth in this chapter and/or specifically provided by law. Negotiate and
recommend the execution of contracts for the purchase of supplies, services and
equipment.
   (d)   Documentation. Maintain purchasing related forms, bid lists, vendor
directory, catalog file and records needed for the efficient operation of the
City's centralized purchasing program.
   (e)   Market Trends. Keep informed of current developments in the
procurement field in areas such as prices, market conditions and new products.
   (f)   Disposition of Surplus Personal Property. Facilitate the transfer of
surplus or unused goods between City departments as needed. Sell surplus goods
unsuitable for City use or discard if there is no salvage value.
   (g)   Asset Identification. Assign asset numbers to capital assets for
accountability and fiscal control of City property.
(§ 3, Ord. 3054, eff. August 18, 2016)
Sec. 2-6.06. Supplemental Regulations.
   (a)   City Council Rules and Regulations. The City Council may, from time to
time, adopt one or more resolutions establishing rules and supplemental
regulations to clarify the application of this chapter's provisions. Such rules
and regulations shall be in conformity with the intent and purpose of this
chapter. In the event of any conflict between such rules and regulations and
the provisions of this chapter, this chapter shall prevail.
   (b)   Administrative Rules and Regulations. The City Manager, or his/her
designee, shall have the power to render interpretations of this chapter and to
adopt and enforce written rules and supplemental regulations to clarify the
application of this chapter's provisions and any resolution(s) adopted pursuant
to subdivision (a), above. Such interpretations, rules and regulations shall be
in conformity with the intent and purpose of this chapter and any such
resolution(s). Without limiting the nature of the foregoing, such rules and
supplemental regulations may include, without limitation, criteria upon which
contracts shall be bid and awarded. In the event of any conflict between such
rules and regulations and the provisions of this chapter or such resolution(s),
this chapter and any such resolution(s) shall prevail.
(§ 3, Ord. 3054, eff. August 18, 2016)
Sec. 2-6.07. Use of Electronic Means.
   (a)   Consistent with the stated policy of promoting efficient public
contract law, consistent with the best of modern practice and research, and
pursuant to the authority granted by Cal. Pub. Contract Code §§ 1600 and 1601,
the City shall be authorized to utilize electronic means in the procurement and
administration of contracts, so long as the purpose and intent of applicable
state law, this chapter, and any supplemental rules or regulations are met.
   (b)   Without limiting the nature of the foregoing, the City may utilize
online bidding and selling methods, electronic signature in accordance with
applicable state, local and federal law, and electronic mail for delivery of
notices when "mailed" notice is required herein. For purposes of this chapter,
“supporting materials,” as that term is used in Public Contract Code § 1601
shall be deemed to include security bonds, which the City may, in its sole and
absolute discretion, allow to be submitted electronically, consistent with any
supplemental regulations, adopted in accordance with § 2-6.06, implementing the
submission of electronic security bonds. Whenever "sealed" bids or proposals
are called for, any electronic means may be used so long as such electronic
means provide for the secured submission of the required data. Whenever bids
are required to be "opened", such bids shall be deemed "opened" if and when
they are made available to both the City and the public simultaneously, in a
public setting, including, without limitation, by way of making such bids
available in an electronic format that is readable by the public. If provisions
of this section are in conflict with any other resolution or ordinance of the
City, this section shall prevail.
(§ 3, Ord. 3054, eff. August 18, 2016; as amended by § 1, Ord. 3110, eff.
August 16, 2018)
Sec. 2-6.08. Exemptions from Centralized Purchasing.
   The Purchasing Officer, with the approval of the City Manager, may authorize
(which authorization, to be effective, shall be in writing) any Using Agency to
purchase or contract for specified goods, services, or public project
independently of the Purchasing Division, but he/she shall require that such
purchases or contracts be made in conformity with the procedures established by
this chapter, and shall further require periodic reports from agencies on
purchases and contracts made under such written authorizations.
(§ 3, Ord. 3054, eff. August 18, 2016)
Sec. 2-6.09. Inspection and Testing.
   The Purchasing Officer or designee shall inspect goods delivered and
contractual services performed to determine their conformance with the
specifications set forth in the order or contract. The Purchasing Officer or
designee shall have the right to waive any defect or informality. The
Purchasing Officer or designee shall have the authority to require chemical and
physical tests of samples, submitted with bids, and samples of deliveries which
are necessary to determine their quality and conformance with required
specifications.
(§ 3, Ord. 3054, eff. August 18, 2016)
Sec. 2-6.10. Purchase Requisitions.
   Using Agencies shall initiate requests for goods, services, and public
projects using purchase requisitions submitted to the Purchasing Division, in
accordance with City's Purchasing Policies and Procedures. Upon review of any
requisition, the Purchasing Officer may require additional justification
concerning the requisition from the originating Department/Agency.
(§ 3, Ord. 3054, eff. August 18, 2016)
Sec. 2-6.11. Purchase Orders.
   The purchase of goods, services, and public projects (pursuant to federal,
state and local law, including the dollar limit thresholds established by the
Ontario City Council) shall be made only by purchase order, except as approved
by City policy. Except in cases of emergency as set forth in §
2-6.24 of this chapter, purchases of items by any person other than a
designated City employee without an approved purchase order shall not be
binding upon the City or constitute a lawful charge against City funds.
(§ 3, Ord. 3054, eff. August 18, 2016)
Sec. 2-6.12. Budgeted Funds Required.
   Except in cases of an emergency, purchase orders or contracts for goods,
services, and public projects shall not be issued unless: 1) budgeted funds
exist in the fund/account against which the purchase is to be charged; or 2) an
authorization to override is provided by the Budget Office due to a pending
budget adjustment.
(§ 3, Ord. 3054, eff. August 18, 2016)
Sec. 2-6.13. Public Projects.
   (a)   Small. Public projects of sixty thousand dollars ($60,000) or less may
be performed by the employees of the City by force account, by negotiated
contract, a contract obtained by way of an alternative procedure, or by
purchase order. In addition, the City may, but shall not be legally required
to, unless the project is subject to federal funding requirements, use one (1)
of the procurement methods set forth in subdivisions (b) or (c) hereof.
   (b)   Medium. Public projects of two hundred thousand dollars ($200,000) or
less shall be let to contract by informal procedures as set forth in this
chapter. In addition, the City may, but shall not be legally required to, use
the procurement method set forth in subdivision (c) hereof.
   (c)   Large. Public projects of more than two hundred thousand dollars
($200,000) shall, except as otherwise provided in this chapter, be let to
contract by formal bidding procedure.
   (d)   If, as, and when the amounts set forth above are amended by the state,
this chapter shall be deemed to have been amended to reflect such changes,
without the need for further action on the part of the City.Such changes by the
state shall be deemed to be incorporated by reference herein.
(§ 3, Ord. 3054, eff. August 18, 2016 as amended by § 2, Ord. 3110, eff. August
16, 2018, § 1, Ord. 3120, eff. December 20, 2018)
Sec. 2-6.14. Services.
   (a)   Professional, non-professional and maintenance service contracts may
be let by any formal, informal or alternative procedure, as established by City
Council resolution, or in the absence of any such City Council resolution as
established by administrative rule or regulation. Award may be predicated on a
best value selection.
   (b)   Unless prohibited by law, the City may establish, consistent with the
procurement requirements of this chapter and any supplemental regulations,
master agreements with vendors providing professional, non-professional and
maintenance services that allow the City to issue task or job orders under the
master agreements without being subject to further procurement requirements,
but prices should be obtained in a manner to ensure best value to the City.
(§ 3, Ord. 3054, eff. August 18, 2016, as amended by § 3, Ord. 3211, eff. July
1, 2022)
Sec. 2-6.15. Qualifications Based Services.
   Notwithstanding any other provision of law, selection for professional
services of private architectural, landscape architectural, engineering,
environmental, land surveying, or construction project management firms shall
be on the basis of demonstrated competence and on the professional
qualifications necessary for the satisfactory performance of the services
required.
(§ 3, Ord. 3054, eff. August 18, 2016)
Sec. 2-6.16. Goods.
   Contracts for the provision of goods may be let and awarded by any formal,
informal or alternative procedure, as established by City Council resolution,
or in the absence of any such City Council resolution as established by
administrative rule or regulation.
(§ 3, Ord. 3054, eff. August 18, 2016)
Sec. 2-6.17. Formal Bid Procedure.
   The formal bid procedure shall be as set forth herein, or as otherwise
required by state or federal law or supplemented by City Council or
administrative rules or regulations.
   (a)   Adoption of Plans. The City Council or its designated representative
shall adopt plans, specifications, and working details for all Public Projects
exceeding two hundred thousand dollars ($200,000).
   (b)   Notices Inviting Bids. Notices Inviting Bids shall state the time and
place for the receiving and opening of sealed bids and distinctly describe the
project. The notice shall be published at least fourteen (14) calendar days
before the date of opening the bids in a newspaper of general circulation,
printed and published in the jurisdiction of the City. The notice shall be sent
electronically, if available, by either facsimile or electronic mail and mailed
at least fifteen (15) calendar days before the date of opening the bids to all
construction trade journals specified in Cal. Pub. Contract Code § 22036.
Notices Inviting Bids shall include a general description of the items to be
purchased and shall state where bid forms may be obtained and the date, time
and place of bid opening. In addition to the notice required by this section,
the City may give such other notice as it deems proper.
   (c)   Bidders List. The notice inviting bids shall be mailed to all
responsible, prospective vendors known to City staff and others requesting, in
writing, to participate in the bid process.
   (d)   Award of contracts. If awarded, the bid will be awarded to the
responsible bidder who submits the lowest responsive bid. Unless provided
otherwise by law, the City shall have the right to waive any defect or
informality in the bidding or in the procedures set forth in this section.
Unless provided otherwise by law, no defect of informality shall void any
contract entered into.
(§ 3, Ord. 3054, eff. August 18, 2016 as amended by § 2, Ord. 3120, eff.
December 20, 2018)
Sec. 2-6.18. Informal Bid Procedure.
   The City may let and award bids for small or medium public projects, as
defined in §
2-6.13, subdivisions (a) and (b), respectively, pursuant to the procedures set
forth in this section.
   (a)   The City shall maintain a list of qualified contractors, identified
according to categories of work. Minimum criteria for development and
maintenance of the contractors list shall be determined by the Commission.
   (b)   All contractors on the list for the category of work being bid or all
construction trade journals pursuant to in Cal. Pub. Contract Code § 22036, or
both all contractors on the list for the category of work being bid and all
construction trade journals pursuant to in Cal. Pub. Contract Code § 22036,
shall be mailed, faxed or emailed, a notice inviting informal bids unless the
product or service is proprietary.
   (c)   All delivery of notices to contractors and construction trade journals
pursuant to subdivision (b) shall be completed not less than ten (10) calendar
days before bids are due.
   (d)   The notice inviting informal bids shall describe the project in
general terms and how to obtain more detailed information about the project,
and state the time and place for the submission of bids.
   (e)   If all bids received are in excess of two hundred thousand dollars
($200,000), the City Council may, by adoption of a resolution by a four-fifths
(4/5) vote, award the contract, at two hundred twelve thousand five hundred
dollars ($212,500) or less, to the lowest responsible bidder, if it determines
the cost estimate of the City was reasonable.
   (f)   Informally bid contracts shall, whenever possible, be based on at
least three (3) responsive bids.
   (g)   Sealed bids may, at the City's election, be received by the City via
the electronic bid management system.
   (h)   Informal Bids shall be awarded to the lowest responsible bidder,
consistent with the quality and delivery requirements. The City Manager, or
his/her designee, shall be authorized to award contracts for Public Projects of
up to one hundred fifty thousand dollars ($150,000). The City Council shall be
authorized to award bids for Public Projects of more than one hundred fifty
thousand dollars ($150,000).
(§ 3, Ord. 3054, eff. August 18, 2016 as amended by § 3, Ord. 3120, eff.
December 20, 2018; § 2, Ord. 3242, eff. March 23, 2023)
Sec. 2-6.19. Alternative Bid Procedure.
   When formal bidding or informal bidding is not required by this chapter, the
City may use any alternative procedure for the procurement of goods, services,
or public projects. An "alternative procedure" means purchasing goods, services
or public projects by negotiated contract, purchase order or any other
procedure outlined in the City's purchasing and bidding policies and procedures
manual approved by the City Manager and consistent with this chapter. A type of
alternative procedure may include, but is not limited to, what will be referred
to as a "simplified pricing procedure" wherein the authorized contracting
party, or his/her designee, obtains written or oral price quotes from one or
more potential contractors or suppliers, and accepts the quote that is
determined to be in the best interests of the City. Job order contracts,
requests for proposals or requests for qualifications are other forms of
"Alternative Bid Procedures" for purposes of this section.
(§ 3, Ord. 3054, eff. August 18, 2016)
Sec. 2-6.20. Rejection of Bids; Options on Rejection and When No Bids or Equal
Bids Are Received.
   (a)   In its discretion, the City Council, or for projects of one hundred
thousand dollars ($100,000) or less the City Manager or his/her designee, may
reject any bids presented, if the City, prior to rejecting all bids and
declaring that the project can be more economically performed by employees of
the City, furnishes a written notice to an apparent low bidder. The notice
shall inform the bidder of the City's intention to reject the bid and shall be
mailed at least two business days prior to the meeting at which the City
intends to reject the bid. If after the first invitation of bids all bids are
rejected, after reevaluating its cost estimates of the project, the City shall
have the option of either of the following:
      (1)   Abandoning the project or re-advertising for bids in the manner
described by this chapter.
      (2)   By passage of a resolution by a four-fifths vote of the City
Council, may have the project done by force account without further complying
with this chapter.
   (b)   If a contract is awarded, it shall be awarded to the lowest
responsible bidder. If two or more bids are the same and the lowest, the City
may accept the one it chooses.
   (c)   If no bids are received through the formal or informal procedure, the
project may be performed by the employees of the City by force account, or
negotiated contract without further complying with this chapter.
(§ 3, Ord. 3054, eff. August 18, 2016)
Sec. 2-6.21. Design Build.
   Notwithstanding any provision contained in this chapter to the contrary, the
City may utilize a design-build method of procurement, to the extent permitted
by law, including, without limitation Cal. Pub. Contract Code §§ 22160 et seq.
and 20194.
(§ 3, Ord. 3054, eff. August 18, 2016)
Sec. 2-6.22. Local Preference.
   The City has established a local preference in order to promote the
community's economic health and to encourage local participation in the
procurement process. For the purchase of goods, with the exception of materials
for public works projects, the City may grant to vendors located within the
City limits of Ontario a 1¾% advantage in the City's determination of low bid
due to the ultimate receipt by the City and County of a proportionate amount of
the sales tax associated with the purchase of the goods solicited. A vendor
whose sales tax is reportable outside of the City but within the County of San
Bernardino will receive a ¾% advantage in low bid determination. This section
shall not apply to procurements subject to federal funding requirements.
(§ 3, Ord. 3054, eff. August 18, 2016 as amended by § 3, Ord. 3110, eff. August
16, 2018)
Sec. 2-6.23. Exceptions.
   The Purchasing Officer may make any of the following procurements without
complying with the procurement methods set forth above, as follows:
   (a)   In an "emergency", provided the procedures set forth in §
2-6.24 are followed.
   (b)   The goods, services or public project can be obtained from a sole
source .
   (c)   Where the awarding entity determined that the nature of the subject of
the contract is such that competitive proposals would be unavailing or would
not produce an advantage, and the advertisement for competitive bid would thus
be undesirable, impractical, or impossible.
   (d)   The City Council has by resolution transferred the authority to make
the purchase of goods to another governmental agency through cooperative
purchasing and the agency generally follows the provisions of Cal. Govt. Code
§§ 54201 through 54204.
(§ 3, Ord. 3054, eff. August 18, 2016)
Sec. 2-6.24. Emergency Procurements.
   (a)   In accordance with Cal. Pub. Contract Code §§ 22050 et seq., in cases
of emergency when repair or replacements are necessary, the City Council,
pursuant to a four-fifths vote of the City Council, may proceed at once to
replace or repair any public facility without adopting plans, specifications,
strain sheets, or working details, or giving notice for bids to let contracts.
Before the City Council takes any action pursuant to this subdivision (a), it
shall make a finding, based on substantial evidence set forth in the minutes of
its meeting, that the emergency will not permit a delay resulting from a
competitive solicitation for bids, and that the action is necessary to respond
to the emergency.
   (b)   Pursuant to Cal. Pub. Contract Code § 22050, Subdivision (b)(1), the
City Council hereby delegates to the City Manager or his/her designee, the
authority to repair or replace a public facility, take any directly related and
immediate action required by that emergency, and procure the necessary
equipment, services, and supplies for those purposes, without giving notice for
bids to let contracts.
   (c)   If the City Manager or his/her designee orders any action specified in
subdivision (a), that person shall report to the City Council, at its next
meeting required pursuant to this section, the reasons justifying why the
emergency will not permit a delay resulting from a competitive solicitation for
bids and why the action is necessary to respond to the emergency.
   (d)   (1)   If the City Council orders any action specified in subdivision
(a), the City Council shall review the emergency action at its next regularly
scheduled meeting and, except as specified below, at every regularly scheduled
meeting thereafter until the action is terminated, to determine, by a four-
fifths vote, that there is a need to continue the action.
      (2)    If the City Manager or his/her designee orders any action
specified in subdivision (a), the City Council shall initially review the
emergency action not later than seven days after the action, or at its next
regularly scheduled meeting if that meeting will occur not later than 14 days
after the action, and at least at every regularly scheduled meeting thereafter
until the action is terminated, to determine, by a four-fifths vote, that there
is a need to continue the action, unless the City Manager or his/her designee
has terminated that action prior to the City Council reviewing the emergency
action and making a determination pursuant to this subdivision.
      (3)    When the City Council reviews the emergency action pursuant to
subdivision (1) or (2), it shall terminate the action at the earliest possible
date that conditions warrant so that the remainder of the emergency action may
be completed by giving notice for bids to let contracts.
(§ 3, Ord. 3054, eff. August 18, 2016)
Sec. 2-6.25. Identification of Capital Assets.
   The Purchasing Division will, when feasible and practical, assign asset
numbers to items identified as capital assets in accordance with the
administrative policies that are in effect. Assignment of asset numbers will
take place at the earliest time that individual assets can be identified from
the purchase order. Assigned asset numbers shall become permanent references
for tracking and controlling assets. Certain other categories of assets, which
may not be identified as capital assets, may also be assigned asset numbers for
inventory and tracking purposes in accordance with the administrative policies
that are in effect.
(§ 3, Ord. 3054, eff. August 18, 2016)
Sec. 2-6.26. Execution of Instruments.
   Pursuant to Cal. Govt. Code § 40603, the City Manager is authorized to sign
all warrants drawn on the City Treasury, all written contracts and conveyances
made or entered into by the City Council, and all instruments requiring the
City seal, provided any such document does not exceed such amount or such
authority as may be established from time to time by resolution, motion or
order of the City Council. The City Manager may delegate to any subordinate of
the City Manager the authority granted to the City Manager by this section;
provided that such delegation by the City Manager must be made in writing and
signed by the City Manager in order to be effective.
(§ 3, Ord. 3054, eff. August 18, 2016)
Sec. 2-6.27. Conflicts of Interest.
   (a)   City employees shall comply with the City's Conflict of Interest Code;
Administrative Manual Policy Number I-2-4, "Statement of Policy on Fraud"; the
Code of Ethics, Rule XXIII of the City's Personnel Rules and Regulations; and
pertinent laws and regulations, all of which are incorporated herein by
reference.
   (b)   Any architects or engineer, or other consultant, used by the City to
assist in the development of any project-specific documents shall not be
eligible to participate in the preparation or submission of a bid or proposal
for that project, except as permitted by §
2-6.21.
   (c)   Pursuant to Cal. Govt. Code § 1126, employees of the City shall not
engage in any business or activity that provides goods, services or public
projects to the City. This subdivision shall not apply to the mere ownership of
stock of the supplier of goods, services or Public Project, so long as the
stock ownership is less than two (2) percent of the total outstanding stock of
the supplier, and the supplier is a publicly traded company.
(§ 3, Ord. 3054, eff. August 18, 2016)
Sec. 2-6.28. Gifts and Gratuities.
   City employees are prohibited from accepting money, premiums, incentives or
anything of value, in an amount exceeding the amount established by City
Council resolution, from any vendor or potential vendor of goods, services or
public projects to the City.
(§ 3, Ord. 3054, eff. August 18, 2016)
Sec. 2-6.29. Cooperative Purchasing Programs.
   The Purchasing Division is authorized to purchase any goods and services by
means of cooperative purchasing programs (also known as "piggybacking")
pursuant to Cal. Govt. Code § 6502 and Ontario Resolution No. 91-141 (adopted
by the City Council on December 17, 1991), so long as the goods, services or
public projects were originally let in accordance with at least the minimum
requirements of this chapter. All documents in connection therewith and on
behalf of the City of Ontario will be signed in accordance with established
City Signature Authority Policy.
(§ 3, Ord. 3054, eff. August 18, 2016)
Sec. 2-6.30. Use of Recycled Materials.
   In the procurement of goods for the City, a preference shall be given to buy
recycled goods in accordance with Ontario Municipal Code §
6-3.701. Recycled goods are defined and provided for in such California State
legislation such as the State Assistance for Recycling (STAR) Markets Act of
1989 (commencing with Cal. Pub. Contract Code § 12150) and the California
Integrated Waste Management Act of 1989 (commencing with Cal. Pub. Resources
Code § 40000).
(§ 3, Ord. 3054, eff. August 18, 2016)
Sec. 2-6.31. Disposition of Surplus Personal Property.
   The Purchasing Officer, upon notification by Using Agencies of excess City-
owned surplus personal property, is authorized to determine whether any such
City-owned personal property is surplus to the present or future needs of the
City and will coordinate the disposition of said City property. This section
shall not be applicable to personal property or money, to the extent the
disposition of such is governed by other applicable law, including, without
limitation, escheat pursuant to Cal. Govt. Code §§ 50050 et seq., personal
property or goods pursuant to the California Uniform Controlled Substances Act
(Cal. Health and Safety Code §§ 11000 et seq.), or the Unclaimed Property Law
(Cal. Code of Civ. Proc. §§ 1500 et seq.).
   (a)   Declaration of Surplus Goods. Using Agencies that determine certain
goods to be of no use to their Agency must complete a "surplus property
transaction request" and forward it to the Purchasing Officer for review and
subsequent declaration as being surplus.
   (b)   Custody of Surplus Goods. Each Using Agency shall retain custody of
its surplus goods until their transfer or final disposition has been
determined. No Using Agency shall, in any event, permit any surplus goods held
by it to be loaned or donated without prior City Council approval, or destroyed
or otherwise removed from the City's custody without the prior written approval
of the Purchasing Officer.
   (c)   Transfer. Before disposing of surplus goods, the Using Agency shall
canvass all other Using Agencies to determine whether another City Agency can
use the surplus goods. If another Agency desires to use the goods, Purchasing
shall assist in transferring the goods to that Agency.
   (d)   Disposition. The Purchasing Officer is hereby authorized to dispose of
surplus goods which are not used or needed by any Using Agency or which have
become unsuitable for City use. Such goods may be disposed of by any of the
following procedures:
      (1)   Exchanged or traded in on new goods;
      (2)   Sold utilizing competitive procedures similar to those prescribed
herein for open market procurement;
      (3)   Sold at public auction conducted by a professional auctioneer;
      (4)   Sold utilizing a negotiation process when the Purchasing Officer
deems that such process is in the best interests of the City;
      (5)   Disposed of as scrap material or destroyed if no resale value
exists; or
      (6)   Donated to a non-profit organization or other public entity
following a City Council determination that such donation would serve a public
purpose.
(§ 3, Ord. 3054, eff. August 18, 2016)
CHAPTER 7: MERIT SYSTEM FOR PERSONNEL ADMINISTRATION
   
2-7.01   Personnel Rules and Regulations adopted
   
2-7.02   Departments, Officers, and Employees Included and Excluded
   
2-7.03   Library Officers and Employees Included and Excluded
   
2-7.04   Personnel Officer
Sec. 2-7.01. Personnel Rules and Regulations adopted.
   There is hereby adopted by the City a merit system of personnel
administration pursuant to the provisions of Title 4, Division 5, Chapter 1,
Article 1 of the Government Code of the State (commencing with Cal. Gov't Code
§ 45000), for the purpose of establishing uniform procedures for personnel
administration as set forth in the document known as “City of Ontario Personnel
Rules and Regulations,” of which regulations not less than one copy has been
and now is filed in the office of the City Clerk, and the same are hereby
adopted and incorporated as fully as if set out at length herein. The Personnel
Rules and Regulations may be revised by the City Manager or designee, subject
to the requirements of Cal. Gov't Code §§ 3500 through 3511.
(§ 1, Ord. 1695, eff. September 19, 1968, as amended by § 2, Ord. 2847, eff.
January 4, 2007)
Sec. 2-7.02. Departments, Officers, and Employees Included and Excluded.
   All departments and all officers and employees of the City are included in
the merit system, except regular full-time employees in a position equivalent
to a department head or above. Employees in these positions will serve at the
will and pleasure of the City Manager and the selection, appointment, and
dismissal of said "at-will" employees is at the discretion of the City Manager.
All elected officials and members of advisory commissions and boards are hereby
excluded from coverage of the merit system.
(§ 1, Ord. 1695, eff. September 19, 1968, as amended by Ord. 2653, eff. March
5, 1998, § 1, Ord. 2659, eff. May 7, 1998, § 3, Ord. 2847, eff. January 4,
2007)
Sec. 2-7.03. Library Officers and Employees Included and Excluded.
   Pursuant to the provisions of Cal. Gov't Code § 45002, the merit system
shall include the librarians, secretary, and other officers and employees of
the Ontario City Library except the Library Director and board of trustees
thereof, pursuant to §
2-7.02.
(§ 1, Ord. 1695, eff. September 19, 1968, as amended by § 4, Ord. 2847, eff.
January 4, 2007)
Sec. 2-7.04. Personnel Officer.
   The City Manager or anyone he may designate, subject to ratification of the
Council, shall be the Personnel Officer for the City and empowered to enforce
the provisions of this chapter.
(§ 1, Ord. 1695, eff. September 19, 1968)
CHAPTER 8: INELIGIBILITY FOR EMPLOYMENT
   
2-8.01   Ineligibility for employment
Sec. 2-8.01. Ineligibility for employment.
   (a)   No person convicted (including pleas of guilty and nolo contendere) of
a felony or a misdemeanor involving moral turpitude shall be eligible for
employment by any department of the City; provided, however, the appointing
authority may disregard such conviction if it is found and determined by such
appointing authority that mitigating circumstances exist, such as, but not
limited to, evidence of rehabilitation, the length of time elapsed since such
conviction, the age of such person at the time of the conviction, or the fact
that the classification applied for is unrelated to such conviction.
   (b)   The City Manager, Personnel Officer, Police Chief, City Attorney,
Assistant or Deputy City Attorney, and each appointing authority of the City
are hereby authorized to have access to the “State Summary Criminal History
Information,” as provided for in Cal. Penal Code § 11105, when it is required
to assist such individual to fulfill the employment responsibilities set forth
in this Section.
(§ 1, Ord. 1939, eff. May 19, 1977)
CHAPTER 9: PUBLIC MUSEUM
   
2-9.01   Established
   
2-9.02   Site
   
2-9.03   Name
Sec. 2-9.01. Established.
   A public museum of natural and historical objects in the City is hereby
established pursuant to the provisions of Article 6 of Chapter 4 of Division 3
of Title 4 of the Government Code of the State (commencing with Cal. Gov't Code
§ 37541), the provisions of which are hereby incorporated in and made a part of
this chapter.
(§ 1, Ord. 2053, eff. October 18, 1979)
Sec. 2-9.02. Site.
   The historic City Hall building, located at 225 South Euclid Avenue, in its
entirety, is hereby established as the site of the public museum.
(§ 1, Ord. 2053, eff. October 18, 1979, as amended by § 2, Ord. 3023, eff.
August 20, 2015)
Sec. 2-9.03. Name.
   The public museum shall be given the name of “Ontario Museum of History and
Art.”
(§ 1, Ord. 2053, eff. October 18, 1979, as amended by § 2, Ord. 3023, eff.
August 20, 2015)
CHAPTER 10: ELECTIONS
   
2-10.01   Authority
   
2-10.02   When Held
   
2-10.03   Applicability; Authority of City Council to Change Dates
   
2-10.04   Adoption of Voluntary Expenditure Ceiling
   
2-10.05   Resolution Determining Number of City Residents
   
2-10.06   Local Campaign Contribution Limits
   
2-10.07   Duties of the Office of the City Clerk
   
2-10.08   Violation - Penalty
   
2-10.09   Electronic Filing of Campaign Statements and Statements of Economic
Interests
Sec. 2-10.01. Authority.
   This chapter is enacted under the authority of Cal. Elec. Code § 1301.
(§ 1, Ord. 2392, eff. August 20, 1987)
Sec. 2-10.02. When Held.
   The General Municipal Election of the City of Ontario shall be held on the
same day as the statewide General Election, namely, on the first Tuesday after
the first Monday of November in each even-numbered year.
(§ 2, Ord. 2392, eff. August 20, 1987)
Sec. 2-10.03. Applicability; Authority of City Council to Change Dates.
   This chapter shall apply to General Municipal Elections held in 1988 and
subsequent years; provided, however, that nothing in this chapter shall limit
or otherwise affect the authority of the City Council to change the day of the
General Municipal Election in the manner permitted by Cal. Gov't Code §
36503.5, or any other relevant statute.
(§ 3, Ord. 2392, eff. August 20, 1987)
Sec. 2-10.04. Adoption of Voluntary Expenditure Ceiling.
   Pursuant to Cal. Gov't Code § 85400(c), a voluntary expenditure ceiling of
one dollar ($1.00) per resident per election for Mayoral candidates, and
seventy-five cents ($.75) per resident per election for Council candidates for
each election in the City in which the candidate is seeking elective office.
(§ 1, Ord. 2647, eff. February 5, 1998)
Sec. 2-10.05. Resolution Determining Number of City Residents.
   The City Council shall determine, by resolution adopted not less than seven
(7) months prior to each regular City election, the number of residents in the
City for purposes of the voluntary expenditure ceiling.
(§ 1, Ord. 2647, eff. February 5, 1998)
Sec. 2-10.06. Local Campaign Contribution Limits.
   A person may make to a candidate for elective city office, and a candidate
for elective city office may accept from a person, a contribution of any
amount, and hereby imposes no limit on the campaign contributions a candidate
for elective city office can receive per election.
(§ 2, Ord. 3170, eff. December 17, 2020, as amended by § 2, Ord. 3185, eff.
July 15, 2021)
Sec. 2-10.07. Duties of the Office of the City Clerk.
   The Office of the City Clerk shall administer the provisions of this
Chapter. In addition to other duties required of the Office of the City Clerk
under the terms of this Chapter, the Office of the City Clerk shall:
   (a)   Supply appropriate forms and manuals to all candidates and committees,
and to other persons required to file reports.
   (b)   Determine whether required documents have been filed and, if so,
whether they conform on their face with the requirements of this Chapter and
state law.
   (c)   Notify promptly all persons and known committees who have failed to
file a document in the form and at the time required by this Chapter, and
promptly notify a person, candidate, campaign treasurer, political committee or
broad-based political committee of any violations of this Chapter. The Office
of the City Clerk shall inform the person, candidate, campaign treasurer,
political committee or broad-based political committee that they shall have two
(2) weeks to correct the violation.
   (d)   Compile and maintain a current list of all statements or parts of
statements filed with the City Clerk’s office pertaining to each candidate.
   (e)   Monitor reports and statements filed by candidates and committees
supporting or opposing candidates for city council, mayor, city clerk and city
treasurer as required by this Chapter.
(§ 2, Ord. 3170, eff. December 17, 2020)
Sec. 2-10.08. Violation - Penalty.
   (a)   Upon notification to the City Prosecutor by the Office of the City
Clerk of a violation that has not been corrected pursuant to Section 2-10.07
(c), the City Prosecutor shall issue a citation for the violation. Any person
violating any of the provisions of this Chapter relating to campaign
contributions and disclosure is guilty of an infraction, punishable in
accordance with Chapter 5 of Title I of this Code.
(§ 2, Ord. 3170, eff. December 17, 2020)
Sec. 2-10.09. Electronic Filing of Campaign Statements and Statements of
Economic Interests.
   (a)   Any elected officer, candidate, committee, or other person required to
file statements, reports, or other documents required by Government Code
Chapter 4 (commencing with Section 84100), except an elected officer,
candidate, committee or other person who receives contributions totaling less
than two thousand dollars ($2,000) in a calendar year, shall file those
statements, reports, or other documents online or electronically with the City
Clerk.
   (b)   Any person holding a position listed in Government Code Section 87200
or designated in the city’s local conflict of interest code adopted pursuant to
Government Code section 87300, shall file any required Statement of Economic
Interest reports (Form 700) online or electronically with the City Clerk.
   (c)   In any instance in which an original statement, report, or other
document must be filed with the California Secretary of State and a copy of
that statement, report or other document is required to be filed with the City
Clerk, the filer may, but is not required to, file the copy electronically.
   (d)   If the City Clerk’s electronic system is not capable of accepting a
particular type of statement, report, or other document, an elected officer,
candidate, committee or other person shall file that document with the City
Clerk in an alternative format acceptable to the City Clerk.
   (e)   The City Clerk shall ensure all procedural and public access
requirements with respect to online or electronic filings, and the online or
electronic filing system used by the City pursuant to this Section, complies
with Government Code Section 84615, as may be amended from time to time.
(§ 1, Ord. 3176, eff. January 14, 2021)
CHAPTER 11: CODE ENFORCEMENT OFFICERS
   
2-11.01   Appointment
   
2-11.02   Authority
   
2-11.03   Arrest and citations
   
2-11.04   Arrest procedures
   
2-11.05   Firearms prohibited
   
2-11.06   Training
Sec. 2-11.01. Appointment.
   The City Manager shall appoint specific City employees as Code Enforcement
Officers of the City. The Code Enforcement Department is now known as the
Community Improvement Department. Accordingly, the Code Enforcement Director is
now known as the Community Improvement Director, and Code Enforcement Officers
are now known as Community Improvement Officers. Wherever the former terms are
used in this Code, they are deemed to refer to a Community Improvement.
(§ 1, Ord. 2522, eff. March 19, 1992, § 5, Ord. 3230, eff. January 19, 2023)
Sec. 2-11.02. Authority.
   A Code Enforcement Officer shall have the authority and duty to enforce the
provisions of this Code and the provisions of any code adopted by reference by
this Code.
(§ 1, Ord. 2522, eff. March 19, 1992)
Sec. 2-11.03. Arrest and citations.
   A Code Enforcement Officer is authorized, pursuant to Cal. Penal Code §§
19.7 and 836.5, and by this chapter, to arrest a person without a warrant
whenever the Code Enforcement Officer has reasonable cause to believe that the
person to be arrested has committed a misdemeanor or an infraction in the Code
Enforcement Officer's presence which is a violation of this Code or any code
adopted by reference by this Code.
(§ 1, Ord. 2522, eff. March 19, 1992)
Sec. 2-11.04. Arrest procedures.
   (a)   If a person is arrested by a Code Enforcement Officer, the Code
Enforcement Officer shall issue a NOTICE TO APPEAR and shall release such
person, pursuant to Cal. Penal Code §§ 853.5 and 853.6, on his or her written
promise to appear in court.
   (b)   If the person arrested demands to be taken before a magistrate or
refuses to sign the NOTICE TO APPEAR, the Code Enforcement Officer shall
release the person arrested and refer the matter to the prosecuting attorney
and request that a complaint be prepared and filed against the person.
(§ 1, Ord. 2522, eff. March 19, 1992)
Sec. 2-11.05. Firearms prohibited.
   A Code Enforcement Officer shall not carry or use firearms in the
performance of his or her duties as a Code Enforcement Officer.
(§ 1, Ord. 2522, eff. March 19, 1992)
Sec. 2-11.06. Training.
   Before exercising the arrest authority granted to Code Enforcement Officers
by this chapter, each Code Enforcement Officer shall complete a course of
training as prescribed by the Police Chief which training shall include the
evidentiary prerequisites to criminal prosecution and procedures for prudently
exercising such arrest authority.
(§ 1, Ord. 2522, eff. March 19, 1992)
TITLE 3. FINANCE
      Chapter
         
1.   BUSINESS LICENSING REGULATIONS
         
2.   CLAIMS AND DEMANDS
         
3.   FUNDS
         
4.   PROPERTY TAXES
         
5.   SALES AND USE TAXES
         
6.   TRANSIENT OCCUPANCY TAXES
         
7.   REAL PROPERTY TRANSFER TAXES
         
8.   PARKING TAX
         
9.   FIRE FACILITY EQUIPMENT IMPACT FEE (REPEALED)
         
10.   MOBILE SOURCE AIR POLLUTION FEES
         
11.   PASSENGER VEHICLE RENTAL TAX (REPEALED)
         
12.   TRANSACTIONS AND USE TAX
CHAPTER 1: BUSINESS LICENSING REGULATIONS *
*Prior ordinance history: Ord. 637, eff. June 14, 1939, Ord. 834, eff. May 18,
1949, Ord. 1062, eff. May 5, 1955, Ord. 1258, eff. August 15, 1957, Ord. 1280,
eff. January 1, 1958, Ord. 1285, eff. February 6, 1958, Ord. 1292, eff. March
6, 1958, Ord. 1320, eff. November 6, 1958, Ord. 1349, eff. July 16, 1959, Ord.
1396, eff. May 19, 1960, Ord. 1415, eff. December 31, 1960, Ord. 1424, eff.
March 23, 1961, Ord. 1426, eff. April 6, 1961, Ord. 1449, eff. December 7,
1961, Ord. 1473, eff. August 2, 1962, Ord. 1559, eff. May 21, 1964, Ord. 1560,
eff. June 4, 1964, Ord. 1653, eff. July 20, 1967, Ord. 1702, eff. March 6,
1969, Ord. 1762, eff. July 15, 1971, Ord. 1868, eff. September 18, 1975, Ord.
2007, eff. August 17, 1978, Ord. 2094, eff. August 14, 1980, Ord. 2137, eff.
July 16, 1981 and Ord. 2466, eff. June 14, 1990.
Article 1. General Provisions
   
3-1.101   Definitions
   
3-1.102   License Bureau created
   
3-1.103   License Official: Office created
   
3-1.104   License Official: Powers and duties
   
3-1.105   License required
   
3-1.106   Taxing power
   
3-1.107   Issuance of business licenses
   
3-1.108   Payment of business license taxes
   
3-1.109   Separate business license for each place of business
   
3-1.110   Separate license for each type of business activity
   
3-1.111   Contractor engaged in business
   
3-1.112   City reporting requirements for contractors
   
3-1.113   Term of business license
   
3-1.114   Portion of license period, no pro-ration
   
3-1.115   Determination of date payment made
   
3-1.116   Renewals
   
3-1.117   Penalties for late payment and non-payment
   
3-1.118   Disabled persons, exemption
   
3-1.119   Nonprofit business
   
3-1.120   Refunds
   
3-1.121   Effect of prosecution
   
3-1.122   Annual statement of licensee
   
3-1.123   Statements: Failure to file: Determination of taxes: Hearings
   
3-1.124   Business license taxes and penalties a debt to City: Suits for
collection
   
3-1.125   Gross receipts reporting period
   
3-1.126   Apportionment
   
3-1.127   Business license to be posted
   
3-1.128   Evidence of workers compensation insurance
   
3-1.129   Zoning compliance
   
3-1.130   Void business license
   
3-1.131   Revocation of license
   
3-1.132   Revocation: Procedure
   
3-1.133   Other appeals
Article 2. Revenue Provisions
   
3-1.201   Professions: Business license tax
   
3-1.202   Services: Business license tax
   
3-1.203   Contractors: Business license tax
   
3-1.204   Rental of residential real property: Business license tax
   
3-1.205   Rental of nonresidential real property: Business license tax
   
3-1.206   Recreation and entertainment: Business license tax
   
3-1.207   Manufacturing: Business license tax
   
3-1.208   Wholesale sales: Business license tax
   
3-1.209   Retail sales: Business license tax
   
3-1.210   Administrative headquarters: Business license tax
   
3-1.211   Non-franchised public utilities: Business license tax
   
3-1.212   Franchised public utilities: Business license tax
   
3-1.213   Itinerant vendor: Business license tax
   
3-1.214   Special events: Business license tax
   
3-1.215   Transportation: Business license tax
   
3-1.216   Warehousing: Business license tax
   
3-1.217   Film making: Business license tax
Articles 3 through 5.
   Reserved for Future Legislation
Article 6. Private Patrol Systems
   
3-1.601   Definitions
   
3-1.602   Permits: Required: Registration
   
3-1.603   Permits: Applications: Form
   
3-1.604   Permits: Applications: Accompanying data
   
3-1.605   Permits: Applications: Investigations: Transmission to Council
   
3-1.606   Permit: Granting or denial: Hearing: Notices
   
3-1.607   Permits: Fees
   
3-1.608   Permits: Form
   
3-1.609   Permits: Modifications
   
3-1.610   Permits: More than one for same area
   
3-1.611   Permittee: Sale or transfer of right to engage in business
   
3-1.612   Reserved
   
3-1.613   Badges and uniforms
   
3-1.614   Badges: Sales, purchases, and other transactions
   
3-1.615   Uniforms: Similarity to police uniforms
   
3-1.616   Equipment and weapons
   
3-1.617   Use of street patrolman or unregistered guard not named on permits
   
3-1.618   Unlawful acts on property of nonsubscribers
   
3-1.619   Police and investigative activities: Reports of law violations
   
3-1.620   Police investigation and reports of complaints relating to patrol
systems
   
3-1.621   Rules and regulations
Article 7. Solicitors and Canvassers
   
3-1.701   Defined
   
3-1.702   Permits: Required
   
3-1.703   Permits: Applications: Form
   
3-1.704   Permits: Applications: Fees
   
3-1.705   Permits: Applications: Investigation
   
3-1.706   Permits: Applications: Denial
   
3-1.707   Permits: Applications: Denial: Appeals: Hearings
   
3-1.708   Permits: Issuance
   
3-1.709   Reserved
   
3-1.710   Reserved
   
3-1.711   Permits: Wearing
   
3-1.712   Permits: Exhibiting
   
3-1.713   Permits: Revocation: Hearings
   
3-1.714   Permits: Charity solicitor's and canvassers
   
3-1.715   Bonds
   
3-1.716   Enforcement of provisions
   
3-1.717   Exceptions to provisions
Article 8. Adult Businesses and Adult Business Performers
   
3-1.801   Adult Businesses; Purpose of registration
   
3-1.802   Prohibition on ownership, management or performance by persons
recently convicted of sexually-related offences
   
3-1.803   Issuance of registration certificates
Article 1. General Provisions
Sec. 3-1.101. Definitions.
   The following words or phrases as used in this chapter shall have the
following meanings:
   (a)   “Business” includes any business, commercial enterprise, trade,
calling, vocation, profession, occupation, or means of livelihood, whether or
not carried on for gain or profit.
   (b)   “City” means the City of Ontario.
   (c)   “Evidence of doing business” shall include, but not be limited to, a
person's use of signs, circulars, cards, telephone books, newspapers, or trade
publications to advertise, hold out or represent that such person is doing
business within the City, or when any person gives other evidence of
transacting and carrying on business within the City, or such person fails to
deny in a sworn statement given to the License Official that such person is not
engaged in business within the City, after being requested to do so by the
License Official.
   (d)   “Gross receipts.”
      (1)   Unless a different meaning is specifically defined, “gross
receipts” shall include:
         (i)   The total amount of the sale price of all sales, the total
amount charged or received for the performance of any act, service, or
employment of whatever nature it may be, whether such service, act, or
employment is done as part of or in connection with the sale of goods, wares,
merchandise or not, for which a charge is made or credit allowed, including all
receipts, cash, credits, and property of any kind or nature, any amount for
which credit is allowed by the seller to the purchaser without any deduction
therefrom on account of the cost of the property sold, the cost of the
materials used, labor or service costs, interest paid or payable, losses or any
other expense whatsoever;
         (ii)   The amount of any federal manufacturers' or importers' excise
tax included in the price of property sold, even though the manufacturer or
importer is also the retailer thereof and whether or not the amount of such tax
is stated as a separate charge;
         (iii)   In connection with a person leasing, subleasing, or renting
property, gross receipts shall include all amounts paid by a tenant or
subtenant to a lessor or sublessee for the services performed, or materials
used, or utilities or facilities furnished by the lessor or sublessor on the
premises or in connection with the tenant's or subtenant's use, possession, or
the right to possess the property, including but not limited to income from
laundry facilities on the property; any receipts paid by a tenant or subtenant
to a lessor or sublessor for the use or possession of land, or the right to use
or possess land other than that upon which the building or structure is located
but which is used or possessed or is available for use or possession by a
tenant or subtenant for purposes related to the tenancy; all amounts paid as
prepaid rent; and all amounts paid by a tenant or subtenant for the rental of
any furniture, equipment, fixtures, garage or storage space;
         (iv)   Receipts of any person received as commissions or fees earned,
or charges of any character made or compensation of any character received, for
the performance of any service by such person or any of such person's employees
and receipt of any person received as partial or full compensation or
reimbursement for salaries, payroll taxes, fringe benefits, and any and all
similar expenses for persons who are employees of said person and receipts of
any person received as partial or full compensation or reimbursement for
equipment, supplies, utilities, or other items or services acquired by said
person in that person's name and used or consumed in the performance of
services;
         (v)   Gross receipts of a person who engages in the occupation of
bringing buyers and sellers together for negotiations, or who negotiate or
arrange terms and conditions for buyers and sellers for the purpose of
effecting a sale of real property or personal property (including securities,
commodities, and insurance) shall include all commissions, fees, charges,
moneys or compensation of any character received by such person for performing
in the capacity described herein;
         (vi)   Gross receipts of a person buying, selling or offering for sale
new or used automobiles, trucks, vans, trailers, house trailers, or campers,
including parts and accessories, and any such maintenance and repair services
for such vehicles, shall include all sales arising from the location or
locations in the City, regardless of where the product is delivered;
         (vii)   Gross receipts of an administrative headquarters, including
research and development facilities, shall be equal to the cost of operation of
such administrative headquarters. Costs of operation shall be equal to the
total of the following items:
            (A)   Annual fair rental value of all real property located in the
City and used for such corporate or administrative headquarters;
            (B)   Annual payroll of all employees based in the City;
            (C)   The cost of all utilities related to the operation of such
corporate or administrative headquarters;
            (D)   Gross receipts of a business licensed as a manufacturer shall
include all gross receipts from products manufactured in the City. In addition,
if the product is not sold from the manufacturer's location in the City, an
amount equal to the value of all component parts of the product shall be
included in the licensee's gross receipts.
         (viii)   Gross receipts of a public utility that does not otherwise
pay a franchise fee to the City shall include one hundred percent (100%) of
gross receipts derived from utility services provided within the City and gross
receipts attributable to any other business activity conducted within the City.
      (2)   “Gross receipts” shall not include:
         (i)   The amount of any federal tax imposed on or with respect to
retail sales whether imposed upon the retailer or upon the consumer and
regardless of whether or not the amount of federal tax is stated to customers
as a separate charge;
         (ii)   Any California State, city, or city and county sales or use tax
required by law to be included in or added to the purchase price and collected
from the consumer or purchaser;
         (iii)   Such part of the sales price of any property previously sold
and returned by the purchaser to the seller which is refunded by the seller by
way of cash or credit allowances given or taken as part payment on any property
so accepted for resale;
         (iv)   Any refundable deposit which is returned to the depositor;
         (v)   That portion of the receipts of a general contractor which
represents payments to subcontractors, provided such subcontractors are
licensed under the provisions of this chapter and that the general contractor
furnishes the License Official with the names and addresses of the
subcontractors and the amounts paid to each subcontractor;
         (vi)   Bad debts taken from gross receipts reported during a prior tax
year in accordance with generally accepted accounting practices;
         (vii)   Anything which the City may not lawfully include by virtue of
the Constitution of the United States or the Constitution of the State of
California;
         (viii)   Fees for actual costs of governmental requirements (e.g.,
inspections, plan checks, and the like) paid by a licensee on behalf of a third
party.
      (e)   “Operate.” Manage, control or carry on, whether done as an owner,
an agent, an employee, or a lessee, or a licensee.
      (f)   “Person” shall include natural persons, fiduciaries, partnerships,
corporations, joint ventures, unincorporated associations, clubs, business
trusts or so-called “Massachusetts trusts,” and every other entity through or
by means of which any business, financial operation, or venture is carried on
in the City. “Person” shall not include a natural person who is engaged in
business in the City solely as the employee of another person.
(§ 1, Ord. 2526, eff. April 8, 1992)
Sec. 3-1.102. License Bureau created.
   There is hereby created a License Bureau of the City.
(§ 1, Ord. 2526, eff. April 8, 1992)
Sec. 3-1.103. License Official: Office created.
   There is hereby created the office of License Official of the City. As used
herein, “License Official” shall include his or her authorized assistants.
(§ 1, Ord. 2526, eff. April 8, 1992)
Sec. 3-1.104. License Official: Powers and duties.
   Under the supervision of the City Manager, the License Official is hereby
charged with the duty of carrying out and enforcing the provisions of this
chapter.
   In addition to all other powers conferred upon him or her, the License
Official shall have the authority, for good cause shown, to extend the time for
filing any required sworn statement for a period not exceeding thirty (30) days
and in such case to waive any penalty which would otherwise have accrued. He or
she shall have the further authority, with the consent of the Council, to
compromise any claim as to the amount of business license taxes due.
(§ 1, Ord. 2526, eff. April 8, 1992)
Sec. 3-1.105. License required.
   It shall be unlawful for any person, whether as principal or agent, to
operate in the City any business whether or not such business is carried on for
gain or profit, without first having paid the required business license taxes
and having procured a business license from said City so to do; and the
carrying on of any business not specifically exempted by law without first
having complied with the provisions of this chapter shall constitute a separate
violation thereof for each and every day that such business is so carried on.
(§ 1, Ord. 2526, eff. April 8, 1992)
Sec. 3-1.106. Taxing power.
   The business licenses required to be obtained and the taxes required to be
paid are hereby declared to be required pursuant to the taxing power of the
City for the purpose of obtaining revenue and for regulation to the extent
provided in this Chapter. Compliance with such requirements shall not be
construed to be a condition precedent to engaging in any business within the
City where the imposition of such a condition precedent would be contrary to
federal or state law.
(§ 1, Ord. 2526, eff. April 8, 1992)
Sec. 3-1.107. Issuance of business licenses.
   (a)   License Official to issue. The business licenses required by this
chapter shall be issued by the License Official and shall state therein the
amount thereof, the period of time covered thereby, the name of the person to
whom issued, the business licensed and the location or place of business where
such business is to be carried on.
   (b)   Prohibition on assignment or transfer. No business license granted or
issued under provisions of this chapter shall be in any manner transferred or
assigned. If a person that holds a City license loans or otherwise allows such
City license to be used by a non-licensed person, such City license may be
revoked.
   (c)   Duplicate business licenses. The License Official shall make a charge
of Ten Dollars ($10.00) for each duplicate business license issued under the
provisions of this chapter which has been lost or destroyed.
   (d)   Change of location. Where a business license is issued authorizing a
person to transact and carry on a business at a particular place, such licensee
may, upon application therefor and paying a fee in the amount of Ten Dollars
($10.00), have the business license amended to authorize the transacting and
carrying on of such business under such license at some other location to which
the business is, or is to be, moved.
   (e)   Mistake not binding on City. In no case shall any mistake made by the
License Official in stating the amount of a business license tax prevent or
prejudice the collection by the City of the amount actually due from any
licensee.
(§ 1, Ord. 2526, eff. April 8, 1992)
Sec. 3-1.108. Payment of business license taxes.
   (a)   All business license taxes shall be paid in advance in legal money of
the United States, at the office of the License Official.
   (b)   A charge in an amount specified in the Citywide Fee Schedule currently
in effect at the time of the violation shall be assessed for any check returned
for lack of sufficient funds. Penalties shall also be assessed pursuant to §
3-1.117 of this chapter, unless a new check clears prior to the delinquent
date.
(§ 1, Ord. 2526, eff. April 8, 1992, as amended by § 4, Ord. 3211, eff. July 1,
2022)
Sec. 3-1.109. Separate business license for each place of business.
   Except as provided in this section, a separate business license must be
obtained for each separate place of business, in which business is carried on,
and each license shall authorize the party obtaining it to operate only that
business described in such license, and only at the location or place of
business which is indicated thereby. Businesses with two or more locations in
the City shall have the option of filing a consolidated annual statement of
licensee for the purpose of computing and paying the business license taxes.
Only a single business license must be obtained for a business which consists
of maintaining one or more vending machines and/or juke boxes in the City.
(§ 1, Ord. 2526, eff. April 8, 1992)
Sec. 3-1.110. Separate license for each type of business activity.
   A separate business license is required for each business activity which
comes within any of the business classifications described in Article 2 of this
chapter. When two or more activities are engaged in at one location, and each
is taxable on the same basis and the same rate, a consolidated annual statement
of licensee for the purpose of computing and paying the business license taxes
may be filed for such activities.
(§ 1, Ord. 2526, eff. April 8, 1992)
Sec. 3-1.111. Contractor engaged in business.
   (a)   Any person holding a California State contractor's license shall be
considered a contractor.
   (b)   A contractor will be deemed to be engaged in business in the City if
such person is engaged within the City in any work for which a California State
contractor's license is required.
(§ 1, Ord. 2526, eff. April 8, 1992)
Sec. 3-1.112. City reporting requirements for contractors.
   (a)   Contractor requirements. No person shall be issued a permit to perform
work requiring a permit under this Code, unless they are:
      (1)   A licensed contractor or subcontractor ("contractor");
      (2)   An employee, agent, or authorized representative of a licensed
contractor;
      (3)   A representative of an electronically subscribed service acting on
behalf of a licensed contractor;
      (4)   The property owner performing their own work; or
      (5)   An employee of the owner provided that the owner shows evidence of
workers' compensation insurance required by state and city law, and their
Federal tax identification number.
   (b)   Duty to provide information. A person applying for a permit
("applicant") under this Code to perform work on a project consisting of twenty
(20) or more residential dwelling units or twenty thousand (20,000) square feet
of newly constructed or improved commercial or industrial development shall
submit the following information at the time of permit issuance and prior to
commencement of work:
      (1)   Scope of inspected work to be performed.
      (2)   A list of all contractors and provide verification of each
contractor's workers' compensation insurance (including policy number and
expiration date), state contractor license and license category (and license
expiration date if a license is required by the California State Licensing
Board to perform the identified scope of inspected work), City business
license, and Federal tax identification number. No person shall contract or
subcontract construction work without a valid contractor's license pursuant to
applicable provisions of the state business and professions code.
      (3)   A disclosure of any previous, pending, or final determinations
pertaining to state or Federal labor code violations within the prior seven (7)
years; or any penalties paid, criminal convictions, or judgments over five
hundred thousand dollars ($500,000) related to the provisions of the California
Labor Code or the Federal Labor Standards Act within the prior seven (7) years
for all contractors. The applicant may provide a sworn attestation from a
contractor to satisfy this requirement.
      (4)   As a condition of receiving City inspections or participating in a
City pre-construction meeting, the applicant shall (under penalty of perjury)
submit required information to the City prior to each contractor or qualifying
subcontractor starting work on the project.
   (c)   Failure to provide required information. In the event the applicant
cannot provide a list of valid contractors and the information required above
upon permit application, the applicant or permit holder shall provide to the
City all information required by subsection (b) within thirty (30) days after
issuance of each permit (but prior to commencement of any associated work
pursuant to said permit). Failure to provide valid and current contractor
listings prior to commencing work shall result in one or more of the following:
      (1)   City withholding inspections for any inspected work until such
compliance is achieved.
      (2)   Issuance of a stop work order.
      (3)   Revocation of any permit issued by the City.
      (4)   The permit applicant paying a penalty for default to the City in an
amount equal to the original permit fee for each violation in order to defray
City costs of enforcement of this section prior to the issuance of any new
permit.
   (d)   Adding new contractor. The information required by subsection (b)
shall be required at the time when any new contractor is added to the permit.
   (e)   Prior work. Any work performed prior to satisfying the requirements of
this section shall be deemed performed without the required permits.
   (f)   Duty to update changed information. The applicant is required to
submit updated information to the City within seventy-two (72) hours of
knowledge of any changes at any time between permit issuance and final
inspection.
(§ 1, Ord. 2526, eff. April 8, 1992, as amended by § 2, Ord. 3291, eff. January
2, 2025)
Sec. 3-1.113. Term of business license.
   (a)   Every business license issued for a period of less than one (1) year
shall expire at midnight on the day that it was issued through.
   (b)   Every annual business license shall expire on midnight on the
anniversary date of the business start date unless otherwise specified in this
chapter.
(§ 1, Ord. 2526, eff. April 8, 1992, as amended by § 1, Ord. 3144. eff.
November 14, 2019, as amended by § 1, Ord. 3144. eff. November 14, 2019)
Sec. 3-1.114. Portion of license period, no proration.
   The business license tax for any daily, monthly or annual shall not be
reduced even though a portion of the license period has expired at the time the
license is issued.
(§ 1, Ord. 2526, eff. April 8, 1992)
Sec. 3-1.115. Determination of date payment made.
   (a)   The payment of a business license tax made in person by or on behalf
of the licensee shall be made on or prior to close of City business hours, and
will be deemed received on the date of delivery, if such personal delivery is
made prior to close of City business hours.
   (b)   If payment is made by United States mail, the payment date will be
the:
      (1)   Date of cancellation by the United States Postal Service, as
reflected on the envelope which contains the payment; or
      (2)   Date of receipt by the City for any payment mailed in an envelope
which has used a postal meter.
(§ 1, Ord. 2526, eff. April 8, 1992)
Sec. 3-1.116. Renewals.
   (a)   No renewal of a business license shall be issued until payment in full
of all delinquent business license taxes, including accrued interest and
applicable penalties thereon, is received by the City.
   (b)   It shall be the responsibility of each business licensee to obtain and
pay for a renewal business license regardless of whether or not such licensee
has received a renewal notice from the City. Any failure to receive such notice
shall not affect the applicability of penalties for non-payment or late payment
set forth in §
3-1.117 of this chapter.
(§ 1, Ord. 2526, eff. April 8, 1992)
Sec. 3-1.117. Penalties for late payment and non-payment.
   For failure to pay a tax when due, the license collector shall add a penalty
of twenty percent (20%) of the amount of such tax on the last calendar day of
each following month after the due date thereof. New businesses in the City who
fail to secure a business license prior to opening for business shall add a
penalty of twenty percent (20%) in addition to amount of the business license
tax. In no event shall any penalty imposed hereunder exceed an amount equal to
one hundred percent (100%) of such tax.
(§ 1, Ord. 2526, eff. April 8, 1992, as amended by § 2, Ord. 3144, effective
November 14, 2019)
Sec. 3-1.118. Disabled persons, exemption.
   A natural person who is disabled within the meaning of any Federal or State
law may request and be issued a certificate of exemption from the payment of
the business license tax for any retail, manufacturing, or wholesaling business
in which he or she is engaged if the annual gross receipts of the business are
less than Sixty Thousand Dollars ($60,000.00).
(§ 1, Ord. 2526, eff. April 8, 1992)
Sec. 3-1.119. Nonprofit business.
   (a)   Exemption. The provisions of this chapter shall not require the
payment of a business license tax to carry on any business from any nonprofit
corporation or organization which is carried on wholly for the benefit of
nonprofit purposes and from which profit is not derived, either directly or
indirectly, by any person. No license shall be required for the conducting of
any entertainment, concert, exhibition, or lecture on scientific, historical,
literary, religious, political, or moral subjects whenever the receipts of any
such entertainment, concert, exhibition or lecture are to be appropriated
entirely to any nonprofit purpose.
   (b)   Definition of nonprofit corporation or organization. For purposes of
this section, a nonprofit organization or corporation is one which is exempt
from paying Federal income tax by virtue of its nonprofit status.
   (c)   Evidence of nonprofit status. Upon request of the License Official, a
corporation or organization claiming exemption from the business license tax
based upon its nonprofit status shall submit documentation satisfactory to the
City evidencing the nonprofit status of the applicant organization or
corporation.
(§ 1, Ord. 2526, eff. April 8, 1992)
Sec. 3-1.120. Refunds.
   (a)   No business license taxes or any portion thereof may be refunded after
one (1) year from the date of payment thereof.
   (b)   No person shall be entitled to a refund of business license taxes
after such person has engaged in business under the license.
   (c)   No person shall be entitled to a refund of business license taxes if
such person has any delinquent business license taxes, including accrued
interest or penalties. Any overpayment of business license taxes shall first be
applied against any such delinquent taxes, interest, or penalties.
(§ 1, Ord. 2526, eff. April 8, 1992)
Sec. 3-1.121. Effect of prosecution.
   The conviction and punishment of any person for transacting any business
without a business license shall not excuse or exempt such person from the
payment of any business license taxes due or unpaid at the time of such
conviction, and nothing in this chapter shall prevent a criminal prosecution
for any violation of other provisions of this Code.
(§ 1, Ord. 2526, eff. April 8, 1992)
Sec. 3-1.122. Annual statement of licensee.
   (a)   Filing of statement. In all cases where the amount of business license
taxes to be paid by any person is based upon the amount of gross receipts, or
upon the number of vehicles used, or upon the square footage of warehousing
space, such person, before obtaining a license for business and within sixty
(60) days after the beginning of each license period, shall file with the
License Official a written statement in the form required by the License
Official, supported by such documentation requested by the License Official,
showing the total amount of gross receipts during the preceding calendar year,
or the number of vehicles used or the total square footage of warehousing space
at the date of such statement.
   (b)   Contents of statement. Any statement filed pursuant to this section
shall be signed and shall contain the following: “I declare under penalty of
perjury under the laws of the State of California, that I am authorized to make
this statement and to the best of my knowledge and belief it is a true, correct
and complete statement, made in good faith for the period stated.”
   (c)   Confidentiality as to gross receipts. Information filed pursuant to
this section as to the gross receipts of a particular person shall be
confidential in character and shall not be subject to public inspection. It
shall be the duty of the License Official to preserve and keep such gross
receipts information so that it may not become known except to the persons
charged by law with the administration of this chapter.
   (d)   Statement not conclusive. No statement filed pursuant to this section
shall be conclusive upon the City or upon any officer thereof as to the matters
therein set forth, and the same shall not prejudice the right of the City to
recover any amount that may be ascertained to be due from such person in
addition to the amount shown by such statement should it be found to be
incorrect.
   (e)   Newly established business license renewal. In any case where an
original business license is to be issued for a newly established business, the
minimum business license tax applicable for that type of business shall be paid
for the original license. At the date of renewal, an additional tax shall be
charged, based upon the gross receipts of such business during the prior year,
at the tax rate applicable for such business, after deducting from the amount
so found to be due the amount paid at the time such original license was
issued. This subsection applies only to businesses which are taxed on the basis
of gross receipts.
   (f)   Accuracy of statement subject to audit. The correctness of any
statement filed pursuant to this section shall be subject to audit and
verification by the License Official, who is hereby authorized and empowered to
inspect and audit the books and records of any and all persons licensed to
carry on any business specified in this chapter. No person licensed to carry on
any business specified in this chapter shall refuse or fail to allow the
License Official to inspect and audit such books and records or shall refuse or
fail to provide such additional information as requested by the License
Official.
(§ 1, Ord. 2526, eff. April 8, 1992)
Sec. 3-1.123. Statements: Failure to file: Determination of taxes: Hearings.
   (a)   Determination of taxes. If any person who is required a City business
license fails to file any required statements within the time prescribed or if,
after demand therefor made by the License Official, such person fails to file a
corrected statement, the License Official may determine the amount of business
license taxes due from such person by means of such information as the License
Official may be able to obtain.
   (b)   Assessments: Notices. If such determination is made, the License
Official shall give a notice of the amount of business license taxes so
assessed by serving it personally or by depositing it in the United States Post
Office in the City, postage prepaid, addressed to the person so assessed at
such person's last known address.
   (c)   Assessments: Hearings: Applications. Such person may, within fifteen
(15) days after the mailing or service of such notice, make an application in
writing to the License Official for a hearing on the amount of the business
license tax. If such application is made, the License Official shall cause the
matter to be set for hearing before the Council within fifteen (15) days.
   (d)   Assessments: Hearings: Notices. The License Official shall give at
least ten (10) days' notice to such person of the time and place of the hearing
in the manner prescribed in subsection (b) of this section for serving notices
of assessments.
(§ 1, Ord. 2526, eff. April 8, 1992)
Sec. 3-1.124. Business license taxes and penalties a debt to City: Suits for
collection.
   The amount of any business license tax and any penalties imposed by the
provisions of this chapter shall be deemed a debt to the City. An action may be
commenced in the name of the City in any court of competent jurisdiction for
the amount of any delinquent business license tax and penalties.
(§ 1, Ord. 2526, eff. April 8, 1992)
Sec. 3-1.125. Gross receipts reporting period.
   For any tax due on or after January 1, gross receipts shall be determined
based upon gross receipts for the calendar year preceding the license tax
period for which the tax is due; except that for licenses of newly established
businesses that were not in operation during the preceding calendar year, the
gross receipts shall be determined based upon gross receipts from the date the
business opened through December 31st.
(§ 1, Ord. 2526, eff. April 8, 1992)
Sec. 3-1.126. Apportionment.
   When, by reason of the provisions of the Constitution of the United States
or the Constitution of the State of California, the business license tax
imposed by this chapter cannot be enforced without there being an apportionment
according to the amount of business done in the City, or in the State of
California, as the case may be, apportionment rules shall be established as
follows:
   (a)   The Council from time to time shall adopt by resolution general
guidelines for apportionment.
   (b)   The License Official, with the approval of the City Attorney, may make
such rules and regulations for the apportionment of the tax as are necessary
and desirable to overcome the constitutional objections and which are
consistent with the general apportionment guidelines adopted by resolution of
the Council. The License Official shall publish such rules and regulations once
in a newspaper of general circulation within the City. Within ten (10) days of
the date of publication of such rules and regulations, any interested person
may file a request with the City Clerk that the Council review the rules and
regulations so published. The rules and regulations shall be final at the
expiration of the period for requesting review in the event no request for
review is filed, or in the event of the filing of a request for review, when
the rules and regulations have been adopted by the Council.
(§ 1, Ord. 2526, eff. April 8, 1992)
Sec. 3-1.127. Business license to be posted.
   Every person having a business license under the provisions of this chapter
and carrying on a business at a fixed place of business shall keep such license
posted and exhibited while in force in some conspicuous part of said place of
business. Every person having a license and not having a fixed place of
business shall carry such license with him or her at all times while carrying
on the business for which the same was granted. Every person having a license
under the provisions of this chapter shall produce and exhibit the same
whenever requested to do so by any police officer, any code enforcement
officer, any person authorized by City to issue business licenses, or by any
person being solicited. Businesses operated without an agent or employee on the
premises shall post in a conspicuous place the name, address and telephone
number of the person or persons to be contacted in event of an emergency.
(§ 1, Ord. 2526, eff. April 8, 1992)
Sec. 3-1.128. Evidence of workers compensation insurance.
   Every person who is an employer and who applies for a business license or
for the renewal of a business license shall provide to the License Official
proof of workers compensation insurance or other proof of compliance with the
provisions of Cal. Labor Code §§ 3700 et seq. No business license shall be
issued to such person until the required proof is provided to the License
Official.
(§ 1, Ord. 2526, eff. April 8, 1992)
Sec. 3-1.129. Zoning compliance.
   Every initial business license application shall be referred to the City
Planner for review as to zoning compliance. The City Planner shall determine
whether the proposed business use is a permitted use or a conditionally
permitted use at the proposed business location. If the proposed business use
is not a permitted use or a conditionally permitted use, then no business
license will be issued for the business at the proposed location. If the
proposed business use is a conditionally permitted use, then no business
license shall be issued for the proposed location until after a conditional use
permit has been obtained.
(§ 1, Ord. 2526, eff. April 8, 1992)
Sec. 3-1.130. Void business license.
   The City shall not be bound by the mistake of any officer or employee of the
City in issuing a business license contrary to the terms of the zoning
ordinance or any other ordinance of the City, and any such business license so
issued shall be void.
(§ 1, Ord. 2526, eff. April 8, 1992)
Sec. 3-1.131. Revocation of license.
   Any business license issued pursuant to this chapter may be revoked by the
City, after notice to the licensee and a hearing, when it shall appear that the
business of the person to whom such business license was issued has been
conducted in violation of any federal or state law, or ordinance of this City,
or is being used for a business activity different from that for which the
license was issued. If the business license of any person shall be so revoked,
another such license shall not be granted to such person within three (3)
months after the date of such revocation.
(§ 1, Ord. 2526, eff. April 8, 1992)
Sec. 3-1.132. Revocation: Procedure.
   (a)   If the License Official proposes to revoke the business license of any
person, he or she shall give written notice of the proposed action to such
person by personal delivery or by mail addressed to such person at the address
shown on the business license. Such notice shall include a statement of the
grounds for revocation, a summary of the evidence in support of the grounds
insofar as that evidence is known to the License Official, the date, time and
place where a hearing will be held to determine whether the business license
should be revoked, which date shall be not less than fifteen (15) nor more than
thirty (30) days after the notice is delivered and mailed, and the name of the
appointed hearing officer.
   (b)   At the hearing, the hearing officer shall receive such evidence as the
License Official and the person holding the business license shall submit and,
in this regard, the hearing officer shall not be bound by the formal rules of
evidence but may receive all evidence which is relevant to the charge stated in
the notice. The person holding the business license is entitled to be heard and
may be represented by counsel.
   (c)   The hearing officer may continue the bearing from time to time but no
more thin a total of sixty (60) days. At the conclusion of the hearing, the
hearing officer shall render his or her written decision, which decision shall
be supported by written findings.
   (d)   If the decision of the hearing officer is to revoke the business
license, the person holding the business license may appeal the decision to the
Council within fourteen (14) days after receipt of notice of the hearing
officer's decision. Appeals shall be processed and determined pursuant to the
provisions of Chapter 4 of Title 1 of this Code.
   (e)   A decision revoking a business license shall become final on the later
of:
      (1)   The date fifteen (15) days after notice of the hearing officer's
decision is delivered to the holder of the business license, if no appeal is
taken; or
      (2)   The date on which the Council upholds the decision of the hearing
officer.
   (f)   After a business license has been revoked, all activity for which such
license was required shall be immediately discontinued.
   (g)   Upon such revocation, the business license tax for the unexpired
portion of the license shall be refunded.
(§ 1, Ord. 2526, eff. April 8, 1992)
Sec. 3-1.133. Other appeals.
   The decisions of the License Official regarding the refusal to issue or
renew a business license, any determination concerning business classifications
or refunds, or any determination of the amount of any business license taxes,
interest or penalties due may be appealed to the Council pursuant to the
procedures set forth in
Chapter 4 of Title 1 of this Code.
(§ 1, Ord. 2526, eff. April 8, 1992)
Article 2. Revenue Provisions
Sec. 3-1.201. Professions: Business license tax.
   Every person engaged in a professional business in the City shall pay an
annual business license tax to the City consisting of a flat tax of Fifty
Dollars ($50.00) plus an additional tax for each calendar year or part of a
calendar year based upon the gross receipts within such year or part of year at
the rate of Forty Cents ($.40) per One Thousand Dollars ($1,000.00) of gross
receipts. Effective January 1, 1993, the additional tax shall be computed and
paid at the rate of Fifty Five Cents ($.55) per One Thousand Dollars
($1,000.00) of gross receipts.
   For the purposes of this section, “profession” shall mean the professions of
accountant, architect, artist, attorney-at-law, bookkeeping services, building
designer, chiropractor, consulting services, dentist, home health and nursing
services, hospitals and medical clinics, income tax services, interior
decorating services, marriage and family counseling services, microfilming
services, notary public, other health care services, physical therapists,
physician, psychiatrist, and psychologist.
(§ 1, Ord. 2526, eff. April 8, 1992)
Sec. 3-1.202. Services: Business license tax.
   Every person engaged in the business of providing services in the City shall
pay an annual business license tax to the City consisting of a flat tax of
Fifty Dollars ($50.00) plus an additional tax for each calendar year or part of
a calendar year based upon the gross receipts within such year or part of year
at the rate of Thirty Cents ($.30) per One Thousand Dollars ($1,000.00) of
gross receipts. Effective January 1, 1993, the additional tax shall be computed
and paid at the rate of Forty Cents ($.40) per One Thousand Dollars ($1,000.00)
of gross receipts.
   For the purposes of this section, “services” shall mean the business of
providing, maintaining or performing labor for the benefit of another; of
supplying some general demand for the benefit of another; or performing any
other personal service or any service in the capacity of an agent/broker.
“Services” do not include the professional services described in §
3-1.201 above.
(§ 1, Ord. 2526, eff. April 8, 1992)
Sec. 3-1.203. Contractors: Business license tax.
   Every person engaged in business as a Contractor in the City shall pay an
annual business license tax to the City consisting of a flat tax of Fifty
Dollars ($50.00) plus an additional tax for each calendar year or part of a
calendar year based upon the gross receipts within such year or part of year at
the rate of Thirty Cents ($.30) per One Thousand Dollars ($1,000.00) of gross
receipts. Effective January 1, 1993, the additional tax shall be computed and
paid at the rate of Forty Cents ($.40) per One Thousand Dollars ($1,000.00) of
gross receipts.
(§ 1, Ord. 2526, eff. April 8, 1992)
Sec. 3-1.204. Rental of residential real property: Business license tax.
   Every person engaged in the business of renting real property for
residential occupancy in the City shall pay an annual business license tax to
the City consisting of a flat tax of Fifty Dollars ($50.00) plus an additional
tax for each calendar year or part of a calendar year based upon the gross
receipts within such year or part of year at the rate of Thirty Cents ($.30)
per One Thousand Dollars ($1,000.00) of gross receipts. Effective January 1,
1993, the additional tax shall be computed and paid at the rate of Forty Cents
($.40) per One Thousand Dollars ($1,000.00) of gross receipts.
   Owners of residential real property who own less than three (3) dwelling
units in the City are exempt from the tax imposed by this section.
(§ 1, Ord. 2526, eff. April 8, 1992)
Sec. 3-1.205. Rental of nonresidential real property: Business license tax.
   Every person engaged in the business of renting nonresidential real property
in the City shall pay an annual business license tax to the City consisting of
a flat tax of Fifty Dollars ($50.00) plus an additional tax for each calendar
year or part of a calendar year based upon the gross receipts within such year
or part of year at the rate of Thirty Cents ($.30) per One Thousand Dollars
($1,000.00) of gross receipts. Effective January 1, 1993, the additional tax
shall be computed and paid at the rate of Forty Cents ($.40) per One Thousand
Dollars ($1,000.00) of gross receipts.
(i 1, Ord. 2526, eff. April 8, 1992)
Sec. 3-1.206. Recreation and entertainment: Business license tax.
   Every person engaged in the business of providing recreation and
entertainment in the City shall pay an annual business license tax to the City
consisting of a flat tax of Fifty Dollars ($50.00) plus an additional tax for
each calendar year or part of a calendar year based upon the gross receipts
within such year or part of year at the rate of Thirty Cents ($.30) per One
Thousand Dollars ($1,000.00) of gross receipts. Effective January 1, 1993, the
additional tax shall be computed and paid at the rate of Forty Cents ($.40) per
One Thousand Dollars ($1,000.00) of gross receipts.
   For the purposes of this section, “recreation and entertainment” includes,
but is not limited to, pool halls, bowling alleys, dancing clubs, theaters,
skating rinks, and riding academies.
(§ 1, Ord. 2526, eff. April 8, 1992)
Sec. 3-1.207. Manufacturing: Business license tax.
   Every person engaged in the business of manufacturing in the City shall pay
an annual business license tax to the City consisting of a flat tax of Fifty
Dollars ($50.00) plus an additional tax for each calendar year or part of a
calendar year based upon the gross receipts within such year or part of year at
the rate of Fifteen Cents ($.15) per One Thousand Dollars ($1,000.00) of gross
receipts. Effective January 1, 1993, the additional tax shall be computed and
paid at the rate of Twenty Cents ($.20) per One Thousand Dollars ($1,000.00) of
gross receipts.
   For the purposes of this section. “manufacturing” means the business of
making, developing, assembling or packaging of any machines, devices, articles,
things, materials or substances whatsoever.
(§ 1, Ord. 2526, eff. April 8, 1992)
Sec. 3-1.208. Wholesale sales: Business license tax.
   Every person engaged in the business of selling goods, wares or merchandise
at wholesale shall pay an annual business license tax to the City consisting of
a flat tax of Fifty Dollars ($50.00) plus an additional tax for each calendar
year or part of a calendar year based upon the gross receipts within such year
or part of year at the rate of Fifteen Cents ($.15) per One Thousand Dollars
($1,000.00) of gross receipts. Effective January 1, 1993, the additional tax
shall be computed and paid at the rate of Twenty Cents ($.20) per One Thousand
Dollars ($1,000.00) of gross receipts.
(§ 1, Ord. 2526, eff. April 8, 1992)
Sec. 3-1.209. Retail sales: Business license tax.
   Every person engaged in the business of selling goods, wares or merchandise
at retail shall pay an annual business license tax to the City consisting of a
flat tax of Fifty Dollars ($50.00) plus an additional tax for each calendar
year or part of a calendar year based upon the gross receipts within such year
or part of year at the rate of Fifteen Cents ($.15) per One Thousand Dollars
($1,000.00) of gross receipts. Effective January 1, 1993, the additional tax
shall be computed and paid at the rate of Twenty Cents ($.20) per One Thousand
Dollars ($1,000.00) of gross receipts.
(§ 1, Ord. 2526, eff. April 8, 1992)
Sec. 3-1.210. Administrative headquarters: Business license tax.
   Every person maintaining an administrative headquarters shall pay an annual
business license tax to the City consisting of a flat tax of Fifty Dollars
($50.00) plus an additional tax for each calendar year or part of a calendar
year based upon the gross receipts within such year or part of year at the rate
of Fifteen Cents ($.15) per One Thousand Dollars ($1,000.00) of gross receipts.
Effective January 1, 1993, the additional tax shall be computed and paid at the
rate of Twenty Cents ($.20) per one Thousand Dollars ($1,000.00) of gross
receipts.
(§ 1, Ord. 2526, eff. April 8, 1992)
Sec. 3-1.211. Non-franchised public utilities: Business license tax.
   Every person engaged in the business of providing public utility services in
the City who does not pay a franchise fee to the City under some other
provision of law shall pay an annual business license tax to the City
consisting of a flat tax of Fifty Dollars ($50.00) plus an additional tax for
each calendar year or part of a calendar year based upon the gross receipts
within such year or part of year at the rate of Fifteen Cents ($.15) per One
Thousand Dollars ($1,000.00) of gross receipts. Effective January 1, 1993, the
additional tax shall be computed and paid at the rate of Twenty Cents ($.20)
per One Thousand Dollars ($1,000.00) of gross receipts.
(§ 1, Ord. 2526, eff. April 8, 1992)
Sec. 3-1.212. Franchised public utilities: Business license tax.
   Every person engaged in the business of providing public utility services in
the City, and who pays a franchise fee to the City under any other provision of
law, shall pay an annual business license tax to the City consisting of a flat
tax of Five Hundred Dollars ($500.00). Effective January 1, 1993, the flat tax
shall be One Thousand Dollars ($1,000.00).
(§ 1, Ord. 2526, eff. April 8, 1992)
Sec. 3-1.213. Itinerant vendor: Business license tax.
   Every person who is an itinerant vendor in the City shall pay an annual
business license tax to the City consisting of a flat tax of Fifty Dollars
($50.00).
   For the purposes of this section, an “itinerant vendor” is any person
engaged in a temporary or transient business in the City, selling or offering
for sale goods, wares, merchandise or other things or articles of value with
the intention of conducting such business for a period of not more than ninety
(90) calendar days in any calendar year and, for the purposes of carrying on
such business travels door-to-door, engages in such activities as special
events, or distributes handbills or other advertising matter.
(§ 1, Ord. 2526, eff. April 8, 1992)
Sec. 3-1.214. Special events: Business license tax.
   Every person conducting a special event in the City shall pay a daily
business license tax to the City consisting of a flat tax of One Hundred
Dollars ($100.00).
   For the purpose of this section, “special event” means such events as swap
meets, carnivals, fairs, exhibitions, and sporting events (other than school or
government sponsored events).
(§ 1, Ord. 2526, eff. April 8, 1992)
Sec. 3-1.215. Transportation: Business license tax.
   Every person engaged in the business of transporting persons or property by
vehicles driven on the streets of the City shall pay an annual business license
tax to the City consisting of a flat tax of Forty Dollars ($40.00) per vehicle.
(§ 1, Ord. 2526, eff. April 8, 1992)
Sec. 3-1.216. Warehousing: Business license tax.
   Every person engaged in the business of warehousing in the City shall pay an
annual business license tax to the City consisting of a flat tax of Fifty
Dollars ($50.00) plus an additional tax of Two Cents ($.02) for each square
foot of warehousing space located in the City.
(§ 1, Ord. 2526, eff. April 8, 1992)
Sec. 3-1.217. Film making: Business license tax.
   (a)   Every person who for the purpose of producing a motion picture film or
a videotape intended for public viewing either in a motion picture theater or
on television, and who films or videotapes any interior or exterior scene in
the City, shall pay a business license tax to the City consisting of a flat tax
of Two Hundred Dollars ($200.00) for videotaping or filming activities
occurring in the City.
   (b)   Every person who films or videotapes any interior or exterior scene in
the City shall also first procure a City Film Permit and pay the applicable
Film Permit Fee prior to the commencement of filming The Film Permit Fee shall
be in the amount specified in the Citywide Fee Schedule currently in effect at
the time the Film Permit application is submitted.
(§ 1, Ord. 2526, eff. April 8, 1992, as amended by § 1, Ord. 2700, eff.
November 5, 1999, § 5, Ord. 3211, eff. July 1, 2022)
Articles 3 through 5.
   Reserved for Future Legislation
Article 6. Private Patrol Systems
Sec. 3-1.601. Definitions.
   For the purposes of this article, unless otherwise apparent from the
context, certain words and phrases used in this article are defined as follows:
   (a)   “Patrol system” shall mean any private service or private system which
purports to furnish, or does furnish, to members or subscribers any watchman or
guard, either uniformed or otherwise, to patrol any part of the territory of
the City, or to guard or watch any property, including guarding against theft
or fire, or both, or to perform any service usually and customarily performed
by the police force of the City.
   “Patrol system” shall not include the guarding of the property of a single
owner, while such property is not open to the public, by one or more
individuals whose entire salary or wage is paid by such owner, irrespective of
whether such salary or wage is paid directly to the individuals performing such
guard duty or to another, nor to service of any nature performed by an employee
whose main or principal duty is not that of guarding or protecting property.
   (b)   “Street patrol service” shall mean the active patrol, regardless
whether on foot or by vehicle, of a public area, street or thoroughfare in the
service of multiple customers.
   (c)   “Street patrolman” shall mean an individual engaged in street patrol
services as the owner, member or employee of a patrol system.
   (d)   “Private post security guard” shall mean an individual engaged in the
act of guarding property as the owner, member or employee of a patrol system,
whose duties are restricted to a single location or private business and whose
duties do not include street patrol service.
   (e)   “Unregistered guard” shall mean an individual engaged in the act of
guarding property as the owner, member or employee of a patrol system who does
not possess a valid State registration as provided in Chapter 11.5 of Division
3 of the Business and Professions Code of the State (commencing with Cal. Bus.
& Prof. Code § 7580 - the “Private Security Services Act”).
   (f)   “Private security personnel” shall mean owners, members and employees
of a patrol system, including but not limited to unregistered guards, street
patrolmen and private post security guards.
(§§ 1 through 3, Ord. 1293, eff. March 6, 1958, as amended by § 1, Ord. 2672,
eff. September 17, 1998)
Sec. 3-1.602. Permits: Required: Registration.
   (a)   Required. Every person conducting a patrol system for which any owner,
member or employee is an unregistered guard, and every person conducting a
patrol system that furnishes street patrol service, shall first procure a City
permit, in addition to any State license required.
   (b)   Registration. Every person conducting a patrol system for which any
owner, member or employee is a private post security guard shall first register
such private post security guards with the City by providing the name of each
such person and a copy of each such person's valid State registration, and
shall keep such registration current by informing the City Clerk within five
(5) business days of any changes, additions or deletions thereto.
(§ 4, Ord. 1293, eff. March 6, 1958, as amended by § 2, Ord. 2672, eff.
September 17, 1998)
Sec. 3-1.603. Permits: Applications: Form.
   Any person required to procure a City permit under this Article shall file a
verified application with the Police Chief, accompanied by the required fee.
Such application shall contain the following:
   (a)   The name and address of the applicant;
   (b)   If the applicant is a partnership, the name and address of all
partners;
   (c)   If the applicant is a corporation, the names and addresses of the
corporate officers and manager and a certified copy of the resolution
authorizing such application;
   (d)   The district or territory proposed to be served by the patrol system;
   (e)   A description of the methods of operation;
   (f)   The names and addresses of all unregistered guards and street
patrolmen who are, or will be, owners, officers, or employees of the applicant;
   (g)   A statement of the offenses, if any, of which any person set forth in
subsection (a), (b), or (c) of this section has been convicted, and of the
time, place, and circumstances thereof; and
   (h)   Such other information as either the Council, Police Chief or his
designee may require.
(§§ 5 and 6, Ord. 1293, eff. March 6, 1958, as amended by §§ 3 and 4, Ord.
2672, eff. September 17, 1998)
Sec. 3-1.604. Permits: Applications: Accompanying data.
   Every application for a permit to conduct a private patrol system shall
include evidence on the part of the applicant that such applicant has complied
with the requirements of Chapter 11.5 of Division 3 of the Business and
Professions Code of the State (commencing with Cal. Bus. & Prof. Code § 7580 -
the “Private Security Services Act”).
(§ 7, Ord. 1293, eff. March 6, 1958, as amended by § 5, Ord. 2672, eff.
September 17, 1998)
Sec. 3-1.605. Permits: Applications: Investigations: Transmission to Council.
   Upon the receipt of an application for a permit to conduct a patrol system,
the Police Chief or his designee shall investigate the character, fitness, and
qualifications of every person whose name appears on such application. The
Police Chief shall transmit such application to the Council, together with his
recommendation that the permit be granted or denied, and his reasons therefor.
He shall also inform the Council what persons, in his opinion, should be
permitted to act as unregistered guards, what persons should be permitted to
act as street patrolmen, and in what territory the applicant shall be allowed
to operate a street patrol service, together with his reasons therefor.
(§ 8, Ord. 1293, eff. March 6, 1958, as amended by § 6, Ord. 2672, eff.
September 17, 1998)
Sec. 3-1.606. Permit: Granting or denial: Hearing: Notices.
   (a)   Granting or denial: Notices. Upon the receipt of an application for a
permit to conduct a patrol system, the Council shall either grant the same to
the full extent requested or it shall notify the applicant that it intends to
deny the application or to grant the application but permit operations in only
a portion of the territory or by only a part of the street patrolmen or
unregistered guards, or both, applied for.
   (b)   Hearings: Requests. Within five (5) days of such notification, the
applicant may demand a public hearing. If he does not do so, he shall be deemed
to have consented to such denial or granting of the permit.
   (c)   Hearings: Notices. Within twenty (20) days after an applicant for a
permit to conduct a patrol system files with the Council a demand for a public
hearing, the Council shall hold a public hearing, either before itself or a
referee, and shall serve notices of the time and place of the hearing upon the
Police Chief or his designee, the applicant, and every person named in the
application as street patrolmen or unregistered guards whom the Council intends
not to allow to act as such.
   (d)   Hearings: Council action. The Council shall inform the Police Chief or
his designee and the City Clerk of its final action on each application for a
permit to conduct a patrol system.
(§§ 9 through 11, Ord. 1293, eff. March 6, 1958, as amended by § 7, Ord. 2672,
eff. September 17, 1998)
Sec. 3-1.607. Permits: Fees.
   Every person conducting a street patrol service and every person employing
unregistered guards shall pay a permit fee in the amount of Fifty Dollars
($50.00) per year, plus Five Dollars ($5.00) per year for each street patrolman
and each unregistered guard.
(§ 4, Ord. 1293, eff. March 6, 1958, as amended by § 8, Ord. 2672, eff.
September 17, 1998)
Sec. 3-1.608. Permits: Form.
   Every permit to conduct street patrol services shall contain, among other
things, an accurate description of the area in which operations shall be
permitted and the names of all street patrolmen permitted to such permittee.
(§ 12, Ord. 1293, eff. March 6, 1958, as amended by § 9, Ord. 2672, eff.
September 17, 1998)
Sec. 3-1.609. Permits: Modifications.
   (a)   Applications: Granting or denial. The Council shall grant or deny
applications to modify existing patrol system permits in the same manner as in
the case of original applications.
   (b)   Decreases in personnel. The permittee of a patrol system shall so
inform the Police Chief or his designee within five (5) days after any street
patrolman or unregistered guard no longer is an owner, member, or employee of
such permittee, and the permittee shall return the permit and badge of such
street patrolman or unregistered guard. The Police Chief or his designee shall
remove the street patrolman's or unregistered guard's name from the permit of
such patrol system.
   (c)   Increases in personnel: Changes of territory. The permittee of a
patrol system required to obtain a City permit may at any time file an
application with the Police Chief either to change or increase his territory
for street patrol operation, or to add street patrolmen or unregistered guards,
or both.
(§§ 13 through 15, Ord. 1293, eff. March 6, 1958, as amended by §§ 10 and 11,
Ord. 2672, eff. September 17, 1998)
Sec. 3-1.610. Permits: More than one for same area.
   The provisions of this article shall not limit the power of the Council to
grant a permit to more than one patrol system to operate in the same area.
(§ 25, Ord. 1293, eff. March 6, 1958)
Sec. 3-1.611. Permittee: Sale or transfer of right to engage in business.
   No patrol system permittee shall sell or offer to sell any transfer or
relinquishment of the privilege to operate a patrol system in territory
assigned to him.
(§ 20, Ord. 1293, eff. March 6, 1958)
Sec. 3-1.612. Reserved.
Sec. 3-1.613. Badges and uniforms.
   (a)   Police Chief approval. Each street patrolman shall wear a badge and a
distinctive uniform approved by the Police Chief or his designee.
   (b)   Wearing. While engaged in his duties as such, a street patrolman shall
at all times wear the badge and the distinctive uniform approved by the Police
Chief or his designee and such street patrolman shall wear no other badges of
any kind, character, or description except the badge issued to him by lawful
governmental authority, nor shall he wear any other uniform of any kind.
(§§ 16 and 18, Ord. 1293, eff. March 6, 1958, as amended by §§ 1 and 3, Ord.
1306, eff. May 15, 1958, § 12, Ord. 2672, eff. September 17, 1998)
Sec. 3-1.614. Badges: Sales, purchases, and other transactions.
   No person shall give, deliver, or sell to any private person any private
security personnel badge or any badge of a design the same as, or so similar
to, the private security personnel badge as to be mistaken therefor.
   No person shall purchase or receive as a gift, pawn, or pledge any private
security personnel badge.
(§§ 21 and 22, Ord. 1293, eff. March 6, 1958, as amended by § 13, Ord. 2672,
eff. September 17, 1998)
Sec. 3-1.615. Uniforms: Similarity to police uniforms.
   No private security personnel shall wear any uniform which is in imitation
of, or can be mistaken for, an official sheriff's uniform or an official police
uniform of the police force of any city within the County or an official
uniform of any State officer.
(§ 23, Ord. 1293, eff. March 6, 1958, as amended by § 14, Ord. 2672, eff.
September 17, 1998)
Sec. 3-1.616. Equipment and weapons.
   Except as otherwise authorized by law, the Police Chief shall specify the
police equipment, including weapons, which private security personnel may wear
while on duty. No private security personnel shall wear any equipment or weapon
or carry any weapon not so defined or otherwise authorized by law.
(§ 26, Ord. 1293, eff. March 6, 1958, as amended by § 15, Ord. 2672, eff.
September 17, 1998)
Sec. 3-1.617. Use of street patrolman or unregistered guard not named on
permits.
   The operator of a patrol system shall neither employ or utilize the services
in any way of a street patrolman or unregistered guard whose name is not on the
permit of such operator.
(§ 19, Ord. 1293, eff. March 6, 1958, as amended by § 16, Ord. 2672, eff.
September 17, 1998)
Sec. 3-1.618. Unlawful acts on property of nonsubscribers.
   No private security personnel shall, either by himself or through the
actions of another, harass, annoy, or commit a nuisance against, or injure the
property of, or unnecessarily enter or otherwise trespass upon the property of,
any person whose property the patrol system of such private security personnel
is not employed to protect.
(§ 24, Ord. 1293, eff. March 6, 1958, as amended by § 17, Ord. 2672, eff.
September 17, 1998)
Sec. 3-1.619. Police and investigative activities: Reports of law violations.
   No private security personnel shall perform official police or investigative
activities but shall immediately report every violation of law and unusual
occurrence to the nearest sheriff or sheriff's substation. Such private
security personnel shall make to such substation a full report of such
violation or other occurrence without unnecessary delay.
(§ 27, Ord. 1293, eff. March 6, 1958, as amended by § 18, Ord. 2672, eff.
September 17, 1998)
Sec. 3-1.620. Police investigation and reports of complaints relating to patrol
systems.
   All complaints regarding the activities of patrol systems or of private
security personnel employed by patrol systems shall be investigated by the
Police Chief or his designee. Reports of such complaints shall be held in the
files of the Police Chief or his designee and shall be subject to the
inspection of the Council at all times.
(§ 28, Ord. 1293, eff. March 6, 1958, as amended by § 19, Ord. 2672, eff.
September 17, 1998)
Sec. 3-1.621. Rules and regulations.
   The Council may make rules and regulations governing Patrol systems and
private security personnel, which rules and regulations are not inconsistent
with the provisions of this article.
(§ 29, Ord. 1293, eff. March 6, 1958, as amended by § 20, Ord. 2672, eff.
September 17, 1998)
Article 7. Solicitors and Canvassers
Sec. 3-1.701. Defined.
   For the purposes of this article, “solicitor” or “canvasser” shall mean any
individual, whether a resident of the City or not, using telephone service or
other communication, or traveling by foot, wagon, automobile, motor truck, or
any other type of conveyance from place to place, from house to house, or from
street to street, taking, or attempting to take, orders for the sale of goods,
wares, merchandise, or personal property of any nature whatsoever for future
delivery, or for services to be furnished or performed in the future, whether
or not such individual has, carries, or exposes for sale a sample of the
subject of such sale, or whether he is collecting advance payments on such
sales or not.
   “Solicitor” or “canvasser” shall include any person who, for himself or for
another person, firm, or corporation, hires, leases, uses, or occupies any
building, structure, tent, vehicle, hotel room, lodging house, apartment, shop,
or any other place in the City for the sole purpose of exhibiting samples and
taking orders for future delivery.
   Such definition shall not include “solicitors” or “canvassers” taking orders
or displaying merchandise exclusively from a public sidewalk or public
pedestrian path in compliance with Chapter 31 of Title 5 of this Municipal
Code.
(§ 2, Ord. 1373, eff. November 5, 1959, as amended by § 1, Ord. 1424, eff.
March 23, 1961, § 2, Ord. 3123, eff. December 18, 2018)
Sec. 3-1.702. Permits: Required.
   Any solicitor or canvasser, as defined in §
3-1.701 of this article, who engages in such business within the City without
first obtaining a permit therefor in compliance with the provisions of this
article shall be guilty of a misdemeanor.
(§ 1, Ord. 1373, eff. November 5, 1959, as amended by § 4, Ord. 2094, eff.
August 14, 1980)
Sec. 3-1.703. Permits: Applications: Form.
   Applicants for permits to solicit or canvass shall file with the License
Official a sworn application in writing, in duplicate, on a form to be
furnished by the License Official, giving the following information:
   (a)   The full name, permanent home address, and full local address of the
applicant;
   (b)   A brief description of the nature of the business and the goods to be
sold;
   (c)   If employed, the name and address of the employer and the name and
address of any local or State office or manager, together with credentials
establishing the exact relationship:
   (d)   The length of time for which the right to engage in business is
desired;
   (e)   The place where the goods or property proposed to be sold, or orders
taken for the sale thereof, is manufactured or produced, where such goods or
products are located at the time the application is filed, and the proposed
method of delivery;
   (f)   Evidence that the applicant has his photograph and fingerprints on
file with the Police Department; and
   (g)   A statement as to whether or not the applicant has been convicted of
any crime, misdemeanor, or violation of any municipal law, the nature of the
offense, and the punishment or penalty assessed therefor.
(§ 3, Ord. 1373, eff. November 5, 1959)
Sec. 3-1.704. Permits: Applications: Fees.
   At the time of filing such application, a fee in the amount of Ten Dollars
($10.00) shall be paid to the License Official to cover the cost of
investigating the facts stated therein. Such administrative fees shall be for
services and shall not be returned to the applicant.
(§ 3, Ord. 1373, eff. November 5, 1959)
Sec. 3-1.705. Permits: Applications: Investigation.
   Upon the receipt of such application, the original shall be referred to the
Police Chief who shall cause such investigation of the applicant's business and
moral character to be made as the Police Chief deems necessary for the
protection of the public welfare.
(§ 4A, Ord. 1373, eff. November 5, 1959)
Sec. 3-1.706. Permits: Applications: Denial.
   If, as a result of such investigation, the applicant's character or business
responsibility is found to be unsatisfactory, the Police Chief shall, within
fourteen (14) days, endorse on such application his disapproval and his reasons
for the same and shall return the application to the License Official who shall
notify the applicant that his application is disapproved and that no permit
shall be issued.
(§ 4B, Ord. 1373, eff. November 5, 1959)
Sec. 3-1.707. Permits: Applications: Denial: Appeals: Hearings.
   (a)   Appeals: Filing. Any person aggrieved by the action of the Police
Chief or License Official in the denial of a permit, provided in §
3-1.706 of this article, shall have the right of appeal to the Council. Such
appeal shall be taken by filing with the Council, within fourteen (14) days
after a notice of the action complained of has been mailed to such person's
last known address, a written statement setting forth fully the grounds for
appeal.
   (b)   Hearings: Notices. The Council shall set a time and place for hearing
such appeal and a notice of such hearing shall be given to the appellant in the
same manner as provided in §
3-1.713 of this article for notices of hearings on the revocation of permits.
   (c)   Hearings: Council action. The decision and order of the Council on
such appeal shall be final and conclusive.
(§ 10, Ord. 1373, eff. November 5, 1959)
Sec. 3-1.708. Permits: Issuance.
   If as a result of the investigation required by the provisions of §
3-1.705 of this article, the applicant's character and business responsibility
are found to be satisfactory, the Police Chief shall, within fourteen (14)
days, endorse his approval on the application and return such application to
the License Official who shall, upon payment of the prescribed permit fee,
deliver to the applicant his permit.
   No solicitor's permit shall be issued for more than one person; provided,
however, supplementary permits may be issued to additional solicitors who
represent an organization currently holding a permit as a solicitor in the
City.
(§§ 4C and D, Ord. 1373, eff. November 5, 1959)
Sec. 3-1.709. Reserved.
Sec. 3-1.710. Reserved.
Sec. 3-1.711. Permits: Wearing.
   The License Official shall issue to each permittee at the time of the
delivery of his permit, a permit holder of the proper size to hold the issued
permit, together with a photograph at least one and one-fourth inches (1¼") by
one and one-fourth inches (1¼") of the applicant taken not more than thirty
(30) days prior to his application for a permit. Such permit and holder shall,
during the time such permittee is engaged in soliciting, be worn constantly by
the permittee on the front of his outer garment in such a way as to be
conspicuous.
(§ 6, Ord. 1373, eff. November 5, 1959)
Sec. 3-1.712. Permits: Exhibiting.
   Solicitors and canvassers shall be required to exhibit their permits at the
request of any citizen, in addition to wearing them in a conspicuous place.
(§ 7, Ord. 1373, eff. November 5, 1959)
Sec. 3-1.713. Permits: Revocation: Hearings.
   (a)   Hearings: Grounds. Permits issued pursuant to the provisions of this
article may be revoked by the Council after a hearing following a notice from a
court or judge or the Police Chief of any of the following offenses:
      (1)   Any fraud, misrepresentation, or false statement contained in the
application for the permit;
      (2)   Any fraud, misrepresentation, or false statement made in the course
of carrying on his business as a solicitor or canvasser;
      (3)   Any violation of the provisions of this article;
      (4)   The conviction of any crime or misdemeanor involving moral
turpitude; or
      (5)   Conducting the business of soliciting or canvassing in an unlawful
manner or in such a manner as to constitute a breach of the peace or to
constitute a menace to the health, safety, or general welfare of the public.
   (b)   Hearings: Notices. A notice of the hearing on the revocation of a
permit shall be given in writing, setting forth specifically the grounds of
complaint and the time and place of such hearing. Such notice shall be mailed,
postage prepaid, to the permittee at his last known address at least five (5)
days prior to the date set for the hearing.
(§ 7, Ord. 1373, eff. November 5, 1959)
Sec. 3-1.714. Permits: Charity solicitor's and canvassers.
   (a)   Requirements for issuance. Any charity or welfare organization seeking
a special solicitation permit shall comply with the provisions of this
subsection. Such organization shall:
      (1)   Give evidence to the Council or its appointed representatives that
the organization is a nonprofit organization so incorporated in the State;
      (2)   Give evidence that there is a need for the organization to solicit
and shall state the purpose and length of time of the solicitation, the number
of solicitors, and other necessary information as listed on the application for
a special permit;
      (3)   Fill out an application requesting a special solicitation permit
without fee; and
      (4)   Publish in a local newspaper, before and after the permit is
granted, the intent to solicit, stating the area of the City to be solicited.
   (b)   Issuance for additional workers. The License Department shall provide
special supplementary limited permits to permittees for additional workers for
qualified charity canvassing for an additional fee of Three Dollars ($3.00) per
worker unless such special fee is waived by the Council or its representative.
(§ 5D, Ord. 1373, eff. November 5, 1959)
Sec. 3-1.715. Bonds.
   (a)   Where a payment or deposit is demanded in advance of the final
delivery of goods or services, the License Official shall require that a cash
or surety bond in the sum of Five Hundred and Dollars ($500.00) be furnished by
each person engaged in the business of canvassing, soliciting, or taking orders
for goods, wares, merchandise, or articles, or for services to be performed,
conditioned upon the making of such final delivery of the goods ordered or
services to be performed in accordance with the terms of such order, or failing
therein that the advance payment on such order shall be refunded.
   (b)   Any person aggrieved by the action of any such solicitor or canvasser
shall have the right of action on the bond for the recovery of money or
damages, or both. Such bond shall remain in full force and effect, and in the
case of cash deposits, such deposits shall be retained by the City, for a
period of ninety (90) days after the expiration of the permit, unless sooner
released by action of the Council. The provisions of this subsection shall not
apply to any authorized agent or representative of a regularly established
business in the City.
(§§ 5A and B, Ord. 1373, eff. November 5, 1959)
Sec. 3-1.716. Enforcement of provisions.
   It shall be the duty of any police officer of the City to require any person
seen soliciting or canvassing, and who is not known by such officer to hold a
permit, to produce such person's solicitor's or canvasser's permit and to
enforce the provisions of this article against any person found to be violating
the same.
(§ 8, Ord. 1373, eff. November 5, 1959)
Sec. 3-1.717. Exceptions to provisions.
   The provisions of this article shall not apply to commercial travelers or
selling agents selling goods, wares, or merchandise to dealers at wholesale for
resale purposes, or to persons, firms, or corporations who use the purchased
goods, wares, or merchandise in the making of a product to be manufactured in
the City, or to any person holding a license pursuant to the provisions of
Article 1 and
2 of this chapter, subject to such requirements as the Council may set forth by
resolution relating to applications for identification badges and the wearing
of such badges.
(§ 2, Ord. 1373, eff. November 5, 1959, as amended by § 1, Ord. 1424, eff.
March 23, 1961)
Article 8. Adult Businesses and Adult Business Performers
Sec. 3-1.801. Adult Businesses; Purpose of registration.
   The purpose of this subsection is to facilitate regulation of adult
businesses and adult business performers pending resolution of issues regarding
the prior-permitting of such establishments and their performers raised in Baby
Tam & Co., Inc. v. City of Las Vegas, 154 F.3d 1097 (9th Cir. 1998). The
intention of the registration requirement is to provide enforcement agencies
sufficient information to assist them in ensuring that criminal elements do not
infiltrate such establishments, that minors are not employed in such
establishments, and that the establishments will comply with zoning and
operational standards imposed by the City of Ontario.
   (a)   Registration of adult businesses. Any person, association, partnership
or corporation desiring to obtain a business license tax certificate for an
adult business shall make an application for a registration certificate, under
oath, to the City Manager or designee. The application shall be accompanied by
the appropriate fee to be established by separate resolution of the City
Council. The application shall be submitted on a form provided by the City
indicating:
      (1)   The name, current permanent residential address and telephone
number of the applicant;
      (2)   The business name, proposed business address of the adult business
and its telephone number.
         (a)   If the applicant is a corporation, the name shall be exactly as
set forth in its articles of incorporation and it shall provide a copy of its
articles of incorporation along with the application. The application shall
indicate the address of the corporation, if different than the address of the
adult business, as well as the name and residence address of each of the
officers, directors and each stockholder owning not less than ten percent of
the stock of the corporation. The applicant shall show that the corporation is
in good standing under the laws of the State of California;
         (b)   If the applicant is a partnership, the application shall show
the name and residence address of each of the partners, including limited
partners, and the address of the partnership itself, if different than the
address of the adult business;
      (3)   The name and permanent address of the owner of the property upon
which the applicant intends to locate the adult business;
      (4)   In the event the applicant is not the owner of record of the real
property upon which the adult business will be located, the application must be
accompanied by a notarized statement from the owner of record of the real
property acknowledging that an adult business is or will be located on the
property. In addition, the applicant shall furnish a copy of the lease or
rental agreement pertaining to the premises in which the adult business will be
located;
      (5)   The date, hours and location where the adult business is proposed
to be conducted, and the admission fee, if any, to be charged;
      (6)   The name(s) of person(s) having the management or supervision of
the applicant’s business;
      (7)   Whether or not the applicant has ever had any similar license or
permit revoked or suspended, or has had any professional or vocational license
or permit revoked or suspended, and the reasons for such revocation or
suspension. If the applicant is a corporation, this requirement shall apply to
each of the officers, directors and/or stockholders owning not less than ten
percent (10%) of the stock of the corporation. If the applicant is partnership,
this requirement shall apply to each of the partners, including limited
partners;
      (8)   Driver’s license or other acceptable identification and social
security number of the applicant. If the applicant is a corporation, this
requirement shall apply to each of the officers, directors and/or stockholders
owning not less than ten percent (10%) of the stock of the corporation. If the
applicant is partnership, this requirement shall apply to each of the partners,
including limited partners;
      (9)   Acceptable written proof that the applicant is at least eighteen
(18) years of age. If the applicant is a corporation, this requirement shall
apply to each of the officers, directors and/or stockholders owning not less
than ten percent (10%) of the stock of the corporation. If the applicant is
partnership, this requirement shall apply to each of the partners, including
limited partners;
      (10)   The height, weight, eye color, hair color and date of birth of the
applicant. If the applicant is a corporation, this requirement shall apply to
each of the officers, directors and/or stockholders owning not less than ten
percent (10%) of the stock of the corporation. If the applicant is partnership,
this requirement shall apply to each of the partners, including limited
partners;
            (11)   The business, occupation or employ- ment history of the
applicant covering the five (5) year period immediately preceding the date of
filing the application. If the applicant is a corporation, this requirement
shall apply to each of the officers, directors and/or stockholders owning not
less than ten percent (10%) of the stock of the corporation. If the applicant
is partnership, this requirement shall apply to each of the partners, including
limited partners;
            (12)   Each residence and business address of the applicant for the
five (5) year period immediately preceding the date of filing the application.
If the applicant is a corporation, this requirement shall apply to each of the
officers, directors and/or stockholders owning not less than ten percent (10%)
of the stock of the corporation. If the applicant is partnership, this
requirement shall apply to each of the partners, including limited partners;
            (13)   One front-facing portrait photograph of the applicant
measuring at least two (2) inches by two (2) inches and a complete set of
applicant’s fingerprints taken by Ontario Police Department. If the applicant
is a corporation, this requirement shall apply to each of the officers,
directors and/or stockholders owning not less than ten percent (10%) of the
stock of the corporation. If the applicant is partnership, this requirement
shall apply to each of the partners, including limited partners;
            (14)   A detailed description of the proposed adult business,
including the type of activities, services and entertainment to be provided,
the number of employees and persons engaged as performers, and any further
information about the adult business or performers, as the City Manager or
designee deems necessary;
            (15)   The name and address of any other adult business owned and
operated by any person whose name is required to be given in subsection (a)(1)
or (a)(2) above;
            (16)   A description of any other business to be operated on the
same premises or adjoining premises owned or controlled by the applicant. If
the applicant is a corporation, this requirement shall apply to each of the
officers, directors and/or stockholders owning not less than ten percent (10%)
of the stock of the corporation. If the applicant is partnership, this
requirement shall apply to each of the partners, including limited partners;
            (17)   Authorization for the City, its agents and employees to seek
information and conduct an investigation into the truth of the statements set
forth in the application and the qualifications of the applicant for the
permit;
      (18)   Such other identification and infor- mation necessary to discover
the truth of the information set forth in the application;
      (19)   The applicant shall also provide, for any person whose name is
required to be given in subsection (a)(6) of this section, the information
requested in subsections (a)(9), (a)(10), (a)(11), (a)(12), (a)(13), (a)(14),
(a)(15), (a)(16) and (a)(18);
      (20)   Whether the applicant or any indivi- duals required to be listed
on the application has within the two or five (5) year period specified in §
3-1.802 immediately preceding the date of the application, been convicted of a
specified criminal act, and, if so, the specified criminal act committed and
the date and place of conviction;
            (21)   Five (5) copies of a site plan, drawn to an appropriate
scale and fully dimensioned, showing the lot, all existing and proposed
buildings, parking areas, landscaping, walls, and lighting;
            (22)   Five (5) copies of a floor plan, drawn to an appropriate
scale and fully dimensioned, showing the interior configuration of the
premises, including all walls and permanent fixtures, as well as a summary of
the total building area and the total floor space occupied by the adult
business;
            (23)   Two (2) copies of vicinity map depicting the property lines
of the proposed adult business and the land uses, zones or districts for which
minimum separation and locational requirements are in effect pursuant to § 9-
1.1305(b)(4) of the Ontario Municipal Code. The proposed vicinity map shall be
prepared by a registered civil engineer or licensed land survey whose original
wet stamp shall appear on the face of the vicinity map drawing. The proposed
vicinity map shall also include a statement certifying the map was prepared
within the last thirty (30) days prior to the submittal of the adult business
application;
      (24)   An adult business that obtains a registration certificate to
conduct adult business uses shall notify the City’s Business Licensing
Department of any change in the information required to be furnished by this
section within thirty (30) days after such change occurs. A registration
certificate issued shall be permanently displayed at the location.
   (b)   Registration of adult business performers.
      (1)   Any person wishing to be engaged as an adult business performer
shall submit an application to the City Manager or designee, under oath, for a
registration certificate. The application shall be accompanied by the
appropriate fee to be established by separate resolution of the City Council.
      (2)   An application for an adult business performer shall include the
following information:
         (i)   The name, including all names, nicknames and aliases by which
the applicant has been known and a listing of their residence address for the
last three (3) years;
         (ii)   Social security number, driver’s license number, if any, and
date of birth;
         (iii)   The applicant’s weight, height, color of eyes, and sex;
         (iv)   Written evidence that the applicant is at least eighteen (18)
years of age;
         (v)   Fingerprint cards to be taken by the Ontario Police Department;
         (vi)   Two front-faced portrait photographs at least two (2) inches by
two (2) inches in size and taken within thirty days of the date of the
application;
         (vii)   Whether the applicant has within the two or five year period
specified in §
3-1.802 immediately preceding the date of the application, been convicted of a
specified criminal act, and, if so, the specified criminal act committed and
the date and place of conviction;
         (viii)   Authorization for the City, its agents and employees to seek
further information and conduct an investigation into the truth of the
statements set forth on the application;
         (ix)   A written declaration by the applicant, under penalty or
perjury, that the foregoing information contained in the application is true
and correct, said declaration being duly dated and signed in the City.
(Added by § 7, Ord. 2682, eff. March 4, 1999)
Sec. 3-1.802. Prohibition on ownership, management or performance by persons
recently convicted of sexually-related offences.
   (a)   No adult business shall operate within the City, nor shall an adult
business performer perform within the City, if any person required to be listed
on an application pursuant to §
3-1.801(a) or (b) has been convicted of a “specified criminal act” for which:
      (1)   Less than two (2) years have elapsed since the date of conviction
or the date of release from confinement, whichever is the later date, if the
conviction is of a misdemeanor offense for the specified criminal acts;
      (2)   Less than five (5) years have elapsed since the date of conviction
or the date of release from confinement, whichever is the later date, if the
conviction is of a felony offense, for a specified criminal act;
      (3)   Less than five (5) years have elapsed since the date of conviction
or the date of release from confinement, which ever is the later date, if
convictions are of two (2) or more misdemeanors for the specified criminal act
occurring within any twenty four (24) month period;
      (4)   The fact that a conviction has been appealed shall have no effect
on disqualification of the applicant.
   (b)   For purposes of this chapter, “Specified Criminal Acts” shall be
defined as sexual crimes against children, sexual abuse, rape or crimes of a
sexual nature including, but not limited to the distribution of obscenity or
materials harmful to minors, including distribution via the Internet,
prostitution or pandering.
(Added by § 7, Ord. 2682, eff. March 4, 1999)
Sec. 3-1.803. Issuance of registration certificates.
   Upon receipt of an application under §
3-1.801(a) or (b), the City Manager or designee shall determine, within three
(3) business days, if the information provided is complete. If the information
is complete and the applicant has complied with the requirements of this
chapter and the adult business location and operation complies with all
applicable requirements for adult businesses contained in the Ontario Municipal
Code, the City Manager or designee shall issue a “registration certificate”
indicating that the applicant has complied with the requirements of this
chapter. If the information is not complete, the City Manager or designee shall
provide written notice to the applicant of the reasons for the determination
that the application is incomplete.
(Added by § 7, Ord. 2682, eff. March 4, 1999)
CHAPTER 2: CLAIMS AND DEMANDS
   
3-2.01   General
   
3-2.02   Special claims procedures
   
3-2.03   Filing
   
3-2.04   Claims covered by insurance
   
3-2.05   Purchases, supplies, or services
   
3-2.06   No enjoining collection of taxes, assessments, or fees/payments
required as condition to filing suit
Sec. 3-2.01. General.
   The provisions of this chapter recognize that the general claim procedures
applicable to local public agencies, including this City, are governed by the
provisions of Chapter 1 of Division 3.6 of the Government Code of the State
(commencing with Cal. Gov't Code § 900). Nothing herein shall permit the filing
of a claim or action on behalf of a class or group.
(§ 1, Ord. 1685, eff. June 6, 1968, as amended by § 7, Ord. 2925, eff. July 15,
2010)
Sec. 3-2.02. Special claims procedures.
   Pursuant to the authority contained in Cal. Gov't Code § 935, the following
claims procedures are established for those claims against the City for money
or damages not now governed by State or local laws:
   (a)   Employee claims. Notwithstanding the exceptions contained in Cal.
Gov't Code § 905, all claims by public officers or employees for fees,
salaries, wages, overtime pay, holiday pay, compensating time off, vacation
pay, sick leave pay, and any other expenses or allowances claimed due from the
City, when a procedure for processing such claims is not otherwise provided by
State or local laws, shall be presented within the time limitations and in the
manner prescribed by Cal. Gov't Code §§ 910 through 915.2. Such claims shall
further be subject to the provisions of Cal. Gov't Code § 945.4 relating to the
prohibition of suits in the absence of the presentation of claims and action
thereon.
   (b)   Contract and other claims. In addition to the requirements of
subsection (a) of this section, and notwithstanding the exemptions set forth in
Cal. Gov't Code § 905, all claims against the City for damages or money, when a
procedure for processing such claims is not otherwise provided by State or
local laws, shall be presented within the time limitations and in the manner
prescribed by Cal. Gov't Code §§ 910 through 915.2. Such claims shall further
be subject to the provisions of Cal. Gov't Code § 945.4 relating to the
prohibition of suits in the absence of the presentation of claims and action
thereon.
   (c)   Nothing herein shall permit the filing of a claim or action on behalf
of a class or group.
(§ 2, Ord. 1685, eff. June 6, 1968, as amended by Ord. 2652, eff. March 5,
1998, and § 8, Ord. 2925, eff. July 15, 2010)
Sec. 3-2.03. Filing.
   All claims or demands against the City shall be filed with the City Clerk.
Such claims or demands shall be reviewed and either rejected or allowed by the
City Manager or his or her designee, provided, however, that the City Manager
or his or her designee shall not have the authority to allow, compromise or
settle a claim against the City if the amount to be paid exceeds fifty thousand
dollars ($50,000.00).
(§ 3, Ord. 1685, eff. June 6, 1968, as amended by Ord. 2652, eff. March 5,
1998)
Sec. 3-2.04. Claims covered by insurance.
   All claims filed with the City Clerk, which claims are covered by insurance,
shall be forwarded by the City Clerk, after action thereon by the City Manager
or his or her designee, to the appropriate insurance carrier for handling and
further processing.
(§ 4, Ord. 1685, eff. June 6, 1968, as amended by Ord. 2652, eff. March 5,
1998)
Sec. 3-2.05. Purchases, supplies, or services.
   (a)   All demands, invoices, or claims for purchases, supplies, or services
included within budgetary appropriations shall be presented in writing to the
Director of Finance. All such demands, invoices, or claims shall be fully
itemized and verified as just and correct by the claimant or his authorized
agent.
   (b)   Each demand shall bear the number of the purchase order issued for the
materials or services rendered.
   (c)   Such demands, invoices, or claims shall be audited by the Executive
Director of Finance or his/her authorized agent, who shall prepare a register
of audited demands.
   (d)   Such demands, invoices, or claims shall be approved by the City
Manager, or his/her authorized agent.
(§ 5, Ord. 1685, eff. June 6, 1968, as amended by § 1, Ord. 2103, eff. October
16, 1980, Ord. 2652, eff. March 5, 1998, and § 6, Ord. 3211, eff. July 1, 2022)
Sec. 3-2.06 No enjoining collection of taxes, assessments, or fees/payments
required as condition to filing suit.
   Notwithstanding any other provision of this Code, no injunction, writ of
mandate or other legal or equitable process shall issue in any suit, action or
proceeding in any court against the city or an officer thereof, to prevent or
enjoin the collection of taxes, assessments, or fees (whether established by
ordinance, resolution or other action of the City) which are sought to be
collected from any person, or are otherwise due and owing from any person to
the City pursuant to this Code or otherwise, and payment of all said taxes,
assessments, fees, plus any interest and penalties shall be required as a
condition precedent to seeking judicial review of any tax, assessment or fee
liability. For purposes of this section, the term “City” shall include, but not
be limited to any agency, district or entity formed or governed by the City.
(§ 9, Ord. 2925, eff. July 15, 2010)
CHAPTER 3: FUNDS
   
3-3.101   City Funds
Sec. 3-3.101. City Funds.
   (a)   The City's funds are administered in accordance with the Principles of
Governmental Accounting and Financial Reporting. Funds used in the government
model are classified into three broad categories: governmental, proprietary and
fiduciary. The three broad fund categories are subdivided into seven fund types
for accounting and financial reporting purposes and are shown as follows.
   (b)   Fund Types. The three broad categories are subdivided into seven fund
types for accounting and financial reporting purposes.
      (1)   Governmental Funds.
         (i)   The General Fund - to account for all financial resources except
those required to be accounted for in another fund.
         (ii)   Special Revenue Funds - to account for the proceeds of specific
revenue sources (other than expendable trusts or for major capital projects)
that are legally restricted to expenditure for specified purposes.
         (iii)   Capital Projects Funds - to account for financial resources to
be used for the acquisition or construction of major capital facilities (other
than those financed by proprietary funds and trust funds).
         (iv)   Debt Service Funds - to account for the accumulation of
resources for, and the payment of, general long-term debt principal and
interest.
      (2)   Proprietary Funds.
         (i)   Enterprise Funds - to account for operations: (1) that are
financed and operated in a manner similar to private business enterprises,
where the intent of the governing body is that the costs (expenses including
depreciation) of providing goods or services to the general public on a
continuing basis be financed or recovered primarily through user charges; or
(2) where the governing body has decided that periodic determination of
revenues earned, expenses incurred, and/or net income is appropriate for
capital maintenance, public policy management control, accountability, or other
purposes.
         (ii)   Internal Service Funds - to account for the financing of goods
or services provided by one department or agency to other departments or
agencies of the governmental unit, or to other governmental units, on a cost-
reimbursement basis.
      (3)   Fiduciary Funds.
         (i)   Trust and Agency Funds - to account for assets held by a
governmental unit in a trustee capacity or as an agent for individuals, private
organizations, other governmental units, and/or other funds. These include: (1)
expendable trust funds; (2) non-expendable trust funds; (3) pension trust
funds; and (4) agency funds.
CHAPTER 4: PROPERTY TAXES
   
3-4.01   Transfer of assessment and tax collection duties to County
Sec. 3-4.01. Transfer of assessment and tax collection duties to County.
   Pursuant to the provisions of Cal. Gov't Code §§ 51500 et seq., the City
hereby elects to transfer the assessment and tax collection duties performed by
the Assessor and Tax Collector of the City to the Assessor and Tax Collector of
the County.
(§ 1, Ord. 619, eff. March 9, 1938)
CHAPTER 5: SALES AND USE TAXES *
*Sections 3-5.01 through 3-5.08 codified from Ord. 1131, eff. March 7, 1956, as
amended by Ord. 1155, eff. June 13, 1956, Ord. 1261, eff. October 1, 1957, Ord.
1451, eff. January 1, 1962, and Ord. 1565, eff. May 20, 1964 superseded by § 1,
Ord. 1816, eff. January 1, 1974. Sections 3-5.01 through 3-5.19 added by Ord.
1816, eff. January 1, 1974, amended in their entirety by § 1, Ord. 1873, eff.
January 1, 1976, operative January 1, 1976.
   
3-5.01   Short title
   
3-5.02   Rate
   
3-5.03   Operative date
   
3-5.04   Purpose
   
3-5.05   Contract with State Board of Equalization
   
3-5.06   Sales taxes
   
3-5.07   Place of sale
   
3-5.08   Use taxes
   
3-5.09   Adoption of State law provisions
   
3-5.10   Limitations on adoption of State law provisions
   
3-5.11   Permits not required
   
3-5.12   Exclusions and exemptions
   
3-5.13   Amendments
   
3-5.14   Enjoining collection forbidden
   
3-5.15   Violations: Penalties (Repealed)
   
3-5.16   Severability
   
3-5.17   Repeal of former provisions
   
3-5.18   Effective date
Sec. 3-5.01. Short title.
   This chapter shall be known as the “Uniform Local Sales and Use Tax Law” of
the City.
(§ 1, Ord. 1873, eff. January 1, 1976)
Sec. 3-5.02. Rate.
   The rate of the sales tax and use tax imposed by the provisions of this
chapter shall be one percent (1%).
(§ 1, Ord. 1873, eff. January 1, 1976)
Sec. 3-5.03. Operative date.
   The provisions of this chapter shall be operative on January 1, 1976.
(§ 1, Ord. 1873, eff. January 1, 1976)
Sec. 3-5.04. Purpose.
   The Council hereby declares that the provisions of this chapter are adopted
to achieve the following, among other, purposes and directs that the provisions
of this chapter be interpreted in order to accomplish those purposes:
   (a)   To adopt a sales and use tax law which complies with the requirements
and limitations set forth in Part 1.5 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation
Code of the State (commencing with Cal. Rev. & Tax. Code § 7200);
   (b)   To adopt a sales and use tax law which incorporates provisions
identical to those of the Sales and Use Tax Law of the State insofar as those
provisions are not inconsistent with the requirements and limitations set forth
in Part 1.5 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code of the State
(commencing with Cal. Rev. & Tax. Code § 7200);
   (c)   To adopt a sales and use tax law which imposes a tax and provides a
measure therefor which can be administered and collected by the State Board of
Equalization in a manner which adapts itself as fully as practicable to, and
requires the least possible deviation from, the existing statutory and
administrative procedures followed by the State Board of Equalization in
administering and collecting the sales and use taxes of the State; and
   (d)   To adopt a sales and use tax law which can be administered in a manner
that will, to the degree possible consistent with the provisions of Part 1.5 of
Division 2 of said Revenue and Taxation Code (commencing with Cal. Rev. & Tax.
Code § 7200), minimize the cost of collecting City sales and use taxes and at
the same time minimize the burden of record keeping upon persons subject to
taxation under the provisions of this chapter.
(§ 1, Ord. 1873, eff. January 1, 1976)
Sec. 3-5.05. Contract with State Board of Equalization.
   Prior to the operative date of this chapter, the City shall contract with
the State Board of Equalization to perform all the functions incident to the
administration and operation of this sales and use tax law; provided, however,
if the City shall not have contracted with the State Board of Equalization
prior to such operative date, the City shall nevertheless so contract, and, in
such a case, the operative date shall be the first day of the first calendar
quarter following the execution of such a contract rather than the first day of
the first calendar quarter following the adoption of this chapter.
(§ 1, Ord. 1873, eff. January 1, 1976)
Sec. 3-5.06. Sales taxes.
   For the privilege of selling tangible personal property at retail, a tax is
hereby imposed upon all retailers in the City at the rate set forth in §
3-5.02 of this chapter of the gross receipts of the retailer from the sale of
all tangible personal property sold at retail in the City on and after the
operative date of this chapter.
(§ 1, Ord. 1873, eff. January 1, 1976)
Sec. 3-5.07. Place of sale.
   For the purposes of this chapter, all retail sales are consummated at the
place of business of the retailer unless the tangible personal property sold is
delivered by the retailer or his agent to an out-of-State destination or to a
common carrier for delivery to an out-of-State destination. The gross receipts
from such sales shall include delivery charges, when such charges are subject
to the State sales and use tax, regardless of the place to which delivery is
made. In the event a retailer has no permanent place of business in the State
or has more than one place of business, the place or places at which the retail
sales are consummated shall be determined under rules and regulations to be
prescribed and adopted by the State Board of Equalization.
(§ 1, Ord. 1873, eff. January 1, 1976)
Sec. 3-5.08. Use taxes.
   An excise tax is hereby imposed on the storage, use, or other consumption in
the City of tangible personal property purchased from any retailer on or after
the operative date of this chapter for the storage, use, or other consumption
in the City at the rate set forth in §
3-5.02 of this chapter of the sales price of the property. The sales price
shall include delivery charges when such charges are subject to State sales or
use tax, regardless of the place to which delivery is made.
(§ 1, Ord. 1873, eff. January 1, 1976)
Sec. 3-5.09. Adoption of State law provisions.
   Except as other wise provided in this chapter, and except insofar as they
are inconsistent with the provisions of Part 1.5 of Division 2 of the Revenue
and Taxation Code of the State (commencing with Cal. Rev. & Tax. Code § 7200),
all of the provisions of Part 1 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code
(commencing with Cal. Rev. & Tax. Code § 6001) are hereby adopted and made a
part of this chapter as though fully set forth in this chapter.
(§ 1, Ord. 1873, eff. January 1, 1976)
Sec. 3-5.10. Limitations on adoption of State law provisions.
   In adopting the provisions of Part 1 of Division 2 of the Revenue and
Taxation Code of the State (commencing with Cal. Rev. & Tax. Code § 6001),
wherever the State is named or referred to as the taxing agency, the name of
the City shall be substituted therefor. Such substitution, however, shall not
be made when the word “State” is used as part of the title of the State
Controller, the State Treasurer, the State Board of Control, the State Board of
Equalization, the State Treasury, or the Constitution of the State; the
substitution shall not be made when the result of that substitution would
require action to be taken by or against the City, or any agency thereof,
rather than by or against the State Board of Equalization, in performing the
functions incident to the administration or operation of the provisions of this
chapter; the substitution shall not be made in those sections, including, but
not necessarily limited to, sections referring to the exterior boundaries of
the State, where the result of the substitution would be to provide an
exemption from this tax with respect to certain sales, storage, use, or other
consumption of tangible personal property which would not otherwise be exempt
from this tax while such sales, storage, use, or other consumption remains
subject to tax by the State under the provisions of Part 1 of Division 2 of the
Revenue and Taxation Code (commencing with Cal. Rev. & Tax. Code § 6001), or to
impose this tax with respect to certain sales, storage, use, or other
consumption of tangible personal property which would not be subject to tax by
the State under the provisions of the Code; the substitution shall not be made
in Cal. Rev. & Tax. Code §§ 6701, 6702 (except in the last sentence thereof),
6711, 6715, 6737, 6797, or 6828; and the substitution shall not be made for the
word “State” in the phrase “retailer engaged in business in this State” in Cal.
Rev. & Tax. Code § 6203 or in the definition of that phrase in Cal. Rev. & Tax.
Code § 6203.
(§ 1, Ord. 1873, eff. January 1, 1976)
Sec. 3-5.11. Permits not required.
   If a seller's permit has been issued to a retailer pursuant to the
provisions of Cal. Rev. & Tax. Code § 6067, an additional seller's permit shall
not be required by the provisions of this chapter.
(§ 1, Ord. 1873, eff. January 1, 1976)
Sec. 3-5.12. Exclusions and exemptions.
   (a)   The amount subject to tax shall not include any sales or use tax
imposed by the State of California upon a retailer or consumer.
   (b)   The storage, use, or other consumption of tangible personal property,
the gross receipts from the sale of which have been subject to tax under a
sales and use tax ordinance enacted in accordance with Part 1.5 of Division 2
of the Revenue and Taxation Code (commencing with Cal. Rev. & Tax. Code § 7200)
by any city and county, county, or city in this state shall be exempt from the
tax due under this chapter.
   (c)   There are exempted from the computation of the amount of the sales tax
the gross receipts from the sale of tangible personal property to operators of
aircraft to be used or consumed principally outside the city in which the sale
is made and directly and exclusively in the use of such aircraft as common
carriers of persons or property under the authority of the laws of this State,
the United States, or any foreign government.
   (d)   In addition to the exemptions provided in Cal. Rev. & Tax. Code §§
6366 and 6366.1, the storage, use, or other consumption of tangible personal
property purchased by operators of aircraft and used or consumed by such
operators directly and exclusively in the use of such aircraft as common
carriers of persons or property for hire or compensation under a certificate of
public convenience and necessity issued pursuant to the laws of this State, the
United States, or any foreign government is exempted from the use tax.
(§ 1, Ord. 1873, eff. January 1, 1976, as amended by § 1, Ord. 2264, eff.
December 21, 1983)
Sec. 3-5.13. Amendments.
   All subsequent amendments of the Revenue and Taxation Code of the State,
which amendments relate to sales and use taxes and which are not inconsistent
with the provisions of Part 1.5 of Division 2 of said Revenue and Taxation Code
(commencing with Cal. Rev. & Tax. Code § 7200), shall automatically become a
part of this chapter.
(§ 1, Ord. 1873, eff. January 1, 1976)
Sec. 3-5.14. Enjoining collection forbidden.
   No injunction or writ of mandate or other legal or equitable process shall
issue in any suit, action, or proceeding in any court against the State or the
City, or against any officer of the State or the City, to prevent or enjoin the
collection under this chapter or Part 1.5 of Division 2 of the Revenue and
Taxation Code of the State (commencing with Cal. Rev. & Tax. Code § 7200) of
any tax or any amount of tax required to be collected.
(§ 1, Ord. 1873, eff. January 1, 1976)
Sec. 3-5.15. Violations: Penalties (Repealed).
(§ 1, Ord. 1873, eff. January 1, 1976, repealed by § 5, Ord. 2094, eff. August
14, 1980)
Sec. 3-5.16. Severability.
   If any provision of this chapter or the application thereof to any person or
circumstance is held invalid, the remainder of the chapter and the application
of such provision to other persons or circumstances shall not be affected
thereby.
(§ 1, Ord. 1873, eff. January 1, 1976)
Sec. 3-5.17. Repeal of former provisions.
   Ordinance No. 1816 (
Chapter 5 of Title 3 of this Code) relating to the imposition of a sales and
use tax in the City is repealed effective January 1, 1976.
(§ 1, Ord. 1873, eff. January 1, 1976)
Sec. 3-5.18. Effective date.
   The provisions of this chapter shall take effect January 1, 1976.
(§ 1, Ord. 1873, eff. January 1, 1976)
CHAPTER 6: TRANSIENT OCCUPANCY TAXES
   
3-6.01   Title of provisions
   
3-6.02   Definitions
   
3-6.03   Tax imposed
   
3-6.04   Exemptions from provision
   
3-6.05   Operator's duties
   
3-6.06   Letting of rooms to minors prohibited; exceptions
   
3-6.07   Hotel registration and certificate
   
3-6.08   Guest registration
   
3-6.09   Reporting and remitting
   
3-6.10   Room rates and regulations; hourly rates prohibited
   
3-6.11   Penalties and interest
   
3-6.10   Room rates and regulations; hourly rates prohibited
   
3-6.12   Failure to collect and report tax
   
3-6.13   Appeals
   
3-6.14   Recordkeeping and inspection
   
3-6.15   Refunds
   
3-6.16   Actions to collect
   
3-6.17   Cessation or change of ownership
   
3-6.18     Additional powers and duties of the Tax Administrator
Sec. 3-6.01. Title of provisions.
   This chapter shall be known as the “Uniform Transient Occupancy Tax Law” of
the City.
(§ 1, Ord. 1569, eff. July 1, 1965, as amended by § 2, Ord. 3234, eff. January
19, 2023)
Sec. 3-6.02. Definitions.
   For the purposes of this chapter, unless otherwise apparent from the
context, certain words and phrases used in this chapter are defined as follows:
   (a)   “Hotel” shall mean any structure, or any portion of any structure,
which is occupied, or intended or designed for occupancy, by transients for
dwelling, lodging, or sleeping purposes and shall include any hotel, inn,
tourist home or house, motel, studio hotel, bachelor hotel, lodging house,
rooming house, apartment house, vacation rental, short-term rental, dormitory,
public or private club, mobile home or house trailer at a fixed location, or
other similar structure, or portion thereof.
   (b)   “Occupancy” shall mean the use or possession, or the right or
entitlement to the use or possession, of any room or rooms, or portion thereof,
in any hotel or hotels for dwelling, lodging, or sleeping purposes.
   (c)   “Operator” shall mean the person who is the proprietor of the hotel
whether in the capacity of owner, lessee, sublessee, mortgagee in possession,
licensee, or any other capacity. Where the operator performs his or her
functions through a managing agent of any type or character, other than an
employee, the managing agent shall also be deemed an operator for the purposes
of this chapter and shall have the same duties and liabilities as his or her
principal. Compliance with the provisions of this chapter by either the
principal or the managing agent, however, shall be considered to be compliance
by both.
   (d)   “Person” shall mean any individual, short-term renter, vacation
renter, firm, partnership, joint venture, association, social club, fraternal
organization, joint stock company, corporation, estate, trust, business trust,
receiver, trustee, syndicate, or any other group or combination acting as a
unit.
   (e)   “Rent” shall mean the consideration charged, whether or not received,
for the occupancy of space in a hotel valued in money, whether to be received
in money, goods, labor, or otherwise, including all receipts, cash, credits,
property, and services of any kind or nature, without any deduction therefrom
whatsoever.
   (f)   “Tax Administrator” shall mean the Executive Director of Finance of
the City of Ontario, or his or her authorized representative.
   (g)   “Transient” shall mean any person who exercises occupancy or is
entitled to occupancy by reason of concession, permit, right of access,
license, or other agreement for a period of thirty (30) consecutive calendar
days or less, counting portions of calendar days as full days. Any such person
so occupying space in a hotel shall be deemed to be a transient until the
period of thirty (30) consecutive calendar days has expired unless there is an
agreement in writing between the operator and the occupant providing for a
longer period of occupancy. Any individual person who exercises or is entitled
to occupancy for a period of thirty (30) consecutive calendar days or less
shall be deemed to be a transient, regardless of whether the reservation and/or
payment for occupancy is made directly by the person exercising occupancy or
another person, or entity. The intent is to tax the individual person
occupying, or having the right or entitlement to occupancy, the hotel room.
“Transient” includes any employee or officer of the State government or of the
government of a political subdivision of the State. “Transient” does not mean
or include any Federal officer or employee when on official Federal government
business, or any officer or employee of a foreign government who is exempt by
reason of express provision of Federal law or international treaty, who
exercises occupancy or is entitled to occupancy by reason of concession,
permit, right of access, license, or other agreement for a period of thirty
(30) consecutive calendar days or less, counting portions of calendar days as
full days.
   In determining whether a person is a transient, uninterrupted periods of
time extending both prior and subsequent to the effective date of the
provisions of this chapter may be considered.
(§ 2, Ord. 1569, eff. July 1, 1965 as amended by § 1, Ord. 2746, eff. October
4, 2001, § 1, Ord. 2925, eff. July 15, 2010, and § 2, Ord. 3234, eff. January
19, 2023)
Sec. 3-6.03. Tax imposed.
   For the privilege of occupancy in any hotel, each transient shall be subject
to and shall pay a tax in the amount of eleven and three-quarters percent
(11¾%) of the rent charged by the operator. Such tax shall constitute a debt
owed by the transient to the City, which debt shall be extinguished only by
payment to the operator or to the City. The transient shall pay the tax to the
operator of the hotel at the time the rent is paid. If the rent is paid in
installments, a proportionate share of the tax shall be paid with each
installment. The unpaid tax shall be due upon the transient's ceasing to occupy
space in the hotel. If for any reason the tax due is not paid to the operator
of the hotel, the Tax Administrator may require that such tax shall be paid
directly to the City.
(§ 3, Ord. 1569, eff. July 1, 1965 as amended by § 1, Ord. 1686, eff. July 1,
1968, § 1, Ord. 1871, eff. October 2, 1975, § 1, Ord. 2002, eff. August 1,
1978, § 1, Ord. 2235, eff. August 4, 1983, § 1, Ord. 2485, eff. November 1,
1990, § 1, Ord. 2593, eff. August 16, 1995, and § 2, Ord. 3234, eff. January
19, 2023)
Sec. 3-6.04. Exemptions from provision.
   (a)   No tax shall be imposed upon:
      (1)   Any person as to whom, or any occupancy as to which, it is beyond
the power of the City to impose the tax provided for in this chapter; and
      (2)   Any Federal officer or employee when on official Federal government
business, or any officer or employee of a foreign government who is exempt by
reason of express provision of Federal law or international treaty, who
exercises occupancy or is entitled to occupancy by reason of concession,
permit, right of access, license, or other agreement for a period of thirty
(30) consecutive calendar days or less, counting portions of calendar days as
full days.
   (b)   No exemption shall be granted except upon a claim therefor made at the
time the rent is collected and under penalty of perjury upon a form prescribed
by the Tax Administrator. Any Federal officer or employee when on official
federal government business claiming such an exemption shall provide to the
operator as conclusive evidence that his or her occupancy is for the official
business of his or her employer:
      (1)   Travel orders from his or her government employer; or a government
warrant issued by his or her employer to pay for the occupancy; or a government
credit card issued by his or her employer to pay for the occupancy; and
      (2)   Photo identification, proof of his or her governmental employment
as an employee or officer as described in subsection (b)(1), and proof,
consistent with these provisions, that his or her occupancy is for the official
business of his or her governmental employer.
(§ 4, Ord. 1569, eff. July 1, 1965 as amended by § 1, Ord. 1606, eff. August 5,
1965 and § 2, Ord. 1686, eff. July 1, 1968, § 2, Ord. 2925, eff. July 15, 2010,
and § 2, Ord. 3234, eff. January 19, 2023)
Sec. 3-6.05. Operator's duties.
   Each operator shall collect and hold in trust for the account and benefit of
the City the tax imposed by the provisions of this chapter to the same extent
and at the same time as the rent is collected from every transient. The amount
of tax shall be separately stated from the amount of the rent charged.
   No operator of a hotel shall advertise or state in any manner, whether
directly or indirectly, that the tax, or any part thereof, will be assumed or
absorbed by the operator, or that it will not be added to the rent, or that, if
added, any part will be refunded except in the manner provided in this chapter.
(§ 5, Ord. 1569, eff. July 1, 1965, as amended by § 3, Ord. 2925, eff. July 15,
2010, and § 2, Ord. 3234, eff. January 19, 2023)
Sec. 3-6.06. Letting of rooms to minors prohibited; Exceptions.
   Letting of rooms to minors shall be prohibited. Any person or corporation
owning, controlling or managing any hotel in the City, who rents or lets any
room or rooms to, or allows any room or rooms to be occupied by any minor under
the age of eighteen (18) years, unless such minor is accompanied by his or her
parent, parents, or legal guardian, shall immediately by telephone, and within
twenty-four (24) hours by written report, notify the Ontario Police Department
of such fact.
(§ 2, Ord. 3234, eff. January 19, 2023)
Sec. 3-6.07. Hotel registration and certificate.
   On or before May 6, 1965, or within thirty (30) days after commencing
business, whichever is later, each operator of any hotel renting an occupancy
to transients shall register such hotel with the Tax Administrator and obtain
from the Tax Administrator a “Transient Occupancy Registration Certificate.”
Any operator that operates a hotel within the City shall at all times post the
certificate in a conspicuous place on the hotel premises. All other operators
shall maintain a copy of the certificate at their place of business, as
indicated on the certificate. Such certificate shall, among other things, set
forth the following information:
   (a)   The name of the operator;
   (b)   The address of the hotel;
   (c)   The date upon which the certificate was issued; and
   (d)   A statement as follows: “This Transient Occupancy Registration
Certificate signifies that the person named on the face hereof has fulfilled
the requirements of the Uniform Transient Occupancy Tax Law by registering with
the Tax Administrator for the purpose of collecting from transients the
Transient Occupancy Tax and remitting such tax to the City. This certificate
shall not authorize any person to conduct any unlawful business or to conduct
any lawful business in an unlawful manner, nor to operate a hotel without
strictly complying with all local applicable laws, including, but not limited
to, those requiring a permit from any board, commission, department, or office
of this City. This certificate shall not constitute a permit.”
(§ 6, Ord. 1569, eff. July 1, 1965, as amended by § 4, Ord. 2925, eff. July 15,
2010, and § 2, Ord. 3234, eff. January 19, 2023)
Sec. 3-6.08. Guest registration.
   (a)   Every manager or person in control of any hotel in the city shall keep
a register for the registration of transient guests. The guest register shall
at all times be open and subject to reasonable inspection by city officials or
by any law enforcement officer in the City.
   (b)   Guests Must Register. No person in control of any hotel in the city
shall let or assign for temporary or transient occupancy any suite, room or bed
in that hotel, to any person until after such person shall have registered his
or her name and address in the register herein provided to be kept, and
thereafter such register shall be made to show correctly the year, month, day
and hour of the arrival of such person at the hotel and the number of the suite
or room let or assigned to such guest; and such person in control of such hotel
or the letting of any suite, room or bed therein shall at the time of the
departure of each guest, endorse upon such register the date of such departure,
nor shall any person erase or alter any name or address written in such
register.
   (c)   Registration Information Required. The operator of any hotel shall
keep a register on forms approved by or supplied by the City, of the names and
home or business addresses of all persons to be accommodated with the length of
stay indicated. At the time of registration, the operator or his or her
employee shall verify the identification of the registrant by requesting to
see, and copying onto the registration form any of the following: the
registrant's valid driver's license number, the registrant's valid military
identification, the registrant's valid passport number and country of issuance.
The operator or his or her employee must also include on the registration forms
the make, type and license number of the registrant's automobile, trailer or
other vehicle, and the state in which such vehicle is registered and the year
of registration, for any vehicle that is parked on the premises. Hotels that
can demonstrate that they take sufficient reasonable steps to control access to
and from parking areas on the premises shall not be required to include this
information on registration forms. Such sufficient reasonable steps to control
access to and from parking areas shall include, but not be limited to, valet
parking, automated access gates, and parking attendants.
   (d)   Pre-Arrival Registration. In the event that the hotel utilizes a pre-
arrival registration or approval procedure that obviates the requirement for an
arriving guest to go to the front desk and provide information typically
required as part of the hotel's customary registration process, the hotel shall
not be required to comply with subsection (c) of this section; provided,
however, that the hotel's pre-arrival registration or approval procedure must
be submitted to and approved by the Tax Administrator, and the facility must
obtain such guest related information of the type specified in subsection (c)
as the Tax Administrator might reasonably require.
   (e)   Illegal Registration. No person shall register at any hotel in the
city, under the name of any other person, or by any assumed, false or
fictitious name. No person placing any information required by this section
shall falsely or inaccurately state such information.
(§ 2, Ord. 3234, eff. January 19, 2023)
Sec. 3-6.09. Reporting and remitting.
   Each operator shall, on or before the last day of the month following the
close of each calendar month, make a return to the Tax Administrator, on forms
provided by him or her, of the total rents charged and received and the amount
of tax collected for transient occupancies. At the time the return is filed,
the full amount of the tax collected shall be remitted to the City. The Tax
Administrator may require further information in the return. Returns and
payments submitted by United States mail or other mail delivery service shall
be deemed to have been made as of the date post marked. Returns and payments
submitted electronically Monday through Friday before 5:00 p.m., shall be
deemed to have been paid that same day. Returns and payments submitted
electronically Monday through Friday after 5:00 p.m., shall be deemed to have
been paid the following calendar day. Returns and payments submitted
electronically Friday after 5:00 p.m., Saturday, Sunday, or any day in which
the City is closed for business, shall be deemed to have been paid the next
business day. Any payment received after the due date, regardless of weekend or
holiday, will be considered late, with penalties and interest applying. All
taxes collected by operators pursuant to the provisions of this chapter shall
be held in trust for the account of the City until payment thereof is made to
the City.
(§ 7, Ord. 1569, eff. July 1, 1965, as amended by § 5, Ord. 2925, eff. July 15,
2010, and § 2, Ord. 3234, eff. January 19, 2023)
Sec. 3-6.10. Room rates and regulations; hourly rates prohibited.
   (a)   Posting of Rates. Every manager or person in control of a hotel in the
city shall post in a conspicuous place on the premises a printed statement of
the specific charge or rate of charges by the day, week or month to be charged
for said room or rooms.
   (b)   Charges in Excess of Rates Posted Prohibited. No charge or sum shall
be collected or received by any manager or person in control of a hotel for any
greater sum than entitled to under the statement of charges or rates posted.
   (c)   Posting of Rules and Regulations of Establishments. Every manager or
person in control of a hotel is required to post in a conspicuous place on the
premises a printed statement of the general rules and regulations of said
hotel.
   (d)   Hourly Rates. No person or business providing transient sleeping
accommodations in any hotel shall charge or accept money or other consideration
by an hourly rate or any rate less than that which is charged or accepted for
one full day's accommodations within any twenty-four (24) hour period.
(§ 2, Ord. 3234, eff. January 19, 2023)
Sec. 3-6.11. Penalties and interest.
   (a)   Original delinquency. Any operator who shall fail to report and remit
any tax imposed by the provisions of this chapter within the time required
shall pay a penalty in the amount of one-half of one percent (0.5%) per day of
the tax due and owing in addition to the amount of the tax, up to thirty (30)
days following the date on which the remittance first became delinquent.
   (b)   Continued delinquency. Any operator who shall fail to remit any
delinquent remittance on or before a period of thirty (30) days following the
date on which the remittance first became delinquent shall pay a second
delinquency penalty in the amount of ten percent (10%) of the tax due and owing
in addition to the amount of the tax and the one-half of one percent (0.5%)
penalty, up to thirty (30) days, first imposed pursuant to subsection (a).
   (c)   Fraud. If the Tax Administrator shall determine that the non-payment
of any remittance due pursuant to the provisions of this chapter is due to
fraud, a penalty in the amount of twenty five percent (25%) of the amount of
the tax due and owing shall be added thereto in addition to the penalties set
forth in subsections (a) and (b) of this section.
   (d)   Interest. In addition to the penalties imposed, any operator who shall
fail to remit any tax imposed by the provisions of this chapter shall pay
interest at the rate of one-half of one percent (0.5%) per month, or fraction
thereof, on the amount of the tax due and owing, exclusive of penalties, from
the date on which the remittance first became delinquent until paid.
   (e)   Penalties and interest merged with tax. Every penalty imposed and such
interest as accrues pursuant to the provisions of this section shall become a
part of the tax required to be paid by the provisions of this chapter.
   (f)   Civil Penalties. Any violation of this chapter, and any failure to pay
assessed penalties, delinquencies, or interest specified herein may result in
alternative remedies, such as referral to a collection agency, civil action, or
any other legal remedy.
   (g)   Criminal Penalties. In addition to the penalties, delinquencies,
interest, or other consequences set forth in subsections (a) through (e) above,
any operator who fails or refuses to collect the tax, fails or refuses to make
any return, fails or refuses to keep adequate records or open them up for
inspection by the city, fails or refuses to furnish other data reasonably
requested by the Tax Administrator, or makes a false or fraudulent return with
intent to evade the tax, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction
thereof, shall be punished pursuant to Ontario Municipal Code Chapter 1-2
(Penalty Provisions). Each and every day during any portion of which any
violation is committed, continued, or permitted, shall constitute a separate
offense and shall be punished accordingly.
   (h)   Waiver. Notwithstanding any provision in this chapter to the contrary,
the Tax Administrator may waive any penalty or interest, or any portion
thereof, imposed upon a person required to collect and/or remit for failure to
collect the tax imposed by this chapter if the non-collection occurred in good
faith. In determining whether the non-collection was in good faith, the Tax
Administrator will take into consideration industry practice or other objective
precedents.
(§ 8, Ord. 1569, eff. July 1, 1965, as amended by § 6, Ord. 2925, eff. July 15,
2010, and § 2, Ord. 3234, eff. January 19, 2023)
Sec. 3-6.12. Failure to collect and report tax.
   (a)   Determination. If any operator shall fail or refuse to collect such
tax and to make, within the time provided in this chapter, any report and
remittance of such tax, or any portion thereof, required by the provisions of
this chapter, the Tax Administrator shall proceed in such manner as he or she
may deem best to obtain the facts and information on which to base his or her
estimate of the tax due. As soon as the Tax Administrator shall procure such
facts and information as he or she is able to obtain upon which to base the
assessment of any such tax imposed by the provisions of this chapter and
payable by any operator who has failed or refused to collect the same and to
make such report and remittance, the Tax Administrator shall proceed to
determine and assess against such operator the tax, interest, and penalties
provided for by the provisions of this chapter. In the event such determination
is made, the Tax Administrator shall give notice of the amount so assessed by
serving it personally or depositing it in the United States mail, postage
prepaid, addressed to the operator so assessed at his or her last known place
of address.
   (b)   Hearing. Such operator may, within ten (10) days after the service or
mailing of such notice, make an application in writing to the Tax Administrator
for a hearing on the amount assessed. If an application by the operator for a
hearing is not made within the time prescribed, the tax, interest, and
penalties, if any, determined by the Tax Administrator shall become final and
conclusive and immediately due and payable. If such an application is made, the
Tax Administrator shall give not less than five (5) days' written notice in the
manner prescribed in this section to the operator to show cause at a time and
place fixed in such notice why the amount specified therein should not be fixed
for such tax, interest, and penalties. At such hearing the operator may appear
and offer evidence why such specified tax, interest, and penalties should not
be so fixed. After such hearing the Tax Administrator shall determine the
proper tax to be remitted and shall thereafter give written notice to the
person in the manner prescribed in this section of such determination and the
amount of such tax, interest, and penalties. The amount determined to be due
shall be payable after fifteen (15) days unless an appeal is filed as provided
in §
3-6.10 of this chapter.
(§ 9, Ord. 1569, eff. July 1, 1965, and § 2, Ord. 3234, eff. January 19, 2023)
Sec. 3-6.13. Appeals.
   Any operator aggrieved by any decision of the Tax Administrator with respect
to the amount of such tax, interest, and penalties, if any, may appeal to the
City Manager, or his or her designee, by filing a notice of appeal with the
City Clerk within fifteen (15) days after the service or mailing of the
determination of the tax due. The City Manager, or his or her designee, shall
fix a time and place for hearing such appeal, and the City Clerk shall give
notice in writing to such operator at his or her last known place of address.
The findings of the City Manager, or his or her designee, shall be final and
conclusive and shall be served upon the appellant in the manner prescribed in
this chapter for the service of a notice of hearing. Any amount found to be due
shall be immediately due and payable upon the service of notice.
(§ 10, Ord. 1569, eff. July 1, 1965, as amended by § 2, Ord. 3234, eff. January
19, 2023)
Sec. 3-6.14. Recordkeeping and inspection.
   (a)   It shall be the duty of every operator liable for the collection and
payment to the City of any tax imposed by the provisions of this chapter to
keep and preserve, for a period of four (4) years, all records as may be
necessary to determine the amount of such tax as the operator may have been
liable for the collection of and payment to the City. All records shall be
maintained in conformance with standards set forth by the Tax Administrator.
The Tax Administrator shall have the right to inspect such records at all
reasonable times.
   (b)   Any audit which must be performed to secure compliance with the terms
of this section is to be performed in the city of Ontario. If for any reason
the audit cannot be performed in Ontario, the operator shall reimburse the City
for the actual cost of all transportation, lodging, meals, travel time and
other incidental costs reasonably incurred by the City in conducting the audit.
   (c)   The Tax Administrator may conduct an audit, to ensure proper
compliance with the requirements of this chapter, of any person required to
collect and/or remit a tax pursuant to this chapter. The Tax Administrator
shall notify said person of the initiation of an audit in writing. In the
absence of fraud or other intentional misconduct, the audit period of review
shall not exceed a period of four (4) years next preceding the date of receipt
of the written notice by said person from the Tax Administrator. Upon
completion of the audit, the Tax Administrator may make a deficiency
determination pursuant to Section
3-6.09 of this chapter for all taxes, penalties and interest owed and not paid,
as evidenced by information provided by such person to the Tax Administrator.
If said person is unable or unwilling to provide sufficient records to enable
the Tax Administrator to verify compliance with this chapter, the Tax
Administrator is authorized to make a reasonable estimate of the deficiency.
Said reasonable estimate shall be entitled to a rebuttable presumption of
correctness.
(§ 11, Ord. 1569, eff. July 1, 1965, as amended by § 2, Ord. 3234, eff. January
19, 2023)
Sec. 3-6.15. Refunds.
   (a)   Claim. Whenever the amount of any tax, interest, or penalty has been
overpaid, or paid more than once, or erroneously or illegally collected or
received by the City pursuant to the provisions of this chapter, such amount
may be refunded as provided in subsections (b) and (c) of this section provided
a claim in writing therefor, stating under penalty of perjury the specific
grounds upon which the claim is founded, is filed with the Tax Administrator
within one (1) year after the date of payment. The claim shall be on forms
furnished by the Tax Administrator.
   (b)   Operator’s compensation. An operator may claim a refund or take as
credit against taxes collected and remitted the amount overpaid, paid more than
once, or erroneously or illegally collected or received when it is established
in a manner prescribed by the Tax Administrator that the person from whom the
tax has been collected was not a transient; provided, however, neither a refund
nor a credit shall be allowed unless the amount of the tax so collected has
either been refunded to the transient or credited to rent subsequently payable
by the transient to the operator.
   (c)   Transient’s compensation. A transient may obtain a refund of taxes
overpaid, paid more than once, or erroneously or illegally collected or
received by the City by filing a claim in the manner provided in subsection (a)
of this section but only when the tax was paid by the transient directly to the
Tax Administrator, or when the transient, having paid the tax to the operator,
establishes to the satisfaction of the Tax Administrator that the transient has
been unable to obtain a refund from the operator who collected the tax.
   (d)   Evidence. No refund shall be paid pursuant to the provisions of this
section unless the claimant establishes his or her right thereto by written
records showing entitlement thereto.
   (e)   Eligibility. The Tax Administrator shall determine the eligibility of
any person who asserts a right to a refund from the tax imposed by this
chapter.
(§ 12, Ord. 1569, eff. July 1, 1965 as amended by § 2, Ord. 2746, eff. October
4, 2001, and § 2, Ord. 3234, eff. January 19, 2023)
Sec. 3-6.16. Actions to collect.
   (a)   Collection. Any tax required to be paid by any transient pursuant to
the provisions of this chapter shall be deemed a debt owed by the transient to
the City. Any such tax collected by an operator which has not been paid to the
City shall be deemed a debt owed by the operator to the City. Any person owing
money to the City pursuant to the provisions of this chapter shall be liable to
an action brought in the name of the City for the recovery of such amount.
   (b)   Liens. When the fines, penalties, and related costs are not paid
within the prescribed time, the amount of those fines, penalties, and their
related costs may be recorded as a lien upon and against the hotel without
further hearing, subject to notice of the lien as required by law.
(§ 13, Ord. 1569, eff. July 1, 1965, as amended by § 2, Ord. 3234, eff. January
19, 2023)
Sec. 3-6.17. Cessation or change of ownership.
   (a)   Cessation of Business. If any operator liable for any amount under
this chapter sells out, transfers, or quits his or her business, he or she
shall make a final return and remittance within fifteen (15) days after the
date of selling or quitting the business.
   (b)   Duty of Successor, Assignee, or Transferee. If any operator liable for
any amount of tax, interest or penalty under this chapter sells out, transfers,
or quits his or her business, his or her successors, assigns, or transferees
shall withhold sufficiently from the purchase price to cover such amount until
the former owner produces from the Tax Administrator either a receipt
reflecting full payment or a certificate stating that no amount is due. If a
purchaser of a business fails to withhold from the purchase price as required,
he or she shall be personally liable for the payment of the amount required to
be withheld by him or her to the extent of the purchase price.
(§ 2, Ord. 3234, eff. January 19, 2023)
Sec. 3-6.18. Additional powers and duties of the Tax Administrator.
   (a)   General. The Tax Administrator shall have the power and duty, and is
hereby directed, to enforce each and all of the provisions of this chapter.
   (b)   Administrative Rules, Regulations and Discretion. The Tax
Administrator may adopt administrative rules and regulations not inconsistent
with provisions of this chapter for the purpose of interpreting, clarifying,
carrying out and enforcing the payment, collection and remittance of the taxes
herein imposed. The administrative ruling shall not impose a new tax, revise an
existing tax methodology as stated in this section, or increase an existing
tax, except as allowed by Cal. Gov’t Code § 53750(h)(2), as may be amended or
renumbered from time to time. A copy of such administrative rules and
regulations shall be on file in the Tax Administrator's office. To the extent
that the Tax Administrator determines that the tax imposed under this chapter
shall not be collected in full for any period of time from any particular
operator or transient, that determination shall be considered an exercise of
the Tax Administrator's discretion to settle disputes and shall not constitute
a change in taxing methodology for purposes of Gov’t Code § 53750 or otherwise.
The Tax Administrator is not authorized to amend the City's methodology for
purposes of Gov’t Code § 53750 and the City does not waive or abrogate its
ability to impose the Transient Occupancy Tax in full as a result of
promulgating administrative rulings or entering into agreements.
   (c)   Administrative Agreements. Upon a proper showing of good cause, the
Tax Administrator may make administrative agreements, with appropriate
conditions, to vary from the strict requirements of this chapter and thereby:
      1.   Conform to the billing procedures of a particular operator so long
as said agreements result in the collection of the tax in conformance with the
general purpose and scope of this chapter; or
      2.   To avoid a hardship where the administrative costs of collection and
remittance greatly outweigh the tax benefit. A copy of each such agreement
shall be on file in the Tax Administrator's office, and are voidable by the Tax
Administrator or the City Manager at any time.
   (d)   Compromise Limits. The Tax Administrator, with the written approval of
the City Attorney, may compromise a claim pursuant to this chapter where the
portion of the tax proposed to be released is less than five thousand dollars
(5,000.00); and, with the approval of the City Attorney and the City Council,
may compromise such a claim where the portion of the tax proposed to be
released is equal to or greater than five thousand dollars (5,000.00).
(§ 2, Ord. 3234, eff. January 19, 2023)
CHAPTER 7: REAL PROPERTY TRANSFER TAXES
   
3-7.01   Title
   
3-7.02   Tax imposed
   
3-7.03   Person responsible for payment
   
3-7.04   Debt security instruments exempted
   
3-7.05   Governmental agencies exempted
   
3-7.06   Bankruptcies, receiverships, and reorganizations
   
3-7.07   Securities and Exchange Commission
   
3-7.08   Partnerships
   
3-7.09   Instruments taken in lieu of foreclosure
   
3-7.10   Marital property
   
3-7.11   Conveyance by governmental entity and reconveyance to exempt public
agency
   
3-7.12   Certain conveyances by governmental entity to nonprofit corporation
   
3-7.13   Transfer by inter vivos gift or by death
   
3-7.14   Administration
   
3-7.15   Claims for refunds
   
3-7.16   Operative date
Sec. 3-7.01. Title.
   This chapter shall be known as the “Real Property Transfer Tax Law of the
City of Ontario.” It is adopted pursuant to the authority contained in Part 6.7
of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code of the State (commencing with
Cal. Rev. & Tax. Code § 11901).
(§ 1, Ord. 1674, eff. December 21, 1967)
Sec. 3-7.02. Tax imposed.
   There is hereby imposed on each deed, instrument, or writing by which any
lands, tenements, or other realty sold within the City shall be granted,
assigned, transferred, or otherwise conveyed to, or vested in, the purchaser or
purchasers, or any other person or persons, by his or their direction, when the
consideration or value of the interest or property conveyed (exclusive of the
value of any lien or encumbrances remaining thereon at the time of sale)
exceeds One Hundred Dollars ($100.00) a tax at the rate of twenty seven and
one-half cents ($.275) for each Five Hundred Dollars ($500.00) or fractional
part thereof.
(§ 2, Ord. 1674, eff. December 21, 1967)
Sec. 3-7.03. Person responsible for payment.
   Any tax imposed pursuant to the provisions of §
3-7.02 of this chapter shall be paid by any person who makes, signs, or issues
any document or instrument subject to the tax, or for whose use or benefit the
same is made, signed, or issued.
(§ 3, Ord. 1674, eff. December 21, 1967)
Sec. 3-7.04. Debt security instruments exempted.
   Any tax imposed pursuant to the provisions of this chapter shall not apply
to any instrument in writing given to secure a debt.
(§ 4, Ord. 1674, eff. December 21, 1967)
Sec. 3-7.05. Governmental agencies exempted.
   The United States, or any agency or instrumentality thereof, any state or
territory or political subdivision thereof, or the District of Columbia shall
not be liable for any tax imposed pursuant to the provisions of this chapter
with respect to any deed, instrument, or writing to which it is a party, but
the tax may be collected by assessment from any other party liable therefor.
(§ 5, Ord. 1674, eff. December 21, 1967)
Sec. 3-7.06. Bankruptcies, receiverships, and reorganizations.
   Any tax imposed pursuant to the provisions of this chapter shall not apply
to the making, delivering, or filing of conveyances to make effective any plan
of reorganization or adjustment:
   (a)   Confirmed under the Federal Bankruptcy Act, as amended;
   (b)   Approved in an equity receivership proceeding in a court involving a
railroad corporation, as defined in 11 USC 205(m), as amended;
   (c)   Approved in an equity receivership proceeding in a court involving a
corporation, as defined in 11 USC 506(3), as amended; or
   (d)   Whereby a mere change in identity, form, or place of organization is
effected.
   The provisions of this section shall only apply if the making, delivery, or
filing of instruments of transfer or conveyances occurs within five (5) years
from the date of such confirmation, approval, or change.
(§ 6, Ord. 1674, eff. December 21, 1967)
Sec. 3-7.07. Securities and Exchange Commission.
   Any tax imposed pursuant to the provisions of this chapter shall not apply
to the making or delivery of conveyances to make effective any order of the
Securities and Exchange Commission, as defined in Section 1083(a) of the
Internal Revenue Code of 1954 (26 USC 1083(a)), but only if:
   (a)   The order of the Securities and Exchange Commission in obedience to
which such conveyance is made recites that such conveyance is necessary or
appropriate to effectuate the provisions of 15 USC 79k relating to the Public
Utility Holding Company Act of 1935;
   (b)   Such order specifies the property which is ordered to be conveyed; and
   (c)   Such conveyance is made in obedience to such order.
(§ 7, Ord. 1674, eff. December 21, 1967)
Sec. 3-7.08. Partnerships.
   (a)   In the case of any realty held by a partnership, no levy shall be
imposed pursuant to the provisions of this chapter by reason of any transfer of
an interest in a partnership or otherwise if:
      (1)   Such partnership (or another partnership) is considered a
continuing partnership within the meaning of Section 708 of the Internal
Revenue Code of 1954 (26 USC 708); and
      (2)   Such continuing partnership continues to hold the realty concerned.
   (b)   If there is a termination of any partnership within the meaning of
Section 708 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1954 (26 USC 708), for the purposes
of this chapter such partnership shall be treated as having executed an
instrument whereby there was conveyed, for fair market value (exclusive of the
value of any lien or encumbrance remaining thereon), all realty held by such
partnership at the time of such termination.
   (c)   Not more than one tax shall be imposed pursuant to the provisions of
this chapter by reason of a termination described subsection (b) of this
section, and any transfer pursuant thereto, with respect to the realty held by
such partnership at the time of such termination.
(§ 8, Ord. 1674, eff. December 21, 1967)
Sec. 3-7.09. Instruments taken in lieu of foreclosure.
   Any tax imposed pursuant to this chapter shall not apply with respect to any
deed, instrument, or writing to a beneficiary or mortgagee, which is taken from
the mortgagor or trustor as a result of or in lieu of foreclosure; provided,
that such tax shall apply to the extent that the consideration exceeds the
unpaid debt, including accrued interest and cost of foreclosure. Consideration,
unpaid debt amount and identification of grantee as beneficiary or mortgagee
shall be noted on the deed, instrument or writing or stated in an affidavit or
declaration under penalty of perjury for tax purposes.
(Cal. Rev. & Tax. Code § 11926)
Sec. 3-7.10. Marital property.
   (a)   Any tax imposed pursuant to this chapter shall not apply with respect
to any deed, instrument, or other writing which purports to transfer, divide,
or allocate community, quasi-community, or quasi-marital property assets
between spouses for the purpose of effecting a division of community, quasi-
community, or quasi-marital property which is required by a judgment decreeing
a dissolution of the marriage or legal separation, by a judgment of nullity, or
by any other judgment or order rendered pursuant to the Family Code, or by a
written agreement between the spouses, executed in contemplation of any such
judgment or order, whether or not the written agreement is incorporated as part
of any of those judgments or orders.
   (b)   In order to qualify for the exemption provided in subdivision (a), the
deed, instrument, or other writing shall include a written recital, signed by
either spouse, stating that the deed, instrument, or other writing is entitled
to the exemption.
(Cal. Rev. & Tax. Code § 11927)
Sec. 3-7.11. Conveyance by governmental entity and reconveyance to exempt
public agency.
   Any tax imposed pursuant to this chapter shall not apply with respect to any
deed, instrument, or other writing by which realty is conveyed by the State of
California, any political subdivision thereof, or agency or instrumentality of
either thereof, pursuant to an agreement whereby the purchaser agrees to
immediately reconvey the realty to the exempt agency.
(Cal. Rev. & Tax. Code § 11928)
Sec. 3-7.12. Certain conveyances by governmental entity to nonprofit
corporation.
   Any tax imposed pursuant to this chapter shall not apply with respect to any
deed, instrument, or other writing by which the State of California, any
political subdivision thereof, or agency or instrumentality of either thereof,
conveys to a nonprofit corporation realty the acquisition, construction, or
improvement of which was financed or refinanced by obligations issued by the
nonprofit corporation on behalf of a governmental unit, within the meaning of
26 CFR 1.103-1(b).
(Cal. Rev. & Tax. Code § 11929)
Sec. 3-7.13. Transfer by inter vivos gift or by death.
   Any tax imposed pursuant to this chapter shall not apply to any deed,
instrument, or other writing which purports to grant, assign, transfer, convey,
divide, allocate, or vest lands, tenements, or realty, or any interest therein,
if by reason of such inter vivos gift or by reason of the death of any person,
such lands, tenements, realty, or interests therein are transferred outright
to, or in trust for the benefit of, any person or entity.
(Cal. Rev. & Tax. Code § 11930)
Sec. 3-7.14. Administration.
   The County Recorder shall administer the provisions of this chapter in
conformity with the provisions of Part 6.7 of Division 2 of the Revenue and
Taxation Code of the State (commencing with Cal. Rev. & Tax. Code § 11901) and
the provisions of any County ordinance adopted pursuant thereto.
(§ 9, Ord. 1674, eff. December 21, 1967)
Sec. 3-7.15. Claims for refunds.
   Claims for the refund of taxes imposed pursuant to the provisions of this
chapter shall be governed by the provisions of Chapter 5 of Part 9 of Division
1 of the Revenue and Taxation Code of the State (commencing with Cal. Rev. &
Tax. Code § 5096).
(§ 10, Ord. 1674, eff. December 21, 1967)
Sec. 3-7.16. Operative date.
   The provisions of this chapter shall become operative upon the operative
date of any ordinance adopted by the County pursuant to the provisions of Part
6.7 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code of the State (commencing
with Cal. Rev. & Tax. Code § 11901), or on November 21, 1967, whichever is the
later.
(§ 11, Ord. 1674, eff. December 21, 1967)
CHAPTER 8: PARKING TAX
   
3-8.01   Imposition and rate of tax
   
3-8.02   Persons liable for tax
   
3-8.03   Collection of tax by operators: Receipt to occupant: Rules for
collection schedules
   
3-8.04   Registration of operator
   
3-8.05   Records required from operators
   
3-8.06   Examination of records
   
3-8.07   Authority to require reports
   
3-8.08   Time of payment
   
3-8.09   Extension of time to file
   
3-8.10   Deficiency determination
   
3-8.11   Interest on deficiency
   
3-8.12   Offsetting of overpayments
   
3-8.13   Time for payment of amounts found due: Penalty for delinquency
   
3-8.14   Manner of serving notices
   
3-8.15   Penalties: Failure to pay tax
   
3-8.16   Determination if no return is made
   
3-8.17   Interest on amount found due
   
3-8.18   Appeals from determinations of Finance Director
   
3-8.19   Violation by operator misdemeanor
   
3-8.20   Tax deemed a debt
   
3-8.21   Disposition of tax funds
Sec. 3-8.01. Imposition and rate of tax.
   There is hereby imposed a tax of one hundred percent (100%) of the rent for
every occupancy of parking space in a parking station in the City; provided,
however, that no occupant shall pay tax exceeding the sum of one dollar and
seventy five cents ($1.75) per vehicle per day, or twelve point five percent
(12.5%) of the monthly charge where the charge is made on a monthly basis, for
occupying any parking station pursuant to the provisions of this chapter.
   The tax imposed by this chapter shall be paid upon any occupancy on or after
the operative date, although such occupancy is had pursuant to a contract,
lease, or other arrangement made prior to such date.
(§ 1, Ord. 2259, eff. January 5, 1984, as amended by § 1, Ord. 2508, eff. July
3, 1991, § 1, Ord. 2529, eff. October 15, 1992, § 1, Ord. 2566, eff. February
17, 1994 and § 1, Ord. 2600, eff. November 8, 1995)
Sec. 3-8.02. Persons liable for tax.
   Every occupant occupying parking space in a parking station in this City
shall be liable for the tax imposed herein. This liability shall not be
extinguished until the tax has been paid to the City, except that a receipt
from an operator maintaining a place of business in this City or from an
operator who is authorized by the Finance Director under such rules and
regulations as he may prescribe, to collect the tax and who is for the purposes
of this chapter regarded as an operator maintaining a place of business in this
City, which receipt is given to the occupant pursuant to the provisions of this
chapter, shall be sufficient to relieve the occupant from further liability for
the tax to which the receipt refers.
(§ 1, Ord. 2259, eff. January 5, 1984)
Sec. 3-8.03. Collection of tax by operators: Receipt to occupant: Rules for
collection schedules.
   Every operator maintaining a place of business in this City and renting
parking space in a parking station in this City shall at the time of collecting
the rent from the occupant and on demand give to the occupant a receipt
therefor. In all cases in which the tax is not collected by the operator, as
aforesaid, the person upon whom such tax is imposed shall pay the same when due
to the Finance Director of the City. In all cases of transactions upon credit
or deferred payment, the payment of tax to the operator may be deferred in
accordance therewith, and the operator shall be liable therefor at the time and
to the extent that such credits are paid or deferred payments are made in
accordance with the rate of tax owing on the amount thereof.
   The Finance Director shall have the power to adopt rules and regulations
prescribing methods and schedules for the collection and payment of the tax and
such methods and schedules shall provide that the fractional part of five one-
hundredths of a dollar ($.05) shall be disregarded unless it amounts to two and
one-half one-hundredths of a dollar ($.025) or more, in which case the amount
(determined without regard to the fractional part of five one-hundredths of a
dollar) shall be increased by five one-hundredths of a dollar ($.05).
(§ 1, Ord. 2259, eff. January 5, 1984)
Sec. 3-8.04. Registration of operator.
   Every person in or about to engage in business as an operator of a parking
station in this City shall immediately register with the Finance Director on a
form provided by said Finance Director. Persons engaged in such business must
so register not later than fifteen (15) days after the operative date of this
tax, but such privilege of such registration after the said operative date of
such tax shall not relieve any person from the obligation of payment or
collection of tax on and after the said operative date, regardless of
registration. Such registration shall set forth the name under which such
person transacts or intends to transact business, the location of his place or
places of business and such other information to facilitate the collection of
the tax as the Finance Director may require. The registration shall be signed
by the owner if a natural person; in case of an association or partnership, by
a member or partner; in the case of a corporation, by an executive officer or
some person specifically authorized by the corporation to sign the
registration. The Finance Director shall within thirty (30) days after such
registration issue without charge a certificate of authority to each registrant
to collect the tax from the occupant, together with a duplicate thereof for
each additional place of business of such registrant. Each certificate and
duplicate shall state the place of business to which it is applicable and shall
be prominently displayed therein so as to be seen and come to the notice
readily of all occupants and persons seeking occupancy. Such certificates shall
be nonassignable and non-transferable and shall be surrendered immediately to
the Finance Director upon the cessation of business at the location named or
upon its sale or transfer.
   If the Finance Director deems its necessary in order to facilitate initial
registration hereunder of persons engaged in business on or prior to the date
of imposition of the tax as set forth in this chapter, he may prescribe
provisions therefor other than those provided in this section. Such provisions
shall be made to effect the purpose thereof. For such purposes, such provisions
shall be in lieu of those herein provided. Such registration and the
certificate thereof shall have the same effect as that provided herein.
(§ 1, Ord. 2259, eff. January 5, 1984)
Sec. 3-8.05. Records required from operators.
   Every operator renting parking space in this City shall keep such records,
receipts, invoices and other pertinent papers in such form as the Finance
Director may require.
(§ 1, Ord. 2259, eff. January 5, 1984)
Sec. 3-8.06. Examination of records.
   The Finance Director or any person authorized in writing by him may examine
the books, papers, records and equipment of any person liable for the tax and
may investigate the character of the business of the person in order to verify
the accuracy of any return made or if no return is made by the person, to
ascertain and determine the amount required to be paid.
(§ 1, Ord. 2259, eff. January 5, 1984)
Sec. 3-8.07. Authority to require reports.
   In administration of the tax, the Finance Director may require the filing of
reports by any person or class of persons having in his or their possession or
custody information relating to rentals of parking spaces which are subject to
the tax. The reports shall be filed when the Finance Director requires and
shall set forth the rental charged for each occupancy, the date or dates of
occupancy, and such other information as the Finance Director may require.
(§ 1, Ord. 2259, eff. January 5, 1984)
Sec. 3-8.08. Time of payment.
   Said report, and taxes calculated thereby to be due to the City, shall be
due and payable and delivered to the Finance Director of the City not later
than the twentieth (20th) day of each calendar month following the month in
which said taxes were collected.
(§ 1, Ord. 2259, eff. January 5, 1984)
Sec. 3-8.09. Extension of time to file.
   For good cause, the Finance Director may extend for not to exceed one month
the time for making any return or payment of tax. Any person to whom an
extension is granted who makes return and pays the tax within the period of
such extension shall pay, in addition to the tax interest on the amount thereof
at the rate of one percent (1%) per month or fraction thereof, for the period
of such extension to the time of return and payment.
(§ 1, Ord. 2259, eff. January 5, 1984)
Sec. 3-8.10. Deficiency determination.
   If the Finance Director is not satisfied with the return or returns of the
tax or the amount of the tax required to be paid to the City by any person, he
may compute and determine the amount required to be paid upon the basis of the
facts contained in the return or returns or upon the basis of any information
within his possession or that may come into his possession. One or more
deficiency determinations may be made of the amount due for one or for more
than one period.
(§ 1, Ord. 2259, eff. January 5, 1984)
Sec. 3-8.11. Interest on deficiency.
   The amount of the determination, exclusive of penalties, shall bear interest
at the rate of one percent (1%) per month or fraction thereof, from and after
the last day required for payment pursuant to §
3-8.08.
(§ 1, Ord. 2259, eff. January 5, 1984)
Sec. 3-8.12. Offsetting of overpayments.
   In making a determination, the Finance Director may offset overpayments for
a period or periods together with interest on the overpayments, against
underpayments for another period or periods against penalties, and against the
interest on the underpayments. The interest on underpayments and overpayments
shall be computed in the manner set forth in §
3-8.11.
(§ 1, Ord. 2259, eff. January 5, 1984)
Sec. 3-8.13. Time for payment of amounts found due: Penalty for delinquency.
   All determinations of the Finance Director made hereunder are due and
payable at the time they become final. If they are not paid when due and
payable, a penalty of ten percent (10%) of the amount of the determination,
exclusive of interest and penalties, shall be added thereto.
(§ 1, Ord. 2259, eff. January 5, 1984)
Sec. 3-8.14. Manner of serving notices.
   Any notice relating to redetermination proceedings shall be served
personally or by mail in the manner prescribed for service of notice of a
deficiency determination.
(§ 1, Ord. 2259, eff. January 5, 1984)
Sec. 3-8.15. Penalties: Failure to pay tax.
   Any person who fails to pay any tax to the City or any amount of tax
required to be collected and paid to the City, except amounts of determinations
made by the Finance Director pursuant hereto within the time required, shall
pay a penalty of ten percent (10%) penalty of the tax or amount of the tax in
addition to the tax or amount of tax plus interest at the rate of one percent
(1%) per month or fraction thereof from the date on which the tax or the amount
of tax required to be collected became due and payable to the City until the
date of payment.
(§ 1, Ord. 2259, eff. January 5, 1984)
Sec. 3-8.16. Determination if no return is made.
   (a)   Estimate of Gross Receipts: Computation of Tax Penalty. If any person
fails to make a return, the Finance Director shall make an estimate of the
amount of the gross receipts of the person or, as the case may be, of the
amount of the total rentals in this City which are subject to the tax. The
estimate shall be made for the period or periods in respect to which the person
failed to make a return and shall be based upon any information which is in the
Finance Director's possession or may come into his possession. Upon the basis
of this estimate, the Finance Director shall compute and determine the amount
required to be paid to the City, adding to the sum thus arrived at a penalty
equal to ten percent (10%) thereof. One or more determinations may be made for
one or for more than one period.
   (b)   Manner of Computation: Offsets: Interest. In making a determination,
the Finance Director may offset overpayments for a period or periods, together
with interest on the overpayments, against underpayments for another period or
periods, against penalties, and against the interest on underpayments. The
interest on underpayments and overpayments shall be computed in the manner set
forth in this chapter.
(§ 1, Ord. 2259, eff. January 5, 1984)
Sec. 3-8.17. Interest on amount found due.
   The amount of the determinations, exclusive of penalties, pursuant to a
determination under §
3-8.16, shall bear interest at the rate of one percent (1%) per month or
fraction thereof, from the last day of the month following the close of the
period designated in §
3-8.07.
(§ 1, Ord. 2259, eff. January 5, 1984)
Sec. 3-8.18. Appeals from determinations of Finance Director.
   Any person dissatisfied with a determination of the Finance Director
relative to any provision of this chapter may appeal such determination in the
manner provided in
Chapter 4 of Title 1 of this Code.
(§ 1, Ord. 2259, eff. January 5, 1984)
Sec. 3-8.19. Violation by operator misdemeanor.
   Any operator or other person who fails or refuses to register as herein
required or to furnish any return required to be made or who fails or refuses
to furnish a supplemental return or other data required by the Finance
Director, or who renders a false or fraudulent return, is guilty of a
misdemeanor. Any person required to make, render, sign or verify any report who
makes any false or fraudulent report, with intent to defeat or evade the
determinations of an amount due required by this chapter to be made, is guilty
of a misdemeanor.
(§ 1, Ord. 2259, eff. January 5, 1984)
Sec. 3-8.20. Tax deemed a debt.
   The amount of any tax or penalty imposed by this chapter shall be deemed a
debt due to the City by the person required hereby to collect the same.
(§ 1, Ord. 2259, eff. January 5, 1984)
Sec. 3-8.21. Disposition of tax funds.
   All taxes and penalties received pursuant to the provisions of this chapter
shall be deposited by the Treasurer in the General Fund.
(§ 1, Ord. 2259, eff. January 5, 1984)
CHAPTER 9: FIRE FACILITY EQUIPMENT IMPACT FEE (REPEALED)*
*
Chapter 9 of Title 3, incorporating §§ 3-9.01 through 3-9.12, was repealed in
its entirety by § 5, Ord. 2779, eff. July 1, 2003.
CHAPTER 10: MOBILE SOURCE AIR POLLUTION FEES
   
3-10.01   Intent of provisions
   
3-10.02   Definitions
   
3-10.03   Administration of vehicle registration fee
   
3-10.04   Legal construction
Sec. 3-10.01. Intent of provisions.
   This chapter is intended to support the SCAQMD's imposition of the vehicle
registration fee and to bring the City into compliance with the requirements
set forth in Cal. Health & Safety Code § 44243 in order to receive fee revenues
for the purpose of implementing programs to reduce air pollution from motor
vehicles.
(§ 2, Ord. 2506, eff. July 4, 1991)
Sec. 3-10.02. Definitions.
   As applied in this chapter, the following words and terms shall be defined
as follows:
   (a)   “City” means the City of Ontario.
   (b)   “Fee administrator” means the Finance Director of the City or his or
her designee.
   (c)   “Mobile source air pollution reduction programs” means any program or
project implemented by the City to reduce air pollution from motor vehicles
which it determines will be consistent with the California Clean Air Act of
1988 or the plan proposed pursuant to Article 5 of Chapter 5.5 of Part 3 of
Division 26 of the California Health and Safety Code (commencing with Cal.
Health & Safety Code § 40460).
(§ 3, Ord. 2506, eff. July 4, 1991)
Sec. 3-10.03. Administration of vehicle registration fee.
   (a)   Receipt of fee. The additional vehicle registration fees disbursed by
the SCAQMD and remitted to the City, pursuant to this chapter, shall be
accepted by the Fee Administrator.
   (b)   Establishment of Air Quality Improvement Trust Fund. The Fee
Administrator shall establish a separate interest-bearing trust fund account in
a financial institution authorized to receive deposits of City funds.
   (c)   Transfer of funds. Upon receipt of vehicle registration fees, the Fee
Administrator shall deposit such funds into the separate account established
pursuant to subsection (b) of this section. All interest earned by the Trust
Fund Account shall be credited only to that account.
   (d)   Expenditure of Air Quality Trust Fund revenues. All revenues received
from the SCAQMD and deposited in the Trust Fund Account shall be exclusively
expended on mobile source emission reduction programs as defined in §
3-10.02(c). Such revenues and any interest earned on the revenues shall be
expended within one (1) year of the completion of the programs.
   (e)   Audits. The City consents to an audit of all programs and projects
funded by vehicle registration fee revenues received from the SCAQMD pursuant
to Cal. Health & Safety Code § 44223. The audit shall be conducted by an
independent auditor selected by the SCAQMD as provided in Cal. Health & Safety
Code §§ 44244 and 44244.1(a).
(§ 4, Ord. 2506, eff. July 4, 1991)
Sec. 3-10.04. Legal construction.
   The provisions of this chapter shall be construed as necessary to
effectively carry out its purposes, which are found and declared to be in
furtherance of the public health, safety, welfare and convenience.
(§ 5, Ord. 2506, eff. July 4, 1991)
CHAPTER 11: PASSENGER VEHICLE RENTAL TAX (REPEALED)
(
Chapter 11 of Title 3, incorporating §§ 3-11.01 through 3-11.12, was repealed
in its entirety by § 1, Ord. 2590, eff. May 3, 1995.)
CHAPTER 12: TRANSACTIONS AND USE TAX
   
3-12.01   Purpose
   
3-12.02   Contract with state
   
3-12.03   Transactions tax rate
   
3-12.04   Place of sale
   
3-12.05   Use tax rate
   
3-12.06   Adoption of provisions of state law
   
3-12.07   Limitations on adoption of state law and collection of use taxes
   
3-12.08   Permit not required
   
3-12.09   Exemptions and exclusions
   
3-12.10   Amendments
   
3-12.11   Enjoining collection forbidden
   
3-12.12   Duration of tax
Sec. 3-12.01. Purpose.
   This chapter is adopted to achieve the following, among other purposes, and
directs that the provisions hereof be interpreted in order to accomplish those
purposes:
   (a)   To impose a retail transactions and use tax in accordance with the
provisions of Part 1.6 (commencing with Section 7251) of Division 2 of the
Revenue and Taxation Code and § 7285.9 of Part 1.7 of Division 2 which
authorizes the City to adopt this tax ordinance which shall be operative if a
majority of the electors voting on the measure vote to approve the imposition
of the tax at an election called for that purpose.
   (b)   To adopt a retail transactions and use tax ordinance that incorporates
provisions identical to those of the Sales and Use Tax Law of the State of
California insofar as those provisions are not inconsistent with the
requirements and limitations contained in Part 1.6 of Division 2 of the Revenue
and Taxation Code.
   (c)   To adopt a retail transactions and use tax ordinance that imposes a
tax and provides a measure therefore that can be administered and collected by
the California Department of Tax and Fee Administration in a manner that adapts
itself as fully as practicable to, and requires the least possible deviation
from, the existing statutory and administrative procedures followed by the
California Department of Tax and Fee Administration in administering and
collecting the California State Sales and Use Taxes.
   (d)   To adopt a retail transactions and use tax ordinance that can be
administered in a manner that will be, to the greatest degree possible,
consistent with the provisions of Part 1.6 of Division 2 of the Revenue and
Taxation Code, minimize the cost of collecting the transactions and use taxes,
and at the same time, minimize the burden of record-keeping upon persons
subject to taxation under the provisions of this chapter.
(Ord. 3239, eff. January 19, 2023)
Sec. 3-12.02. Contract with state.
   Prior to the operative date, the City shall contract with the California
Department of Tax and Fee Administration to perform all functions incident to
the administration and operation of this transactions and use tax ordinance;
provided, that if the City shall not have contracted with the California
Department of Tax and Fee Administration prior to the operative date, it shall
nevertheless so contract and in such a case the operative date shall be the
first day of the first calendar quarter following the execution of such a
contract.
(Ord. 3239, eff. January 19, 2023)
Sec. 3-12.03. Transactions tax rate.
   For the privilege of selling tangible personal property at retail, a tax is
hereby imposed upon all retailers in the incorporated territory of the City at
the rate of one percent (1%) of the gross receipts of any retailer from the
sale of all tangible personal property sold at retail in said territory on and
after the operative date of this chapter.
(Ord. 3239, eff. January 19, 2023)
Sec. 3-12.04. Place of sale.
   For the purposes of this chapter, all retail sales are consummated at the
place of business of the retailer unless the tangible personal property sold is
delivered by the retailer or his agent to an out-of-state destination or to a
common carrier for delivery to an out-of-state destination. The gross receipts
from such sales shall include delivery charges, when such charges are subject
to the state sales and use tax, regardless of the place to which delivery is
made. In the event a retailer has no permanent place of business in the State
or has more than one place of business, the place or places at which the retail
sales are consummated shall be determined under rules and regulations to be
prescribed and adopted by the California Department of Tax and Fee
Administration.
(Ord. 3239, eff. January 19, 2023)
Sec. 3-12.05. Use tax rate.
   An excise tax is hereby imposed on the storage, use or other consumption in
the City of tangible personal property purchased from any retailer on and after
the operative date of this ordinance for storage, use or other consumption in
said territory at the rate of one percent (1%) of the sales price of the
property. The sales price shall include delivery charges when such charges are
subject to state sales or use tax regardless of the place to which delivery is
made.
(Ord. 3239, eff. January 19, 2023)
Sec. 3-12.06. Adoption of provisions of state law.
   Except as otherwise provided in this chapter and except insofar as they are
inconsistent with the provisions of Part 1.6 of Division 2 of the Revenue and
Taxation Code, all of the provisions of Part 1 (commencing with Section 6001)
of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code are hereby adopted and made a
part of this ordinance as though fully set forth herein.
(Ord. 3239, eff. January 19, 2023)
Sec. 3-12.07. Limitations on adoption of state law and collection of use taxes.
   In adopting the provisions of Part 1 of Division 2 of the Revenue and
Taxation Code:
   (a)   Wherever the State of California is named or referred to as the taxing
agency, the name of this City shall be substituted therefor. However, the
substitution shall not be made when:
      (1)   The word "State" is used as a part of the title of the State
Controller, State Treasurer, California Victim Compensation Board, California
Department of Tax and Fee Administration, State Treasury, or the Constitution
of the State of California;
      (2)   The result of that substitution would require action to be taken by
or against this City or any agency, officer, or employee thereof rather than by
or against the California Department of Tax and Fee Administration, in
performing the functions incident to the administration or operation of this
chapter.
      (3)   In those sections, including, but not necessarily limited to
sections referring to the exterior boundaries of the State of California, where
the result of the substitution would be to:
         (A)   Provide an exemption from this tax with respect to certain
sales, storage, use or other consumption of tangible personal property which
would not otherwise be exempt from this tax while such sales, storage, use or
other consumption remain subject to tax by the State under the provisions of
Part 1 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code, or
         (B)   Impose this tax with respect to certain sales, storage, use or
other consumption of tangible personal property which would not be subject to
tax by the state under the said provision of that code.
      (4)   In reference to Sections 6701, 6702 (except in the last sentence
thereof), 6711, 6715, 6737, 6797 or 6828 of the Revenue and Taxation Code.
   (b)   The word "city" shall be substituted for the word "state" in the
phrase "retailer engaged in business in this state" in Section 6203 of the
Revenue and Taxation Code and in the definition of that phrase in Section 6203.
      (1)   "A retailer engaged in business in the District" shall also include
any retailer that, in the preceding calendar year or the current calendar year,
has total combined sales of tangible personal property in this state or for
delivery in the State by the retailer and all persons related to the retailer
that exceeds five hundred thousand dollars ($500,000). For purposes of this
section, a person is related to another person if both persons are related to
each other pursuant to Section 267(b) of Title 26 of the United States Code and
the regulations thereunder.
(Ord. 3239, eff. January 19, 2023)
Sec. 3-12.08. Permit not required.
   If a seller's permit has been issued to a retailer under Section 6067 of the
Revenue and Taxation Code, an additional transactor's permit shall not be
required by this ordinance.
(Ord. 3239, eff. January 19, 2023)
Sec. 3-12.09. Exemptions and Exclusions.
   (a)   There shall be excluded from the measure of the transactions tax and
the use tax the amount of any sales tax or use tax imposed by the State of
California or by any city, city and county, or county pursuant to the Bradley-
Burns Uniform Local Sales and Use Tax Law or the amount of any state-
administered transactions or use tax.
   (b)   There are exempted from the computation of the amount of transactions
tax the gross receipts from:
      (1)   Sales of tangible personal property, other than fuel or petroleum
products, to operators of aircraft to be used or consumed principally outside
the county in which the sale is made and directly and exclusively in the use of
such aircraft as common carriers of persons or property under the authority of
the laws of this State, the United States, or any foreign government.
      (2)   Sales of property to be used outside the City which is shipped to a
point outside the City, pursuant to the contract of sale, by delivery to such
point by the retailer or his agent, or by delivery by the retailer to a carrier
for shipment to a consignee at such point. For the purposes of this paragraph,
delivery to a point outside the City shall be satisfied:
         (A)   With respect to vehicles (other than commercial vehicles)
subject to registration pursuant to Chapter 1 (commencing with Section 4000) of
Division 3 of the Vehicle Code, aircraft licensed in compliance with Section
21411 of the Public Utilities Code, and undocumented vessels registered under
Division 3.5 (commencing with Section 9840) of the Vehicle Code by registration
to an out-of-City address and by a declaration under penalty of perjury, signed
by the buyer, stating that such address is, in fact, his or her principal place
of residence; and
         (B)   With respect to commercial vehicles, by registration to a place
of business out-of-City and declaration under penalty of perjury, signed by the
buyer, that the vehicle will be operated from that address.
      (3)   The sale of tangible personal property if the seller is obligated
to furnish the property for a fixed price pursuant to a contract entered into
prior to the operative date of this chapter.
      (4)   A lease of tangible personal property which is a continuing sale of
such property, for any period of time for which the lessor is obligated to
lease the property for an amount fixed by the lease prior to the operative date
of this chapter.
      (5)   For the purposes of subparagraphs (3) and (4) of this subsection,
the sale or lease of tangible personal property shall be deemed not to be
obligated pursuant to a contract or lease for any period of time for which any
party to the contract or lease has the unconditional right to terminate the
contract or lease upon notice, whether or not such right is exercised.
   (c)   There are exempted from the use tax imposed by this ordinance, the
storage, use or other consumption in this City of tangible personal property:
      (1)   The gross receipts from the sale of which have been subject to a
transactions tax under any state-administered transactions and use tax
ordinance.
      (2)   Other than fuel or petroleum products purchased by operators of
aircraft and used or consumed by such operators directly and exclusively in the
use of such aircraft as common carriers of persons or property for hire or
compensation under a certificate of public convenience and necessity issued
pursuant to the laws of this State, the United States, or any foreign
government. This exemption is in addition to the exemptions provided in
Sections 6366 and 6366.1 of the Revenue and Taxation Code of the State of
California.
      (3)   If the purchaser is obligated to purchase the property for a fixed
price pursuant to a contract entered into prior to the operative date of this
chapter.
      (4)   If the possession of, or the exercise of any right or power over,
the tangible personal property arises under a lease which is a continuing
purchase of such property for any period of time for which the lessee is
obligated to lease the property for an amount fixed by a lease prior to the
operative date of this chapter.
      (5)   For the purposes of subparagraphs (3) and (4) of this subsection,
storage, use, or other consumption, or possession of, or exercise of any right
or power over, tangible personal property shall be deemed not to be obligated
pursuant to a contract or lease for any period of time for which any party to
the contract or lease has the unconditional right to terminate the contract or
lease upon notice, whether or not such right is exercised.
      (6)   Except as provided in subparagraph (7), a retailer engaged in
business in the City shall not be required to collect use tax from the
purchaser of tangible personal property, unless the retailer ships or delivers
the property into the City or participates within the City in making the sale
of the property, including, but not limited to, soliciting or receiving the
order, either directly or indirectly, at a place of business of the retailer in
the City or through any representative, agent, canvasser, solicitor,
subsidiary, or person in the City under the authority of the retailer.
      (7)   "A retailer engaged in business in the City" shall also include any
retailer of any of the following: vehicles subject to registration pursuant to
Chapter 1 (commencing with Section 4000) of Division 3 of the Vehicle Code,
aircraft licensed in compliance with Section 21411 of the Public Utilities
Code, or undocumented vessels registered under Division 3.5 (commencing with
Section 9840) of the Vehicle Code. That retailer shall be required to collect
use tax from any purchaser who registers or licenses the vehicle, vessel, or
aircraft at an address in the City.
   (d)   Any person subject to use tax under this ordinance may credit against
that tax any transactions tax or reimbursement for transactions tax paid to a
district imposing, or retailer liable for, a transactions tax pursuant to Part
1.6 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code with respect to the sale to
the person of the property the storage, use or other consumption of which is
subject to the use tax.
(Ord. 3239, eff. January 19, 2023)
Sec. 3-12.10. Amendments.
   All amendments subsequent to the effective date of this ordinance to Part 1
of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code relating to sales and use taxes
and which are not inconsistent with Part 1.6 and Part 1.7 of Division 2 of the
Revenue and Taxation Code, and all amendments to Part 1.6 and Part 1.7 of
Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code, shall automatically become a part
of this ordinance, provided however, that no such amendment shall operate so as
to affect the rate of tax imposed by this ordinance.
(Ord. 3239, eff. January 19, 2023)
Sec. 3-12.11. Enjoining collection forbidden.
   No injunction or writ of mandate or other legal or equitable process shall
issue in any suit, action or proceeding in any court against the State or the
City, or against any officer of the State or the City, to prevent or enjoin the
collection under this chapter, or Part 1.6 of Division 2 of the Revenue and
Taxation Code, of any tax or any amount of tax required to be collected.
(Ord. 3239, eff. January 19, 2023)
Sec. 3-12.12. Duration of Tax.
   The tax imposed by this chapter shall continue until this chapter is
repealed.
(Ord. 3239, eff. January 19, 2023)
TITLE 4. PUBLIC SAFETY
      Chapter
         
1.   AMBULANCES (REPEALED)
         
2.   BICYCLES
         
3.   EMERGENCY ORGANIZATION
         
4.   FIRE CODE
         
5.   TAXICABS AND AUTOMOBILES FOR HIRE
         
6.   TRAFFIC
         
7.   TENTS AND STRUCTURES OF SIMILAR FLAMMABLE MATERIALS
         
8.   USE OF AUTOMATIC DIALING AND TAPED MESSAGE BURGLAR AND FIRE ALARM SYSTEMS
         
9.   ALARM SYSTEMS
         
10.   HIGH-RISE BUILDING REGULATIONS (REPEALED)
         
11.   SECURITY STANDARDS FOR BUILDINGS
         
12.   COST RECOVERY FOR POLICE SERVICES AT LARGE PARTIES ON PRIVATE PROPERTY
         
13.   OFF-STREET PARKING PROHIBITIONS AND RESTRICTIONS
         
14.   NEWSRACKS
         
15.   REGULATIONS RELATING TO SOLICITATION OF EMPLOYMENT ON PUBLIC STREETS AND
CERTAIN PARKING AREAS
         
16.   PAY TELEPHONES ON PRIVATE PROPERTY
         
17.   PAY TELEPHONES ON PUBLIC RIGHT-OF-WAY
         
18.   ICE CREAM TRUCK OPERATING REGULATIONS
         
19.   ROTATIONAL TOWING SERVICES
         
20.   VIDEO PROVIDERS
         
20A.   STATE VIDEO SERVICE FRANCHISES
         
21.   FIREWORKS, PYROTECHNIC DEVICES, EXPLOSIVES, DESTRUCTIVE DEVICES OR THEIR
COMPONENTS
         
22.   PROHIBITIONS AGAINST CONSUMPTION OF ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES BY MINORS AND
ALLOWING OR HOSTING GATHERINGS WHERE UNSUPERVISED MINORS ARE CONSUMING
ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES
         
23.   REGULATION OF REGISTERED SEX OFFENDERS
         
24.   UNLAWFUL POSSESSION OF A CATALYTIC CONVERTER PROHIBITED
CHAPTER 1: AMBULANCES (REPEALED)
CHAPTER 2: BICYCLES
   
4-2.01   Definitions
   
4-2.02   Licenses: Required
   
4-2.03   Registration certificates and license plates (decals): Inspections:
Issuance
   
4-2.04   Registration certificates and license plates (decals)
   
4-2.05   License plates (decals): Attachment
   
4-2.06   License plates (decals): Issuance
   
4-2.07   License plates (decals): Removal and mutilation
   
4-2.08   Identification numbers
   
4-2.09   Identification numbers: Removal and mutilation
   
4-2.10   Sales and transfers of ownership: Reports
   
4-2.11   Bicycle retailers
   
4-2.12   Rental to minors
   
4-2.13   Change or address: Notices
   
4-2.14   Violation of provisions
   
4-2.15   Motorized bicycles: Posting State licensing requirements
Sec. 4-2.01. Definitions.
   For the purposes of this chapter, unless otherwise apparent from the
context, certain words and phrases used in this chapter are defined as follows:
   (a)   “Bicycle” shall mean any device upon which a person may ride, which is
propelled by human power through a system of belts, chains, or gears and which
has wheels at least twenty (20) inches in diameter and a frame size of at least
fourteen (14) inches.
(Cal. Veh. Code § 39000)
   (b)   “Police Department” shall mean the Police Department of the City.
(§ 2, Ord. 940, eff. February 4, 1953, as amended by § 1, Ord. 1798, eff. July
1, 1973, § 1, Ord. 1878, eff. January 1, 1976, § 1, Ord. 1984, eff. February 2,
1978, and § 1, Ord. 2724, eff. November 2, 2000)
Sec. 4-2.02. Licenses: Required.
   (a)   It shall be unlawful for any person to operate or use a bicycle in the
City which is not currently licensed by the City pursuant to the provisions of
this chapter or by some other City or County in the State; provided, however,
this subsection (a) shall not apply to bicycles owned by persons who are not
residents of the State.
   (b)   It shall be unlawful for any person residing in the City to operate in
the City a bicycle which is required to be, but which is not, currently
licensed by the City.
   (c)   Any person residing in the City who, upon the effective date of this
section, owns a bicycle which is usually kept within the City shall obtain a
registration certificate and a license plate (decal) for such bicycle from the
Police Department within thirty (30) days after the effective date of this
section.
   (d)   Any person residing in the City who, after the effective date of this
section, acquires a bicycle to be kept in the City shall obtain a registration
certificate and a license plate (decal) for such bicycle from the Police
Department within ten (10) days after the acquisition thereof.
(§ 1(a) and (b), Ord. 940, eff. February 4, 1953, as amended by § 1, Ord. 1878,
eff. January 1, 1976, and § 1, Ord. 2724, eff. November 2, 2000)
Sec. 4-2.03. Registration certificates and license plates (decals):
Inspections: Issuance.
   (a)   The Police Department shall obtain original bicycle license plates
(decals) and renewal license plates (decals) from the Department of Motor
Vehicles of the State pursuant to Division 16.7 of the Vehicle Code of the
State.
   (b)   Registration certificates and license plates (decals) will be issued
by the Police Department in accordance with the provisions of this chapter and
upon application by prospective licensees.
   (c)   No registration certificate or license plate (decal) shall be issued
until the Police Department has determined, upon inspection of the bicycle,
that the bicycle is in a safe operating condition and is equipped with all the
safety devices required by the laws of the State.
(§ 1(b), Ord. 940, eff. February 4, 1953, as amended by § 2, Ord. 1798, eff.
July 1, 1973, § 1, Ord. 1878, eff. January 1, 1976, and § 1, Ord. 2724, eff.
November 2, 2000)
Sec. 4-2.04. Registration certificates and license plates (decals).
   (a)   The due date for any person owning a bicycle required to be licensed
pursuant to the provisions of this chapter shall be January 1, 1975, or the
date on which said person first kept the bicycle in the City, whichever date is
later.
   (b)   All registration certificates and license plates (decals) issued prior
to December 31, 1978, shall expire on December 31, 1978.
   (c)   Any person residing in the City who owns a bicycle required to be
licensed by the provisions of this chapter, which bicycle was originally
licensed on or before December 31, 1978, shall within thirty (30) days after
January 1, 1979, apply to the Police Department for a renewal of the
registration certificate and for a renewal license plate (decal).
   (d)   Any person residing in the City who acquires a bicycle required to be
licensed by the provisions of this chapter on or after January 1, 1979, shall
upon application, and after inspection as provided in this chapter, be issued
an original registration certificate and a renewal license plate (decal).
   (e)   Any bicycle which has wheels less than twenty (20) inches in diameter
or a frame size less than fourteen (14) inches may be licensed at the request
of the owner thereof. Licensing procedures shall be as otherwise set forth in
this chapter, with the due date being the date of the application for such
license. Once such bicycle is licensed, all of the provisions of this chapter
shall thereafter apply to such bicycle.
(§ 1(c), Ord. 940, eff. February 4, 1953, as amended by § 3, Ord. 1798, eff.
July 1, 1973, and § 1, Ord. 1878, eff. January 1, 1976, § 2, Ord. 2489, eff.
January 1, 1991, and § 1, Ord. 2724, eff. November 2, 2000)
Sec. 4-2.05. License plates (decals): Attachment.
   Each license decal shall be affixed to a permanent frame member under police
supervision at the time of registration.
(§ 1(b), Ord. 940, eff. February 4, 1953, as amended by § 4, Ord. 1798, eff.
July 1, 1973)
Sec. 4-2.06. License plates (decals): Issuance.
   Upon satisfactory evidence that a license plate (decal) has been mutilated,
and upon the presentation of the original certificate of registration, a new
license plate (decal) may be issued.
(§ 1(c), Ord. 940, eff. February 4, 1953, as amended by § 5, Ord. 1798, eff.
July 1, 1973, § 1, Ord. 1878, eff. January 1, 1976, and § 1, Ord. 2724, eff.
November 2, 2000)
Sec. 4-2.07. License plates (decals): Removal and mutilation.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to destroy, remove, mutilate, or alter
any bicycle license plate (decal); provided, however, an expired or invalid
license plate (decal) may be removed by the owner of a bicycle, or by a person
authorized by the owner, subsequent to the affixing of a current and valid
license plate (decal) to the bicycle.
(§ 1(d), Ord. 940, eff. February 4, 1953, as amended by § 6, Ord. 1798, eff.
July 1, 1973, and § 1, Ord. 1878, eff. January 1, 1976)
Sec. 4-2.08. Identification numbers.
   Upon the licensing of any bicycle not having permanent identification
numbers, the Police Department may affix permanent identification numbers on
the frame of such bicycle.
(§ 1(d), Ord. 940, eff. February 4, 1953, as amended by § 1, Ord. 1878, eff.
January 1, 1976, and § 1, Ord. 2724, eff. November 2, 2000)
Sec. 4-2.09. Identification numbers: Removal and mutilation.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to destroy, remove, mutilate, or alter
any identification number affixed on a bicycle frame.
(§ 1(d), Ord. 940, eff. February 4, 1953, as amended by § 1, Ord. 1878, eff.
January 1, 1976, and § 1, Ord. 2724, eff. November 2, 2000)
Sec. 4-2.10. Sales and transfers of ownership: Reports.
   (a)   The owner of any bicycle licensed pursuant to the provisions of this
chapter shall report any sale or transfer of ownership of the bicycle to the
Police Department within ten (10) days after such sale or transfer. The report
shall be in writing and shall contain such information as is required by the
Police Department.
   (b)   Any person residing in the City who is a transferee of a bicycle
currently licensed by the City in accordance with the provisions of this
chapter shall obtain a new registration certificate and license plate (decal)
for such bicycle within ten (10) days after such sale or transfer.
(§ 1(e), Ord. 940, eff. February 4, 1953, as amended by § 7, Ord. 1798, eff.
July 1, 1973, § 1, Ord. 1878, eff. January 1, 1976, and § 1, Ord. 2724, eff.
November 2, 2000)
Sec. 4-2.11. Bicycle retailers.
   Each bicycle retailer shall supply each purchaser with a record of the
following information: the name and address of the retailer; the year, make,
serial number, and general description of the bicycle; and the name and address
of the purchaser. The retailer shall forward a copy of such record to the
Police Department within ten (10) days after such transaction.
(§ 1(c), Ord. 940, eff. February 4, 1953, as amended by § 8, Ord. 1798, eff.
July 1, 1973, and § 1, Ord. 2724, eff. November 2, 2000)
Sec. 4-2.12. Rental to minors.
   No person engaged in the business of renting bicycles for hire shall rent a
bicycle to a minor under ten (10) years of age. In renting a bicycle to a minor
over ten (10) years of age and under sixteen (16) years of age, the renting
agency shall have on file for police inspection the written consent of the
parent or guardian of such minor stating that the minor is ten (10) years of
age or older and is permitted to rent a bicycle.
(§ 3, Ord. 940, eff. February 4, 1953, as amended by § 1, Ord. 2724, eff.
November 2, 2000)
Sec. 4-2.13. Change or address: Notices.
   Whenever the owner of a bicycle licensed pursuant to this chapter changes
his or her address, he or she shall, within ten (10) days, notify the Police
Department of the old and new address.
(§ 5, Ord. 940, eff. February 4, 1953, as amended by § 1, Ord. 985, eff.
February 3, 1954, § 1, Ord. 1878, eff. January 1, 1976, and § 1, Ord. 2724,
eff. November 2, 2000)
Sec. 4-2.14. Violation of provisions.
   (a)   By minors. Any minor who violates any provision of this chapter shall
be reprimanded by the Police Department by a letter addressed to the parent or
guardian of such minor.
   Upon any subsequent violation within a period of three (3) years, the
offender shall be summoned to appear at the Police Department with this bicycle
and shall be accompanied by a parent or guardian. After a hearing, the Police
Department may suspend the offender's privilege to operate and use a bicycle
within the City and/or impound the offender's bicycle for a period of not to
exceed thirty (30) days.
   (b)   By persons other than minors. Any person, other than a minor, who has
been convicted of violating any provision of this chapter shall be punished
upon a first conviction by a fine of not more than Five Dollars ($5.00) and,
upon a second or any subsequent conviction within three (3) years of a prior
conviction, by a fine of Ten Dollars ($10.00).
(§ 1, Ord. 1878, eff. January 1, 1976, as amended by § 1, Ord. 2724, eff.
November 2, 2000)
Sec. 4-2.15. Motorized bicycles: Posting State licensing requirements.
   Each motorized bicycle retailer shall post a sign in a conspicuous location
upon the business premises, which sign shall contain the following statement
imprinted in letters at least one and one-half (1½) inches in height: “A State
Driver's License or Instruction (Learner's) Permit Is Required to Operate a
Motorized Bicycle on Streets and Highways.”
(§ 1, Ord. 1984, eff. February 2, 1978, as amended by § 1, Ord. 2724, eff.
November 2, 2000)
CHAPTER 3: EMERGENCY ORGANIZATION *
*Chapter 3 entitled “Civil Defense,” consisting of §§ 4-3.01 through 4-3.10,
codified from Ord. 1438, eff. October 5, 1961 and Ord. 1661, eff. September 6,
1967, as amended by Ord. 1708, eff. July 17, 1969, amended in its entirety by
Ord. 1773, eff. February 17, 1972.
   
4-3.01   Purpose
   
4-3.02   Definition
   
4-3.03   Disaster Council: Membership
   
4-3.04   Disaster Council: Powers, duties, meetings
   
4-3.05   Director and Assistant Director of Emergency Services, Emergency
Manager
   
4-3.06   Emergency Powers of the Director of Emergency Services, Assistant
Director of Emergency Services, and Emergency Manager
   
4-3.07   Emergency Management Working Committee
   
4-3.08   Emergency Organization
   
4-3.09   Emergency Operations Plan
   
4-3.10   Expenditures
   
4-3.11   Violations of provisions: Penalties
Sec. 4-3.01. Purpose.
   The declared purpose of this chapter is to provide for the preparation and
carrying out of plans for the protection of persons and property within the
City of Ontario in the event of an emergency. This chapter shall provide for
the direction of the emergency organization and the coordination of the
emergency functions with all other public agencies, corporations,
organizations, and affected private persons.
(§ 1, Ord. 1773, eff. February 17, 1972, as amended by § 1, Ord. 2706, eff.
December 2, 1999,§ 2, Ord. 2990, eff. July 17, 2014, § 2, Ord. 3293, eff.
December 17, 2024)
Sec. 4-3.02. Definition.
   As used in this chapter, "emergency" shall mean the actual or threatened
existence of conditions of disaster or of extreme peril to the safety of
persons and property within the City's jurisdiction caused by such hazards as
identified in the most current edition of the Local Hazard Mitigation Plan or
other conditions, which are, or are likely to be, beyond the control of the
services, personnel, equipment, and facilities of the City, requiring the
combined forces of other political subdivisions to combat.
(Cal. Gov’t Code § 8558) (§ 1, Ord. 1773, eff. February 17, 1972, as amended by
§ 1, Ord. 2706, eff. December 2, 1999, § 2, Ord. 2990, eff. July 17, 2014, § 2,
Ord. 3293, eff. December 17, 2024)
Sec. 4-3.03. Disaster Council: Membership.
   The City of Ontario Disaster Council is hereby created and shall consist of
the following:
   (a)   The Mayor, who shall be chair.
   (b)   The Mayor pro Tem, who shall be vice chair.
   (c)   All members of the Ontario City Council.
   (d)   Staff, technical advisors, and community representatives as may be
appointed by the Disaster Council chair with the concurrence of a majority of
the above Disaster Council members.
(§ 1, Ord. 1773, eff. February 17, 1972, as amended by § 1, Ord. 2449, eff.
August 17, 1989, § 1, Ord. 2706, eff. December 2, 1999, § 2, Ord. 2990, eff.
July 17, 2014, § 2, Ord. 3293, eff. December 17, 2024)
Sec. 4-3.04. Disaster Council: Powers, duties, meetings.
   It shall be the duty of the City of Ontario Disaster Council, and it is
hereby empowered, to develop and recommend for adoption by the City Council,
emergency and mutual aid plans and agreements and such ordinances and
resolutions and rules and regulations as are necessary to implement such plans
and agreements. The Disaster Council shall meet upon call of the Disaster
Council chair or upon call of the Disaster Council vice chair in the absence of
the chair.
(§ 1, Ord. 1773, eff. February 17, 1972, as amended by § 2, Ord. 2449, eff.
August 17, 1989, § 1, Ord. 2706, eff. December 2, 1999, § 2, Ord. 2990, eff.
July 17, 2014, § 2, Ord. 3293, eff. December 17, 2024)
Sec. 4-3.05. Director and Assistant Director of Emergency Services, Emergency
Manager.
   (a)   There is hereby created the office of Director of Emergency Services.
The City Manager of the City of Ontario shall be the Director of Emergency
Services.
   (b)   There is hereby created the office of Assistant Director of Emergency
Services, who shall be appointed by the Director of Emergency Services. The
Director of Emergency Services may appoint either the Assistant City Manager,
Deputy City Manager, Fire Chief, Police Chief, or Emergency Manager as the
Assistant Director of Emergency Services.
   (c)   There is hereby created the office of Emergency Manager, who shall act
at the will of the Director of Emergency Services. The Emergency Manager of the
City of Ontario shall manage day-to-day affairs of the emergency management
program and have certain other emergency management functions as specified.
(§ 1, Ord. 1773, eff. February 17, 1972, as amended by § 4, Ord. 2449, eff.
August 17, 1989, § 1, Ord. 2706, eff. December 2, 1999, § 2, Ord. 2990, eff.
July 17, 2014, § 2, Ord. 3293, eff. December 17, 2024)
Sec. 4-3.06. Emergency Powers of the Director of Emergency Services, Assistant
Director of Emergency Services, and Emergency Manager.
   (a)   The Director of Emergency Services is hereby empowered to:
      (1)   Request the City Council to proclaim the existence or threatened
existence of a "local emergency" if the City Council is in session, or to issue
such proclamation if the City Council is not in session. Whenever a local
emergency is proclaimed by the Director of Emergency Services, the City Council
shall take action to ratify the proclamation within seven (7) days thereafter
or the proclamation shall have no further force or effect; and
      (2)   Request the City Council to review the need for continuing the
local emergency at the interval specified in the Cal. Gov’t Code § 8630(c)
until the City Council terminates the local emergency; and
      (3)   Request the Governor to proclaim a "state of emergency" when, in
the opinion of the Director of Emergency Services, the locally available
resources are inadequate to cope with the emergency; and
      (4)   Control and direct the effort of the Emergency Organization of the
City for the accomplishment of the purposes of this chapter; and
      (5)   Direct cooperation between and coordination of services and staff
of the Emergency Organization of the City and resolve questions of authority
and responsibility that may arise between them; and
      (6)   Represent the City in all dealings with public or private agencies
on matters pertaining to emergencies as defined in this chapter; and
      (7)   In the event of the proclamation of a "local emergency," the
proclamation of a "state of emergency" by the California Governor or California
Office of Emergency Services Director, or the existence of a "state of war
emergency," the Director of Emergency Services is hereby empowered to:
         (i)   Promulgate written orders and regulations necessary to provide
for the protection of life and property as affected by such emergency,
including orders or regulations imposing a curfew within designated boundaries
where necessary to preserve the public order and safety; provided, however,
such rules and regulations shall be widely publicized and noticed and shall be
confirmed at the earliest practicable time by the City Council; and
         (ii)   Obtain vital supplies, equipment, and such other properties
found lacking and needed for the protection of life and property and to bind
the City for the fair value thereof and, if required immediately, to commandeer
the same for public use; and
         (iii)   Require emergency services of any City officer or employee
and, in the event of the proclamation of a "state of emergency" in the County
of San Bernardino or the existence of a "state of war emergency," to command
the aid of as many citizens of the community as deemed necessary in the
execution of duties; such persons shall be entitled to all privileges,
benefits, and immunities as are provided by state law for registered disaster
services workers; and
         (iv)   Requisition necessary personnel or material of any City
departments or agencies; and
         (v)   Execute all ordinary powers; all special powers conferred by
this chapter, by resolution, and by an adopted Emergency Operations Plan; and
all other powers conferred by statute, agreement approved by the City Council,
or by any other lawful authority; and
         (vi)   Approve contracts as necessary to support the Emergency
Organization and to protect the life and property of the citizens of Ontario.
   (b)   In the absence of the Director of Emergency Services, the Assistant
Director of Emergency Services is empowered to take on the powers of the
Director of Emergency Services under Section
4-3.06(a). In the absence of both the Director of Emergency Services and the
Assistant Director of Emergency Services, the Emergency Manager is empowered to
take on the powers of the Director of Emergency Services under Section
4-3.06(a). The Director of Emergency Services shall be deemed absent where he
or she is unavailable to participate in meetings or otherwise is unable to
perform his or her duties during an emergency.
   (c)   The Director of Emergency Services may supplement the order of
succession to that office identified in Section
4-3.06(b), to take effect in the event the Director is absent. Such order of
succession shall be approved by the governing body.
   (d)   The Assistant Director of Emergency Services shall, under the
supervision of the Director of Emergency Services, supervise the activities of
the Emergency Manager and shall have such other powers and duties as may be
assigned by the Director of Emergency Services.
(§ 1, Ord. 1773, eff. February 17, 1972, as amended by §§ 5 and 6, Ord. 2449,
eff. August 17, 1989, § 1, Ord. 2518, eff. February 20, 1992, § 1, Ord. 2706,
eff. December 2, 1999, § 2, Ord. 2990, eff. July 17, 2014, § 2, Ord. 3293, eff.
December 17, 2024)
Sec. 4-3.07. Emergency Management Working Committee.
   (a)   There is also created the Emergency Management Working Committee
(EMWC) which shall consist of the following:
      (1)   The Emergency Manager who shall serve as chair and shall schedule
meetings and projects as necessary.
      (2)   Two supervisory level or above representatives from each agency or
department with a position assigned to the Emergency Operations Center (EOC)
under the City of Ontario Emergency Operations Plan.
   (b)   The Emergency Management Working Committee shall:
      (1)   Develop plans and procedures for the effective accomplishment of
emergency management objectives, including the review and update of the City of
Ontario Emergency Operations Plan.
      (2)   Review and keep current emergency management automated systems so
that they meet the needs of all organizations that may be represented in the
Ontario EOC.
      (3)   Achieve a high level of knowledge about specific emergency
management functions assigned to the various City departments.
      (4)   Train an adequate number of staff members from each department so
as to ensure that personnel are available to respond to and perform in an EOC,
Department Operations Center (DOC), or field-environment.
      (5)   Design and call emergency management exercises to test various
components of the City of Ontario Emergency Operations Plan as necessary;
provided, however, that with respect to any such test exercise no one shall
have the power to command the assistance of any private citizen, and the
failure of a citizen to follow any orders or regulations pertaining to a test
exercise shall not constitute a violation of this chapter.
      (6)   Serve as a resource for trained exercise simulators and observers
so that the learning value of such activities is maximized.
      (7)   Serve as a department contact for all emergency management issues
such as the gathering of information for disaster assistance claims,
circulation of pertinent legislation, notification of events and activities,
and liaison with executive level managers.
      (8)   Ensure that each of the five mission areas of the National
Preparedness Goal (prevention, protection, mitigation, response, and recovery)
are addressed in a systematic fashion so as to provide a comprehensive,
integrated, and effective emergency management program for the City of Ontario.
      (9)   Conduct a preparedness meeting with City and regional partners,
including, but not limited to; utilities, special districts, non-profits
organizations, faith-based organizations, hospitals, and business partners who
have play a critical role within the City of Ontario Emergency Operations Plan.
(§ 1, Ord. 2706, eff. December 2, 1999, as amended by § 2, Ord. 2990, eff. July
17, 2014, § 2, Ord. 3293, eff. December 17, 2024)
Sec. 4-3.08. Emergency Organization.
   All officers and employees, together with those volunteer forces enrolled to
aid them during an emergency, and all groups, organizations, and persons who
may by agreement or operation of law, including persons impressed into service
under the provisions of Section
4-3.06(a)(7)(iii), be charged with duties incident to the protection of life
and property during such emergency, shall constitute the Emergency Organization
of the City of Ontario.
(§ 1, Ord. 1773, eff. February 17, 1972, as amended by § 1, Ord. 2706, eff.
December 2, 1999, § 2, Ord. 2990, eff. July 17, 2014, § 2, Ord. 3293, eff.
December 17, 2024)
Sec. 4-3.09. Emergency Operations Plan.
   The City of Ontario Disaster Council shall be responsible for the
development of the Emergency Operations Plan, which shall provide for the
effective mobilization of all of the resources of this jurisdiction, both
public and private, to meet any condition constituting a local emergency, state
of emergency, or state of war emergency; and shall provide for the
organization, powers and duties, services, and staff of the emergency
organization. Such plan shall take effect upon adoption by resolution of the
City Council.
(§ 1, Ord. 1773, eff. February 17, 1972, as amended by § 1, Ord. 2706, eff.
December 2, 1999, § 2, Ord. 2990, eff. July 17, 2014, § 2, Ord. 3293, eff.
December 17, 2024)
Sec. 4-3.10. Expenditures.
   Any expenditure made in connection with emergency activities, including
mutual aid activities, shall be deemed conclusively to be for the direct
protection and benefit of the inhabitants and property of the City of Ontario.
Under certain emergency conditions the Disaster Council, or any City staff
member of the Emergency Organization, may enact conditional changes in
procurement processes, spending limits, approval authorities, and allocation of
City resources in order to support the City's required response activities.
(§ 1, Ord. 1773, eff. February 17, 1972, as amended by § 1, Ord. 2706, eff.
December 2, 1999, § 2, Ord. 2990, eff. July 17, 2014, § 2, Ord. 3293, eff.
December 17, 2024)
Sec. 4-3.11. Violations of provisions: Penalties.
   It shall be a misdemeanor, punishable by fine of not to exceed five hundred
dollars ($500.00), or by imprisonment in the County Jail for a period of time
not to exceed six (6) months, or both, for any person, during an emergency to:
   (a)   Willfully obstruct, hinder, or delay any member of the Emergency
Organization in the enforcement of any lawful rule or regulation issued
pursuant to the provisions of this chapter or in the performance of any duty
imposed upon him by virtue of said provisions; and
   (b)   Do any act forbidden by any lawful rule or regulation issued pursuant
to the provisions of this chapter if such act is of such a nature as to give,
or be likely to give, assistance to the enemy or imperil the lives or property
of inhabitants of the City, or to prevent, hinder, or delay the defense or
protection thereof; or
   (c)   Wear, carry, or display, without authority, any means of
identification specified by the emergency agency of the State.
(§ 1, Ord. 1773, eff. February 17, 1972, as amended by § 1, Ord. 2706, eff.
December 2, 1999, § 2, Ord. 2990, eff. July 17, 2014, § 2, Ord. 3293, eff.
December 17, 2024)
CHAPTER 4: FIRE CODE *
*Sections 4-4.01 through 4-4.13, codified from Ordinance No. 1650, eff. July 6,
1967, repealed by Ordinance No. 1834, effective June 20, 1974. Sections 4-4.01
through 4-4.14, codified from Ordinance No. 1834, repealed by Ordinance No.
2112, effective December 18, 1980. Sections 4-4.01 through 4-4.43, codified
from Ordinance No. 2341, eff. March 20, 1986, repealed by Ordinance No. 2624,
effective October 31, 1996. Sections 4-4.01 through 4-4.04, codified from
Ordinance No. 2624, repealed by Ordinance No. 2692, effective July 1, 1999.
Sections 4-4.01 through 4-4.35, repealed and reenacted by § 2, Ordinance No.
2768, effective January 16, 2003. Sections 4-4.01 through 4-4.38, repealed by §
2, Ordinance No. 2881, effective January 3, 2008. Sections 4-4.01 through 4-
4.23 enacted by § 2, Ordinance No. 2881, effective January 3, 2008. Sections 4-
4.01 through 4-4.23, repealed by § 2, Ordinance No. 2976, effective December
19, 2013. Sections 4-4.01 through 4-4.29 enacted by § 2, Ordinance No. 2976,
effective December 19, 2013. Sections 4-4.01 through 4-4.29, repealed and
reenacted by § 2, Ordinance No. 3062, effective December 15, 2016. Sections 4-
4.01 through 4-4.29 repealed by § 2, Ordinance No. 3147, effective December 19,
2019. Sections 4-4.01 through 4-4.26 enacted by § 2, Ordinance No. 3147,
effective December 19, 2019. Sections 4-4.01 through 4-4.25 amended by § 2,
Ordinance No. 3226, effective January 5, 2023.
   
4-4.01   Adoption of California Fire Code and the International Fire Code
   
4-4.02   Cost recovery
   
4-4.03   Establishment of the limits of districts in which stationary
containers of flammable cryogenic fluids are prohibited
   
4-4.04   Establishment of the limits of districts in which storage of flammable
or combustible Class I and Class II liquids in outside unprotected aboveground
tanks is prohibited
   
4-4.05   Establishment of the limits in which storage of liquefied petroleum
gases is restricted for the protection of heavily populated or congested areas
   
4-4.06   Amendments to the 2022 California Fire Code (CFC) and 2021
International Fire Code (IFC)
   
4-4.07   Amendment: Referenced codes and standards
   
4-4.08   Amendment: General
   
4-4.09   Amendment: Appointment
   
4-4.10   Amendment: Liability and legal defense
   
4-4.11   Amendment: Investigations
   
4-4.12   Amendment: Pallets
   
4-4.13   Amendment: Board of Appeals
   
4-4.14   Amendment: Violation penalties
   
4-4.15   Amendment: Failure to comply
   
4-4.16   Amendment: Dimensions
   
4-4.17   Amendment: Obstruction of fire apparatus access roads
   
4-4.18   Amendment: Two points of connection
   
4-4.19   Amendment: General
   
4-4.20   Amendment: Size of piles
   
4-4.21   Amendment: Combustible waste
   
4-4.22   Amendment: Emergency plan
   
4-4.23   Amendment: Buildings other than one- and two-family dwellings, Group
R-3 and R-4 buildings and townhomes
   
4-4.24   ADDED: Remote annunciation
   
4-4.25   Amendment: Monitoring
   
4-4.26   Reserved
   
4-4.27   Administrative fines
Sec. 4-4.01. Adoption of the California Fire Code and the International Fire
Code.
   The City Council of the City of Ontario hereby adopts by reference with
certain amendments, additions, deletions and exceptions, the 2022 California
Fire Code with errata, incorporating therein the 2021 International Fire Code,
also referred to as Part 9 of Title 24 of the California Code of Regulations,
with included appendices, as published by the International Code Council and
adopted by the California State Building Standards Commission, (hereinafter
also "this Code" or the "Ontario Fire Code",) for the purpose of prescribing
regulations governing conditions hazardous to life and property from fire,
hazardous materials or explosion.
(§ 2, Ord. 3147, eff. December 19, 2019, as amended by § 2, Ord. 3226, eff.
January 5, 2023)
Sec. 4-4.02. Cost recovery.
   (a)   Expense for responding to and securing an emergency.
      (1)   Fire suppression, investigation and rescue or emergency medical
costs shall be recoverable in accordance with Health and Safety Code Sections
13009 and 13009.1.
         (i)   The date, time and place of the hearing to be held on the claim
for reimbursement with a statement describing the rights of the person or
entity charged and the procedures for presenting evidence at said hearing; and
         (ii)   The Chief's account of the sum claimed to be due.
      (2)   Any person or entity who negligently or intentionally, or in
violation of law, causes an emergency response, including but not limited to, a
traffic accident or spill of toxic or flammable fluids or chemicals, is liable
for the costs of responding, securing and investigating such emergency,
including those costs set out in Health and Safety Code Section 13009 et seq.
and Government Code Section 53150 et seq. Any expense incurred by the Fire
Department for responding to, securing, or investigating such an emergency
situation shall constitute a debt of the person or entity responsible and shall
be subject to collection by the City in the same manner as an obligation under
contract, expressed or implied.
      (3)   The expense of responding to, securing and investigating any
emergency or hazard which is the result of a violation of this Code or any
other code, ordinance or state law, or any damages caused by malicious mischief
requiring any corrective or preventive actions by the Fire Department shall be
a charge against the person(s) or entity whose violation caused the emergency
and/or damage. Damages caused by such emergency or action may constitute a debt
of such person(s) or entity responsible and shall be collectible as provided
below:
         (i)   Liability for hazardous activities and conditions. The Chief may
also impose the reasonable cost of fire prevention, fire suppression, incident
investigation and protection of the public
from other safety hazards when a fire or hazardous condition results from any
of the following activities or conditions:
            (A)   The manufacture, transportation, storage, handling, or
spilling, of hazardous chemicals, flammable or combustible liquids, explosives,
or blasting agents as defined in this Code; and
            (B)   The failure to correct a hazardous condition for which a
"Notice of Violation," or equivalent notice, has been previously given by the
Chief; and
            (C)   The use of welding equipment, cutting torches, tar pot, or
other open flame devices; and
            (D)   Permitting or causing the accumulation of hazardous or
flammable materials on property; and
            (E)   Setting of a fire or allowing a fire to be set in violation
of any code, ordinance, law or regulation; and
            (F)   The possession of, or causing illegal fireworks, explosive
devices or destructive devices to ignite, explode or detonate; and
            (G)   Creating, allowing, or maintaining a hazard as stated in
California Fire Code Section 112.2.
         (ii)   Determination of costs. Whenever the Chief determines that the
fire department or other public agency has incurred costs for fire suppression,
fire prevention, or protection of the public from a fire or other hazardous
condition that results from the activities or conditions described in
subsection (a), the Chief shall:
            (A)   Calculate the costs incurred;
            (B)   Identify the person(s) or entity to be charged for those
costs; and
            (C)   Send a report with this information to the City Clerk.
         (iii)   Method of calculation. In determining costs to be charged a
responsible person or entity, the Chief shall include all necessary
expenditures to correct the hazardous condition or extinguish the fire,
including, but not limited to the following:
            (A)   The cost of personnel;
            (B)   The cost of extinguishing agents;
            (C)   The reasonable value of the use of City equipment;
            (D)   The cost incurred for the use of any private contractors to
mitigate or remove the hazard or condition; and
            (E)   Any and all administrative costs incurred pursuant to the fee
schedule as set by resolution duly adopted by the City Council.
         (iv)   Reimbursement hearing. The City Clerk shall, thereupon, set the
report and account received by the Chief for hearing before the City Council at
a regular or adjourned regular meeting to be held at least fourteen (14)
calendar days after the date the Clerk mails the notice to the responsible
person(s) or entity. The City Clerk shall send by regular mail a notice of said
hearing to the person or entity to be charged at the person's or entity's
address as shown on the latest equalized tax assessor's roll, or as otherwise
known to the City.
         (v)   Notice to person charged. The notice sent by the City Clerk to
the responsible person(s) or entity shall contain:
            (A)   The name of the person(s) or entity sought to be charged;
            (B)   The location, date and time of the incident upon which the
claim for reimbursement is based;
            (C)   The amount of, and the basis upon which the claim for
reimbursement is made.
         (vi)   Procedure for hearing before the City Council. At the hearing
on the Chief's accounting of the costs and other evidence upon which
reimbursement is sought, the City Council shall hear and consider evidence by
the person or entity against which reimbursement is sought. The City Council
shall thereafter confirm or disallow the account, all or in part, and set forth
in a resolution the amount of the account confirmed, if any. Thereafter, any
amount confirmed by resolution of the City Council shall become a debt owing to
the City of Ontario and shall be collectible by the City in the same manner as
in the case of an obligation under contract expressed or implied.
   (b)   Service fees.
      (1)   Permit fees. Any person, establishment, business, occupancy, or
process requiring any permit or utilizing any special service or activity
performed by or under the direction of the Fire Department shall compensate the
City for the cost of such service or activity, in accordance with the adopted
fee and charge schedule and any departmental policy.
      (2)   Service fee refunds. The Fire Chief is authorized to refund any fee
paid hereunder which is determined to be erroneously paid or collected.
         (i)   The Fire Chief is authorized to refund eighty percent (80%) of
the service fee paid when the permittee has performed no work nor commenced an
operation for which a permit was issued in accordance with this chapter.
         (ii)   The Fire Chief is authorized to refund eighty percent (80%) of
the plan review fee paid when an application for a permit for which a plan
review fee has been paid is withdrawn or canceled before any plan review is
completed.
         (iii)   The Fire Chief shall not authorize the refund of any fee paid
except upon written application filed by the original permittee not later than
one hundred eighty (180) days after the date the fee was paid. Such written
application shall state the reasons for the refund request and be accompanied
with a receipt of payment.
(§ 2, Ord. 3147, eff. December 19, 2019, as amended by § 2, Ord. 3226, eff.
January 5, 2023)
Sec. 4-4.03. Establishment of the limits of districts in which stationary
containers of flammable cryogenic fluids are prohibited.
   The limits referred to in Section 5806.2 of the 2022 California Fire Code in
which the storage of flammable cryogenic fluids in stationary containers is
prohibited are hereby established as follows:
   (a)   All areas and zoning districts of the City except the General
Industrial District of the City Development Code, and with the specific
approval of the Fire Chief.
(§ 2, Ord. 3147, eff. December 19, 2019, as amended by § 2, Ord. 3226, eff.
January 5, 2023)
Sec. 4-4.04. Establishment of the limits of districts in which storage of
flammable or combustible Class I and Class II liquids in outside unprotected
aboveground tanks is prohibited.
   The limits referred to in Sections 5704.2.9.6.1 and 5706.2.4.4 of the 2022
California Fire Code in which the storage of flammable or combustible liquids
in outside aboveground unprotected tanks are prohibited are hereby established
as follows:
   (a)   In all areas of the City unless upon specific written findings, the
Chief determines that the installation of flammable and combustible unprotected
aboveground storage tanks or below grade vaulted tanks will not create a hazard
to occupants and property owners in the surrounding area.
(§ 2, Ord. 3147, eff. December 19, 2019, as amended by § 2, Ord. 3226, eff.
January 5, 2023)
Sec. 4-4.05. Establishment of the limits in which storage of liquefied
petroleum gases is restricted for the protection of heavily populated or
congested areas.
   The limits referred to in Section 6104.2 of 2022 California Fire Code, in
which storage of liquefied petroleum gas is restricted, are hereby established
as follows:
   (a)   All areas and zoning districts of the City except the General
Industrial District of the City zoning ordinance, and with the specific
approval of the Fire Chief.
(§ 2, Ord. 3147, eff. December 19, 2019, as amended by § 2, Ord. 3226, eff.
January 5, 2023)
Sec. 4-4.06. Amendments to the 2022 California Fire Code (CFC) and 2021
International Fire Code (IFC).
   Designated portions of the 2022 California Fire Code (CFC) and 2021
International Fire Code (IFC)
are amended and changed as set forth in §§ 4-4.07 through 4-4.28.
(§ 2, Ord. 3147, eff. December 19, 2019, as amended by § 2, Ord. 3226, eff.
January 5, 2023)
Sec. 4-4.07. Amendment: Referenced codes and standards.
   Section 102.7 of the 2022 CFC is amended to read as follows:
   102.7 Referenced codes and standards. The codes and standards referenced in
this code shall be those that are listed in Chapter 80, and such codes and
standards shall be considered to be part of the requirements of this code to
the prescribed extent of each such reference and as further regulated by
Sections 102.7.1 and 102.7.2. The Fire Chief also hereby authorizes the use of
the Ontario Fire Department Fire Protection Standards for the purposes of
interpreting and clarifying requirements of this Code and its referenced codes
and standards.
(§ 2, Ord. 3147, eff. December 19, 2019, as amended by § 2, Ord. 3226, eff.
January 5, 2023)
Sec. 4-4.08. Amendment: General.
   Section 103.1 of the 2018 IFC is amended to read as follows:
   103.1 General. The Fire Code as adopted and amended herein shall be enforced
by the Bureau of Fire Prevention of the Fire Department of the City of Ontario
which is hereby established and shall operate under the supervision of the
Chief of the Fire Department.
(§ 2, Ord. 3147, eff. December 19, 2019, as amended by § 2, Ord. 3226, eff.
January 5, 2023)
Sec. 4-4.09. Amendment: Appointment.
   Section 103.2 of the 2022 CFC is amended to read as follows:
   103.2 Appointment. The Fire Marshal shall be responsible for operating the
Bureau of Fire Prevention and shall be appointed by the Fire Chief on the basis
of examination to determine his or her qualifications.
(§ 2, Ord. 3147, eff. December 19, 2019, as amended by § 2, Ord. 3226, eff.
January 5, 2023)
Sec. 4-4.10. Amendment: Liability and legal defense.
   Section 104.7 and 104.7.1 of the CFC of the IFC is amended to read as
follows:
   104.7 and 104.7.1 Liability and legal defense. The Chief and other
individuals charged by the Chief with the enforcement of this Code or any other
official duties, acting in good faith and without malice in the discharge of
their duties, shall not thereby be rendered personally liable for any damage
that may accrue to persons or property as a result of any act or by reason of
any act or omission in the discharge of their duties. Any suit brought against
the Chief or such individuals because of such act or omission performed in the
enforcement of any provision of such Code or other pertinent laws or ordinances
implemented through the enforcement of this Code or enforced by the code
enforcement agency shall be defended by this jurisdiction until final
termination of such proceedings, and any judgment resulting there from shall be
assumed by this jurisdiction subject to the provisions of Government Code
Section 825.
(§ 2, Ord. 3147, eff. December 19, 2019, as amended by § 2, Ord. 3226, eff.
January 5, 2023)
Sec. 4-4.11. Amendment: Investigations.
   Section 104.11 of the CFC is amended to read as follows:
   104.11 Investigations. The fire code official, the fire department or other
responsible authority shall have the authority to investigate the cause, origin
and circumstances of any fire, explosion or other hazardous condition.
Information that could be related to trade secrets or processes shall not be
made part of the public record, except as directed by a court of law. Fire
Investigators shall have the powers of a police officer in performing their
duties under this code.
(§ 2, Ord. 3147, eff. December 19, 2019, as amended by § 2, Ord. 3226, eff.
January 5, 2023)
Sec. 4-4.12. Amendment: Pallets.
   Section 105.5.55 is added to the CFC to read as follows:
   105.5.55 Pallets. An operational permit is required for idle storage,
handling, repair or manufacturing of combustible pallets in excess of one
thousand (1,000) units at any one site.
(§ 2, Ord. 3147, eff. December 19, 2019, as amended by § 2, Ord. 3226, eff.
January 5, 2023)
Sec. 4-4.13. Amendment: Board of Appeals.
   Section 111.1 of the CFC is amended to read as follows:
   111.1 Board of Appeals Established. The City Council of the City of Ontario
may hear and decide appeals of orders, decisions or determinations made by the
fire code official relative to the application and interpretation of this code,
pursuant to Chapter 4 of Title 1 of the City of Ontario Municipal Code. An
application for appeal shall be submitted in writing, in a timely manner, and
shall be based on a claim that the intent of this code or the rules, standards
and interpretations adopted hereunder have been incorrectly interpreted, the
provisions of this code do not fully apply, or an equivalent method of
protection or safety is proposed. The Council shall have no authority to waive
requirements of this Code. The City Council shall set the matter for hearing
and shall give written notice to the appellant. The fire code official shall
act as staff in advising the City Council during such hearing. A written copy
of the decision shall be mailed to the concerned parties after the conclusion
of such proceedings.
(§ 2, Ord. 3147, eff. December 19, 2019, as amended by § 2, Ord. 3226, eff.
January 5, 2023)
Sec. 4-4.14. Amendment: Violation penalties.
   Section 112.4 of the CFC is amended to read as follows:
   112.4 Violation penalties.  Any person who violates any provision of the
Fire Code as adopted and amended herein or fails to comply therewith, or who
violates or fails to comply with any order made thereunder, or who builds in
violation of any detailed statement of specifications or plans submitted and
approved thereunder, or any certificate or permit issued thereunder, and from
which no appeal has been taken, or who fails to comply with such an order as
affirmed or modified by the Board of Appeals or by a court of competent
jurisdiction, within the required time, shall severally for each and every such
violation and noncompliance, respectively, be guilty of an infraction or a
misdemeanor, punishable as set forth in Chapter 2 of Title 1 of the Ontario
Municipal Code. The imposition of one penalty for any violation shall not
excuse the violation or permit it to continue; and all such persons shall be
required to correct or remedy such violations or defects within a reasonable
time; and when not otherwise specified, each day that a prohibited condition is
maintained shall constitute a separate offense. The application of this penalty
shall not be held to prevent the enforced removal of prohibited conditions.
(§ 2, Ord. 3147, eff. December 19, 2019, as amended by § 2, Ord. 3226, eff.
January 5, 2023)
Sec. 4-4.15. Amendment: Failure to comply.
   Section 113.4 of the CFC is amended to read as follows:
   113.4 Failure to Comply. Any person who shall continue any work after having
been served with a stop work order, except that work as that person is directed
to perform to remove a violation or unsafe condition, shall be guilty of a
misdemeanor, punishable as set forth in Chapter 2 of Title 1 of the Ontario
Municipal Code. Each day that any work is done under a stop work order shall
constitute a separate offense.
(§ 2, Ord. 3147, eff. December 19, 2019, as amended by § 2, Ord. 3226, eff.
January 5, 2023)
Sec. 4-4.16. Amendment: Dimensions.
   Section 503.2.1 of the CFC is amended to read as follows:
   503.2.1 Dimensions. Fire apparatus access roads shall have an unobstructed
width of not less than 24 feet, exclusive of shoulders or curbs, except for
approved security gates in accordance with section 503.6, and an unobstructed
vertical clearance of not less than 13 feet 6 inches.
(§ 2, Ord. 3147, eff. December 19, 2019, as amended by § 2, Ord. 3226, eff.
January 5, 2023)
Sec. 4-4.17. Amendment: Obstruction of fire apparatus access roads.
   Section 503.4 of the CFC is amended to read as follows:
   503.4 Obstruction of fire apparatus access roads.  The required width of a
fire apparatus access road shall not be obstructed in any manner, including
parking of vehicles. Access roads, private roadways and public roadways shall
be provided and maintained in a passable condition at all times. Any
obstruction or impediment to reasonable access may be removed by any public
safety agency with the expense of such removal to be borne by the owner of the
roadway, or in the case of an obstructing vehicle or object, by the owner of
said vehicle or object.
(§ 2, Ord. 3147, eff. December 19, 2019, as amended by § 2, Ord. 3226, eff.
January 5, 2023)
Sec. 4-4.18. Amendment: Two points of connection.
   Section 507.5.1.2 of the CFC is added to read as follows:
   507.5.1.2 Redundant water supplies. New on-site fire protection water
systems that serve buildings greater than 100,000 square feet in floor area
shall have two separate remote connections to the public water system designed
and constructed in accordance with recognized standards. The locations of such
water connections shall be approved by the fire code official.
(§ 2, Ord. 3147, eff. December 19, 2019, as amended by § 2, Ord. 3226, eff.
January 5, 2023)
Sec. 4-4.19. Amendment: General.
   Section 2808.1 of the CFC is amended to read as follows:
   2808.1 General. The storage and processing of wood chips, hogged materials,
fines, compost, solid biomass feedstock, and raw product produced from yard
waste, debris, argo industrial, recycling, and green waste processing
facilities shall comply with Sections 2808.2 through 2808.10.
(§ 2, Ord. 3147, eff. December 19, 2019, as amended by § 2, Ord. 3226, eff.
January 5, 2023)
Sec. 4-4.20. Amendment: Size of piles.
   Section 2808.3 of the CFC is amended to read as follows:
   2808.3 Size of piles. Piles shall not exceed 15 feet in height, 50 feet in
width and 250 feet in length.
      Exception: The fire code official is authorized to allow the pile size to
be increased when in accordance with section 2808.3.1.
(§ 2, Ord. 3147, eff. December 19, 2019, as amended by § 2, Ord. 3226, eff.
January 5, 2023)
Sec. 4-4.21. Amendment: Combustible waste.
   Section 2808.5 of the CFC is amended to read as follows:
   2808.5 Combustible waste. The storage, accumulation and handling of
combustible materials and control of vegetation shall comply with Chapter 3.
All incoming materials shall be ground or incorporated within 10 days. All
incoming materials shall be incorporated into windrows within 15 days. Internal
temperatures of stockpiles shall be continuously monitored.
(§ 2, Ord. 3147, eff. December 19, 2019, as amended by § 2, Ord. 3226, eff.
January 5, 2023)
Sec. 4-4.22. Amendment: Emergency plan.
   Section 2808.10 of the CFC is amended to read as follows:
   2808.10 Emergency plan. The owner or operator shall develop a plan for
monitoring, controlling and extinguishing spot fires and submit the plan to the
Ontario Fire Department Fire Prevention Bureau for review and approval. The
plan shall include, but not be limited to methods and policies for:
      1.   Monitoring, controlling and extinguishing spot fires.
      2.   Emergency contact information for personnel who are able to respond
to location 24 hours a day, 7 days a week.
      3.   Onsite equipment to assist with firefighting operations, such as
dozers, water tenders, and large tractors.
      4.   Special considerations for fire safety during extreme weather
conditions.
      5.   Method of providing adequate onsite water supply for firefighting
operation. Water system shall have a minimum delivery/replenish capability of
250 gallons per minute for 2 hours.
(§ 2, Ord. 3147, eff. December 19, 2019, as amended by § 2, Ord. 3226, eff.
January 5, 2023)
Sec. 4-4.23. Amendment: Buildings other than one- and two-family dwellings,
Group R-3 and R-4 buildings and townhomes.
   Table B105.2 of Appendix B is hereby deleted and Appendix B Section B105.2
of the CFC is amended to read as follows:
   B105.2 Buildings other than one- and two-family dwellings. The minimum fire-
flow and flow duration for buildings other than one- and two-family dwellings,
Group R-3 and R-4 buildings and townhouses shall be as specified in Table
B105.1(2).
      Exceptions:
         1.   A reduction in required fire-flow of up to 50 percent, as
approved, is allowed when the building is provided with an approved sprinkler
system installed in accordance with Section 903.3.1.1 or 903.3.1.2. The
resulting fire-flow shall not be less than 1,500 gallons per minute (5678 L/
min) for the prescribed duration as specified in Table B105.1(2).
         2.   [SFM] Group B, S-2 and U occupancies having a floor area not
exceeding 1,000 square feet, primarily constructed of noncombustible exterior
walls with wood or steel roof framing, having a Class A roof assembly, with
uses limited to the following or similar uses:
            2.1.   California State Parks buildings of an accessory nature
(restrooms).
            2.2.   Safety roadside rest areas, (SRRA), public restrooms.
            2.3.   Truck inspection facilities, (TIF), CHP office space and
vehicle inspection bays.
            2.4.   Sand/salt storage buildings, storage of sand and salt.
(§ 2, Ord. 3147, eff. December 19, 2019, as amended by § 2, Ord. 3226, eff.
January 5, 2023)
Sec. 4-4.24. ADDED: Remote Annunciation.
   Section 903.4.2.1 of the CFC is hereby added to read as follows:
   903.4.2.1 A dedicated fire alarm control unit for the fire sprinkler
monitoring system shall be provided and located in an approved location, near
the main entrance into the building for fire department use. An approved remote
annunciator may be installed at the approved location in lieu of the fire alarm
control unit. Zone indication on the remote annunciator may be required by the
fire code official.
(§ 2, Ord. 3226, eff. January 5, 2023)
Sec. 4-4.25. Amendment: Monitoring.
   Section 904.3.5 of the CFC is hereby amended to read as follows:
   904.3.5 When a building fire alarm system or sprinkler monitoring system is
installed, automatic fire- extinguishing systems shall be monitored by the
building's fire alarm control unit in accordance with NFPA 72.
(§ 2, Ord. 3226, eff. January 5, 2023)
Sec. 4-4.26. Reserved.
Sec. 4-4.27. Administrative fines.
   (a)   In addition to any other remedy available at law, any person in
violation of this chapter is subject to an administrative fine as defined
below:
      (1)   A fine not exceeding one hundred dollars ($100.00) for the first
occurrence of each separate violation of the Ontario Fire Code;
      (2)   A fine not exceeding two hundred dollars ($200.00) for a second
violation of the same
Ontario Fire Code provision within one (1) year from the date of the first
violation.
      (3)   A fine not exceeding one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) for a third
or more violation(s) of the same Ontario Fire Code provision within one (1)
year from the date of the first violation.
   (b)   The provisions and procedures concerning administrative citations set
forth in Chapter 5 of Title 1 of the Ontario Municipal Code shall apply to
administrative citations issued for violations of this chapter. To the extent
there are any conflicts between the provisions of the two chapters, the
provisions of this chapter shall supersede and control administrative citations
issued for violations of this chapter.
(§ 2, Ord. 3232, eff. January 19, 2023)
CHAPTER 5: TAXICABS AND AUTOMOBILES FOR HIRE
   
4-5.01   Definitions
   
4-5.02   Compliance with provisions
   
4-5.03   Establishing performance criteria
   
4-5.04   Owner’s Permits: Required; Permit Fees
   
4-5.05   Public convenience and necessity
   
4-5.06   Owner’s Permits: Applications; Procedure; Fee; Form
   
4-5.07   Annual Review of Owner’s Permits
   
4-5.08   Owner’s Permits: Modifications
   
4-5.09   Owner’s Permits: Transferability
   
4-5.10   Driver’s Permits: Required
   
4-5.11   Driver’s Permits: Applications; Granting; Conditions
   
4-5.12   Driver’s Permits: Form
   
4-5.13   Driver’s Permits: Posting
   
4-5.14   Operators: Driver’s licenses
   
4-5.15   Rules and Regulations
   
4-5.16   Insurance
   
4-5.17   Taximeter
   
4-5.18   Stands: Permits Required
   
4-5.19   Rates
   
4-5.20   Refusal to Pay Fares
   
4-5.21   Refusal to Carry Passengers
   
4-5.22   Parking on Euclid Avenue
   
4-5.23   Transporting Persons for Unlawful Purposes
   
4-5.24   Disqualification
   
4-5.25   Permits: Revocation
   
4-5.26   Conflicting Ordinances Repealed
   
4-5.27   Severability
Sec. 4-5.01. Definitions.
   For the purposes of this chapter, unless otherwise apparent from the
context, certain words and phrases used in this chapter are defined as follows:
   (a)   “Automobile for hire” shall mean and include every automobile or
motor-propelled vehicle by means of which passengers are transported for hire
upon any public street in the City, not over a regular or defined route, and
irrespective of whether the operation extends beyond the boundary limits of the
City or not. “Automobile for hire” shall not include vehicles defined as
taxicabs in subsection (b) of this section nor vehicles of transportation
companies, as defined in subsection (f) of this section. Further, “automobile
for hire” shall not include automobiles used exclusively by or under written
agreement with a hotel, motel, airport, hospital, club or other such entity for
the transportation of its members, guests, patients or clients; provided, that
each vehicle under such agreement will have the same distinctive visible
outside painted appearance as each other vehicle under the agreement to any
such hotel, motel, airport, hospital, club, or other such entity.
   (b)   “Taxicab” shall mean and include every automobile or motor-propelled
vehicle by means of which passengers are transported for hire upon any public
street in the City, not over a regular or defined route, and irrespective of
whether the operation extends beyond the boundary limits of the City or not,
where the charge for such transportation is measured by the distance traveled
or by the time required for such transportation, or both. “Taxicab” shall not
include vehicles of transportation companies, as defined in subsection (d) of
this section.
   (c)   “Taximeter” shall mean a mechanical instrument or device by which the
charge for hire of a passenger-carrying, motor-propelled vehicle is
mechanically registered, calculated, and/or indicated by means of figures in
accordance with the distance traveled or the time elapsed, or waiting time, or
both.
   (d)   “Taxi Permit” shall mean the permit issued by the Chief of Police to
an applicant to operate taxis or limousine service in the City.
(§ 2, Ord. 2668, eff. July 16, 1988, as amended by § 1, Ord. 2678, eff.
February 18, 1999 and § 2, Ord. 3018, eff. June 19, 2015)
Sec. 4-5.02. Compliance with provisions.
   It shall be unlawful to operate, or cause to be operated, an automobile for
hire or a taxicab upon any public street within the City without complying with
the provisions of this chapter.
(§ 2, Ord. 2668, eff. July 16, 1998, as amended by § 2, Ord. 3018, eff. June
19, 2015)
Sec. 4-5.03. Establishing performance criteria.
   The City Council shall, from time to time, develop objective performance
criteria to be used in evaluating permit requests for the awarding of
additional permits to operate taxi cabs in the City of Ontario. The objective
performance criteria shall be established by separate resolution and contain
minimum performance standards to be met by permit applicants. The resolution
adopting the objective performance criteria shall also identify the number of
points to be awarded to an applicant for exceeding the minimum performance
standards identified. The Chief of Police shall award future permits to the
most qualified permittee accumulating the most points.
(§ 2, Ord. 2668, eff. July 15, 1998, as amended by § 3, Ord. 2678, eff.
February 18, 1999 and § 2, Ord. 3018, eff. June 19, 2015)
Sec. 4-5.04. Owner’s Permits: Required; Permit Fees.
   It shall be unlawful to operate, or cause to be operated, an automobile for
hire or taxicab upon any public street within the City without first having
obtained a permit to do so, in accordance with the provisions of this chapter,
and without first paying the appropriate permit fee as established by
resolution of the City Council.
(§ 2, Ord. 2668, eff. July 16, 1998, as amended by § 4, Ord. 2678, eff.
February 18, 1999 and § 2, Ord. 3018, eff. June 19, 2015)
Sec. 4-5.05. Public convenience and necessity.
   (a)   Between June 1 and June 30, inclusive, of each year, or within thirty
(30) days of the expiration of an existing permit, any person desiring to
obtain a permit to operate automobiles for hire or taxicabs shall submit a
letter to the City Clerk requesting the City Council determine that the public
convenience and necessity require that a permit be issued or renewed. The
letter shall include information demonstrating why the public convenience and
necessity require awarding additional permits or renewing existing permits.
Within thirty (30) days of receipt of the letter, the matter shall be set for
hearing and all existing permittees shall be notified by letter at least ten
(10) days prior to the hearing. No additional permits shall be granted until
the City Council shall have determined by resolution that the public
convenience and necessity require the issuance of additional permits.
   (b)   In determining whether the public convenience or necessity require
additional permits, the City Council shall be guided by the following:
      (1)   the transportation needs of residents and visitors of the City;
      (2)   the number of taxicabs and limousines, and other automobiles for
hire already operational in the City;
      (3)   whether existing transportation services are adequate to meet the
public need;
      (4)   the probable effect of additional taxicabs or automobiles for hire
on local traffic conditions;
      (5)   the effect of increased competition on the revenues of existing
permittees and on the wages, compensation, hours and conditions of service of
existing licensed drivers; and
      (6)   other relevant factors.
   (c)   Nothing in this section shall prohibit the Council from determining
that the public convenience and necessity require additional permits be issued
at any time upon finding that emergency circumstances and conditions exist that
necessitate granting additional permits for the health, welfare, and benefit of
the residents of the City.
(§ 2, Ord. 2668, eff. July 16, 1988, as amended by § 5, Ord. 2678, eff.
February 18, 1999 and § 2, Ord. 3018, eff. June 19, 2015)
Sec. 4-5.06. Owner’s Permits: Applications; Procedure; Fee; Form.
   If the City Council determines that the public convenience and necessity
require the issuance of additional permits, it shall direct the Chief of Police
to accept applications from all persons desiring to obtain such permits. The
applicants shall pay to the City a nonrefundable fee in an amount set by
resolution of the City Council and shall make an application for such permit to
the Chief of Police. The applications shall set forth the following
information:
   (a)   The name, residence and businesses addresses and present occupation of
the applicant;
   (b)   If the applicant is a corporation, the names and present occupation(s)
of its principal officers;
   (c)   If the applicant is a partnership, association, or fictitious company,
the names of the partners or persons comprising the association or company with
the residence and businesses addresses of each;
   (d)   A statement as to whether the permit is desired for an automobile for
hire or a taxicab;
   (e)   A description of every motor vehicle which the applicant proposes to
use, giving:
      (1)   The make, model, body style and year;
      (2)   The motor and serial numbers;
      (3)   The State license number; and
      (4)   The seating capacity.
   (f)   The street number and exact location of the place where the applicant
proposes to stand each such automobile;
   (g)   The distinctive color scheme, name, monogram, or insignia proposed to
be used on such automobile;
   (h)   A financial statement prepared by a certified public accountant,
showing net worth and results of operation for the prior twelve (12) months
and/or last fiscal year;
   (i)   A statement as to whether the applicant, person or corporation has any
unpaid judgments, and if so, the nature and amount of any unpaid or unbonded
judgment;
   (j)   A statement of any bankruptcies, either personal or business,
including the number, court and date of discharge;
   (k)   A statement of experience of the applicant in the operation of
taxicabs; and
   (l)   A statement of facts indicating how the applicant meets the objective
performance criteria established by resolution of the City Council.
   A permit awarded to an operator by the Chief of Police shall state that the
permit is granted for a term of five (5) years, shall indicate that the permit
is nonexclusive and nonrenewable, and shall include a statement that any
violation of the terms of this chapter may be grounds for revoking the permit.
(§ 2, Ord. 2668, eff. July 16, 1998, as amended by § 6, Ord. 2678, eff.
February 18, 1999 and § 2, Ord. 3018, eff. June 19, 2015)
Sec. 4-5.07. Annual Review of Owner’s Permits.
   Notwithstanding the 5 year approval period granted, all owner's permits
shall be subject to review by the Chief of Police, or designee, on an annual
basis occurring on the anniversary of the granting of the permit. Such review
shall be limited to determining whether the owner is complying with the
provisions and standards contained in this chapter. The Chief of Police, or
designee, may refer the latter to the City Council for review in accordance
with the provisions contained in § 4-5.25 upon finding that a permittee is not
complying with the provisions and standards set forth in this chapter.
(§ 2, Ord. 2668, eff. July 16, 1998, as amended by § 2, Ord. 3018, eff. June
19, 2015)
Sec. 4-5.08. Owner’s Permits: Modifications.
   In the event any permittee desires to change his schedule of rates, or
desires to change the color scheme, name, monogram, or insignia used on the
automobile for hire or taxicab, he shall make application for permission to do
so from the City Council, which permission shall be granted if, in the
discretion of the City Council, it deems the public interest, necessity, and
convenience will be served by such change and if the permittee has complied
with all the provisions of this chapter.
(§ 2, Ord. 2668, eff. July 16, 1998, as amended by § 7, Ord. 2678, eff.
February 18, 1999 and § 2, Ord. 3018, eff. June 19, 2015)
Sec. 4-5.09. Owner’s Permits: Transferability.
   No permit issued pursuant to the provisions of this chapter shall be
transferable, either by contract or operation of law, without the permission of
the City Council having been first obtained, and any such attempted transfer
shall be sufficient cause for revocation of such permit.
(§ 2, Ord. 2668, eff. July 16, 1998, as amended by § 2, Ord. 3018, eff. June
19, 2015)
Sec. 4-5.10. Driver’s Permits: Required.
   It shall be unlawful for any permittee to permit a taxicab to be driven for
hire by any person who has not obtained a permit from the Chief of Police to
operate as a taxicab driver.
(§ 2, Ord. 2668, eff. July 16, 1998, as amended by § 8, Ord. 2678, eff.
February 18, 1999 and § 2, Ord. 3018, eff. June 19, 2015)
Sec. 4-5.11. Driver’s Permits: Applications; Granting; Conditions.
   Driver’s permit applications (including renewal and replacement) shall be on
the form provided by the Chief of Police Chief and shall become void upon
termination of employment by the stated employer, who shall notify the Chief of
Police upon termination and cause the permit to be returned to the City. First-
time applications shall be accompanied by a non-refundable application fee set
by resolution of the City Council. Driver’s permits issued upon approval of
applications shall remain in force for a period of one (1) year from the date
of issue. Fees for replacement and renewal driver’s permit shall also be set by
resolution of the City Council.
   As a condition to granting or renewing a taxicab driver’s permit, the Chief
of Police is hereby empowered to require the applicant:
   (a)   To be fingerprinted;
   (b)   To undergo background checks by the California Department of Motor
Vehicles and any other agency deemed appropriate to determine the safety
practices of the drivers;
   (c)   To undergo testing for controlled substances and alcohol pursuant to
Cal. Gov’t Code § 53075.5;
   (d)   To submit a statement of the applicant’s physical condition, including
statement of whether an applicant has ever had epilepsy, blackout periods,
fainting spells, or been addicted to the use of alcohol, narcotics, or other
form of dangerous drugs. Based upon such statement, an applicant may be
required to submit a medical report and have a valid medical certificate. In
such a situation, the applicant for a driver’s permit may be granted a
temporary permit for thirty (30) days pending receipt of a valid certificate.
Upon submittal of the valid medical certificate and acceptance by the Chief of
Police, a regular permit shall be issued to an applicant if all other
requirements of this chapter have been met; and
   (e)   No driver’s permit shall be issued to any person:
      (1)   Who is subject to epilepsy, fainting or loss of consciousness by
reason of chronic medical condition;
      (2)   Who is addicted to the use of narcotics;
      (3)   Who is known to have been a user of dangerous drugs or alcohol to
an excessive degree;
      (4)   Whose driving record indicates five (5) violations of traffic laws
involving moving vehicles within two (2) years preceding the date of
application;
      (5)   Who has willfully furnished false information on this application
or omitted to furnish all information requested on said application forms;
      (6)   Who has been convicted of driving while under the influence of
intoxicating liquor or narcotic drugs, or both, within three (3) years of the
date of application; or
      (7)   Who has been convicted of a felony or any crime involving moral
turpitude within five (5) years preceding the date of application.
   The Chief of Police is also hereby empowered to accept a permit from another
jurisdiction in lieu of the submittal of a permit application, upon a showing
by the applicant that the jurisdiction contains substantially the same permit
requirements.
(§ 2, Ord. 2668, eff. July 16, 1998, as amended by § 2, Ord. 3018, eff. June
19, 2015)
Sec. 4-5.12. Driver’s Permits: Form.
   Such taxicab driver’s permit shall contain all the information contained on
the operator’s driver’s license and shall include a picture of the driver.
(§ 2, Ord. 2668, eff. July 16, 1998, as amended by § 2, Ord. 3018, eff. June
19, 2015)
Sec. 4-5.13. Driver’s Permits: Posting.
   The taxicab driver’s permit shall be posted in a conspicuous place in the
vehicle which the driver is operating at all times while he is operating the
same for the purpose of carrying passengers for hire.
(§ 2, Ord. 2668, eff. July 16, 1998, as amended by § 2, Ord. 3018, eff. June
19, 2015)
Sec. 4-5.14. Operators: Driver’s Licenses.
   It shall be unlawful for any permittee to permit a taxicab to be driven for
hire by any person who has not complied with the requirements of the California
Vehicle Code requiring a valid driver's license, within the appropriate
automobile classification.
(§ 2, Ord. 2668, eff. July 16, 1998, as amended by § 9, Ord. 2678, eff.
February 18, 1999 and § 2, Ord. 3018, eff. June 19, 2015)
Sec. 4-5.15. Rules and Regulations.
   The rules and regulations set forth in this section shall be observed by all
persons operating taxicabs and automobiles for hire, and it shall be unlawful
to operate such taxicabs or automobiles for hire in violation of any such rules
and regulations.
   (a)   Uniforms and driver’s appearance. Any person operating a taxicab or
automobile for hire shall wear a distinctive uniform with an emblem, badge or
insignia and similar color scheme identifying the driver’s association with an
operating company licensed by the City. The driver’s uniforms shall be clean
and in good, non-faded condition. Drivers shall be well groomed and shall not
wear t-shirts or tank tops without collars. All persons operating taxicabs and
automobiles for hire in the City shall take all efforts to be neat, clean and
well groomed in their appearance and attire at all times while operating a
vehicle regulated by this chapter.
   (b)   Stopping at railroad crossing. All taxicabs and automobiles for hire
shall, while carrying passengers, come to a full stop within thirty (30) feet
of the nearest railroad rail before crossing any railroad track where no gates
are maintained.
   (c)   Stopping and standing. No automobile for hire or taxicab shall remain
standing upon any portion of any public street within the City except for
loading and unloading passengers, and then not for a period of more than five
(5) minutes, excepting such stand as may be designated by the City Council and
described in the application for a permit. The provisions of this subsection
shall not apply to any automobile for hire or taxicab while the same is engaged
by, and being paid for by, a passenger.
   (d)   Direct routes. The operator of a taxicab shall carry any passenger
engaging the same safely and expeditiously to his destination by the most
direct and accessible route.
   (e)   Soliciting patronage in certain places. No owner or operator of any
automobile for hire or taxicab shall solicit patronage for the same at the
Ontario International Airport or the Ontario Convention Center, from such
vehicle or within 100 yards therefrom, or upon any public street, except at
railroad and interurban depots and within the boundaries of the space to be
designated by the Chief of Police for such purposes.
   (f)   Mechanical condition. All automobiles for hire and taxicabs shall be
kept in good mechanical condition. It shall be the obligation of the permittee
to maintain and inspect vehicles on a regular basis. The City also reserves the
right to conduct periodic inspections or require that selected automobiles for
hire or taxicabs be inspected by an automobile service professional certified
by the State of California Bureau of Automotive Repair, and selected by the
City. The permittee agrees not to interfere in any way with any such
inspections. The City may charge a reasonable inspection and reinspection fees
to be set by resolution of the City Council to offset the costs of such
inspections and reinspections. At the discretion of the Chief of Police,
inspections performed by other jurisdictions may be accepted as satisfaction of
the City’s request.
   In addition to maintaining each taxicab and vehicle for hire in good
mechanical condition, each taxicab operator and vehicle permittee shall
maintain every taxicab free from:
      (1)    Unsightly dirt, grime and stains inside and out including the
trunk.
      (2)   Cracked or broken windows, headlights, taillights and interior
lights.
      (3)   Missing or broken door locks and handles and window cranks.
      (4)   Torn floor covering, headliner or upholstery.
      (5)   Unusual or unsightly paint defacement and body dents.
      (6)   Unauthorized signs or markings, such as bumper stickers.
      (7)   Missing parts such as hubcaps and moldings.
   The City shall have the right to prohibit the use of any vehicle determined,
after inspection, not to be in good mechanical condition or maintained in
accordance with the standards contained in this chapter.
   (g)   Sanitation. No automobile for hire or taxicab shall be operated unless
the passenger compartment is kept clean and in a sanitary condition.
   (h)   Interior lighting. Hours. Every automobile for hire and taxicab shall
be equipped with a light of not less than two (2) candlepower, within such
vehicle, so arranged to illuminate the entire passenger compartment. Such light
shall be constantly lighted at all times while the passenger is in such
vehicle, except when the vehicle is in motion, from one-half (1/2) hour after
sunset of any day until one-half (1/2) hour before sunrise of the following
day, and no shade or blinds shall be drawn over the windows of an automobile
for hire or taxicab while any passenger is in such vehicle.
   (i)   Operation by minors and certain other persons. No taxicab or
automobile for hire shall be operated by any person who:
      (1)   Is under the age of twenty-one (21) years;
      (2)   Does not have a valid driver’s license issued by the State of
California;
      (3)   Is under the influence of intoxicating liquors or narcotics;
      (4)   Is using tobacco in any form while operating such vehicle;
      (5)   Is for any reason whatever unable or incompetent to safely handle
such vehicle; or
      (6)   Operates such vehicle in violation of any law.
   (j)   Unfair competition. No owner or operator of any automobile for hire or
taxicab shall indulge in unfair competition with competitors or commit any
fraud upon the public or other persons engaged in the same business. The City
Council shall be the sole judge of what constitutes fraud or unfair competition
for the purposes of this subsection. Any complaint to the Council of any
violation of the provisions of this subsection shall only be heard upon a
written complaint specifying the act complained of and sworn to by the
complainant before a notary public or other officer authorized to administer
oaths.
   (k)   Posting of rates and provisions. Every taxicab shall have posted in
the passenger compartment visible to passengers a schedule of rates and charges
for the hire of such vehicle, and a copy of the provisions of this chapter.
   (l)   Overcharging. No charge shall be made by any operator or owner of a
taxicab or automobile for hire in excess of the rates approved by the City
Council and posted in the passenger compartment of such vehicle.
   (m)   Advertising automobiles for hire as taxicabs. No automobile for hire
shall be designated as a “taxicab” or by any word or phrase using the words
“taxi” or “taxicab” in any sign or advertising matter.
   (n)   Taxicab vehicles and equipment. Each taxicab will be equipped with the
following:
      (1)   A radio transmitter and receiver in good working order capable of
two-way communication with a dispatcher anywhere in the service area over the
taxicab operator’s assigned frequency.
      (2)   An approved rate card showing City approved rates plainly visible
to all passengers in the front and back seats of the vehicle.
      (3)   An approved complaint procedure card plainly visible to all
passengers in the front and back seats of the vehicle identifying the City and
the City’s complaint phone number, the City’s complaint email address, and the
web address to the complaint section on the City’s website. This information
shall be also placed at the bottom of any paper or electronic receipts provided
to passengers. A written log of complaints received by the City shall be
submitted to the City Council quarterly.
      (4)   A sufficient number of seat belts, properly bolted in place, at
least three sets in the rear and two sets in the front seat, to accommodate
each passenger and the driver.
      (5)   An emergency system to signal when a robbery is in progress or when
a felon suspect is in the taxicab.
      (6)   An approved fire extinguisher.
(§ 2, Ord. 2668, eff. July 16, 1998, as amended by § 10, Ord. 2678, eff.
February 18, 1999 and § 2, Ord. 3018, eff. June 19, 2015)
Sec. 4-5.16. Insurance.
   Before a permit shall be issued by the City, the applicant to whom a permit
shall have been awarded by the City Council, as provided in § 4-5.06 of this
chapter, shall deliver to the License Official a policy of insurance executed
by a company duly authorized under the laws of the State of California to
engage in the insurance business. The policy shall provide that the City is
named as an additional insured, and that all such insurance shall not be
materially changed, terminated or allowed to expire except on 60 days prior
written notice to the City. By the provisions of such policy the insurance
company shall promise and undertake to pay in full all claims for damages to
persons or property resulting from the operation of the vehicles described in
the application for such permit; provided, however, the minimum amounts for
which liability shall be assumed shall be as follows:
   (a)   For the injury or death of one person in any one event, One Million
Dollars ($1,000,000.00); and
   (b)   For bodily injury to, or destruction of property in any one event, One
Million Dollars ($1,000,000.00).
   Before a permit shall be issued by the City, a policy of Worker’s
Compensation Insurance covering all employees and lease drivers, with statutory
limits, must be executed and a certificate filed with the City, if Worker’s
Compensation Insurance is required by the State of California.
(§ 2, Ord. 2668, eff. July 16, 1998, as amended by § 2, Ord. 3018, eff. June
19, 2015)
Sec. 4-5.17. Taximeter.
   Each taxicab operator or vehicle permittee shall equip each taxicab with a
State of California approved taximeter with unbroken State of California or
County of San Bernardino Bureau of Weights and Measures seal affixed. A
taximeter shall be placed in each taxicab or vehicle for hire so that the
reading dial showing the amount to be charged shall be well lit and readily
discernible to the passenger(s) riding in any such taxicab. No passenger shall
be carried in any taxicab unless said taximeter shall be in operation. Every
taximeter used in the operation of taxicabs shall be subject to inspection at
any time by the City, or any of its agents or employees. Upon discovery or
notification of any inaccuracy of the taximeter, the operator thereof shall
remove, or cause to be removed from service any vehicle equipped with said
taximeter until the taximeter has been repaired and accurately adjusted. Every
taximeter shall be inspected and tested for accuracy by the carrier at least
once annually. Certification is to be presented to the City indicating date of
inspection and the name of the governmental agency performing the
certification.
(§ 2, Ord. 2668, eff. July 16, 1998, as amended by § 2, Ord. 3018, eff. June
19, 2015)
Sec. 4-5.18. Stands: Permits Required.
   Any applicant for a permit pursuant to the provisions of this chapter who
desires space to stand a vehicle on the street shall obtain the written
permission of the property owner(s) as well as the written consent thereto of
all the occupants of the ground floor of any building in front of which such
automobile is to be located and for fifty (50) feet each way therefrom or, if
there is no such occupant, by the written consent thereto of the owner or
lessee of such building. No applicant shall be entitled to space on the street
for more than one (1) automobile for hire or taxicab; and all applicants for
permits for more than one (1) vehicle shall be required to provide parking
space for the remainder of such vehicles off the streets of the City and shall
not be entitled to stand such vehicles on the public streets longer than
necessary to load and unload passengers, except while the vehicle is actually
paid for and engaged by a passenger.
(§ 2, Ord. 2668, eff. July 16, 1998, as amended by § 2, Ord. 3018, eff. June
19, 2015)
Sec. 4-5.19. Rates.
   Persons licensed pursuant to the provisions of this chapter shall charge the
rates set forth by separate resolution adopted by the City Council, and it
shall be unlawful for any person licensed pursuant to the provisions of this
chapter to charge rates higher than provided by resolution of the City Council.
(§ 2, Ord. 2668, eff. July 16, 1998, as amended by § 2, Ord. 3018, eff. June
19, 2015)
Sec. 4-5.20. Refusal to Pay Fares.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to refuse to pay the legal fare for the
hire of any automobile for hire or taxicab, after having hired the same, with
the intent to defraud the person from whom it is hired.
(§ 2, Ord. 2668, eff. July 16, 1998, as amended by § 2, Ord. 3018, eff. June
19, 2015)
Sec. 4-5.21. Refusal to Carry Passengers.
   It shall be unlawful for any driver operating under a permit issued pursuant
to this chapter to refuse to transport passengers who present themselves for
carriage in a sober and orderly manner and for a lawful purpose when the
vehicle is in service and not otherwise engaged. This section is intended to
prevent drivers from discriminating against a person on the basis of trip
length, or on the basis of race, ethnicity or gender. It is not intended to
require the driver to transport a person whom the driver knows has not paid a
fare in the past, or who presents a threat to the safety of the driver.
(§ 2, Ord. 2668, eff. July 16, 1998, as amended by § 2, Ord. 3018, eff. June
19, 2015)
Sec. 4-5.22. Parking on Euclid Avenue.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to use any portion of Euclid Avenue
between Transit Street and H Street for the purpose of parking taxicabs;
provided, however, that provisions of this section shall not prohibit the
reasonable use of such portion of Euclid Avenue for the purpose of stopping to
receive or discharge passengers, the purpose of this section being to prohibit
the use of such portion of Euclid Avenue for depot purposes.
(§ 2, Ord. 2668, eff. July 16, 1998, as amended by § 2, Ord. 3018, eff. June
19, 2015)
Sec. 4-5.23. Transporting Persons for Unlawful Purposes.
   It shall be unlawful for any driver of a taxicab to knowingly transport any
passenger to the abode of a prostitute, or knowingly to transport any criminal,
narcotic peddler, prostitute or bootlegger in the commission of a crime or as a
panderer for prostitutes or a contact for unlawful establishments of any
nature.
(§ 2, Ord. 2668, eff. July 16, 1998, as amended by § 2, Ord. 3018, eff. June
19, 2015)
Sec. 4-5.24. Disqualification.
   Any person who, while operating a taxicab or automobile for hire within the
City, violates any provision of the Vehicle Code of the State of California,
the violation of which is declared a misdemeanor or felony, and who is later
convicted thereof shall be disqualified from driving taxicabs or automobiles
for hire within the City.
(§ 2, Ord. 2668, eff. July 16, 1998, as amended by § 2, Ord. 3018, June 19,
2015)
Sec. 4-5.25. Permits: Revocation.
   Any owner’s or driver’s permit granted pursuant to the provisions of this
chapter may be revoked by the City Council, either as whole or as to any
vehicle described therein or as to the right to use any distinctive color,
monogram, or insignia, after five (5) days notice to the permittee requiring
him to appear at a certain time and place to show cause why such permit should
not be revoked for any of the following reasons:
   (a)   That the required insurance policy provided for in § 4-5.16 of this
chapter has not been given or has been withdrawn or lapsed for the nonpayment
of premiums or is not in force for any reason;
   (b)   For the nonpayment of any permit or license fee provided by law;
   (c)   For failure to observe any of the rules, regulations, standards, or
provisions set forth in this chapter;
   (d)   For the violation, and later conviction, of any laws of the State of
California or the City by any permittee, operator, or driver of any automobile
for hire or taxicab;
   (e)   For failure to maintain satisfactory service to the public by means of
any of the vehicles described in the permit, or failure to keep any vehicle
described in the permit in use for an unreasonable length of time, or for
failure to use the distinctive color, monogram, or insignia described in the
application; and
   (f)   For any cause which, in the opinion of the City Council make it
contrary to the public interest, convenience, and necessity for the permit to
be continued.
(§ 2, Ord. 2668, eff. July 16, 1998, as amended by § 11, Ord. 2678, eff.
February 18, 1999 and § 2, Ord. 3018, eff. June 19, 2015)
Sec. 4-5.26. Conflicting Ordinances Repealed.
   All ordinances or parts of ordinances, or regulations in conflict with the
provisions of this chapter are hereby repealed.
(§ 2, Ord. 2668, eff. July 16, 1998, as amended by § 2, Ord. 3018, eff. June
19, 2015)
Sec. 4-5.27. Severability.
   If any provision or clause in this chapter or the application thereof to any
person or circumstance is held to be unconstitutional or otherwise invalid by
any court of competent jurisdiction, such invalidity shall not affect other
provisions or clauses or applications of this chapter which can be implemented
without the invalid provision, clause or application; and to this end, the
provisions of this chapter are declared to be severable.
(§ 2, Ord. 2668, eff. July 16, 1998, as amended by § 2, Ord. 3018, eff. June
19, 2015)
CHAPTER 6: TRAFFIC
Article 1. Definitions
   
4-6.101   Scope of provisions
   
4-6.102   Vehicle Code definitions
   
4-6.103   Central Traffic District
   
4-6.104   Coach
   
4-6.105   Council
   
4-6.106   Curb
   
4-6.107   Divisional island
   
4-6.108   Holidays
   
4-6.109   Loading zone
   
4-6.110   Official time standard
   
4-6.111   Parkway
   
4-6.112   Passenger loading zone
   
4-6.113   Pedestrian
   
4-6.114   Police officer
   
4-6.115   Stop
   
4-6.116   Vehicle Code
   
4-6.117   Commercial vehicles
Article 2. Administration
   
4-6.201   Traffic Division: Established: Supervision
   
4-6.202   Traffic Division: Duties
   
4-6.203   Traffic Division: Accident studies
   
4-6.204   Traffic Division: Accident reports
   
4-6.205   Traffic Division: Annual safety reports
   
4-6.206   City Traffic Engineer: Office established
   
4-6.207   City Traffic Engineer: Powers and duties
Article 3. Enforcement and Obedience to Traffic Regulations
   
4-6.301   Authority of police officers and firefighters to direct traffic
   
4-6.302   Unauthorized persons directing traffic
   
4-6.303   Obedience to police officers, firemen, and other authorized persons
   
4-6.304   Obedience by public employees
   
4-6.305   Rights and duties of persons riding bicycles and animals
   
4-6.306   Interference with police officers, other authorized persons, and
markings
   
4-6.307   Exceptions for certain vehicles
   
4-6.308   Reports of damages to certain property
   
4-6.309   Removal of vehicles from streets, alleys and city-owned parking lots
and parking facilities
Article 4. Traffic Control Devices
   
4-6.401   Authority to place and maintain
   
4-6.402   Authority to remove, relocate, and discontinue
   
4-6.403   Obedience
   
4-6.404   Hours of operation
   
4-6.405   Authority to install and maintain signals
   
4-6.406   Signs required for enforcement purposes
   
4-6.407   Roadway markings
   
4-6.408   Unauthorized painting of street and curb surfaces
Article 5. Turning Movements
   
4-6.501   Authority to place turn control devices for intersections and
multiple lanes
   
4-6.502   Authority to place restricted turn signs
   
4-6.503   Application of provisions to Euclid Avenue intersections
Article 6. One-Way Streets and Alleys
   
4-6.601   Authority to place signs
Article 7. Special Stops Required
   
4-6.701   Authority to place stop signs
   
4-6.702   Reserved
   
4-6.703   Emerging from alleys, driveways, and buildings
Article 8. Miscellaneous Driving Rules
   
4-6.801   Driving through funeral processions and parades
   
4-6.802   Clinging to moving vehicles
   
4-6.803   Commercial vehicles using private driveways
   
4-6.804   Riding and driving on sidewalks and parkways
   
4-6.805   Riding and driving over new pavement and markings
   
4-6.806   Placement of barriers and signs
   
4-6.807   Obedience to barriers and signs
   
4-6.808   Obstructing traffic by entering intersections and crosswalks
   
4-6.809   Driving to and from limited access roadways
   
4-6.810   Use of freeways by pedestrians and operators of bicycles and certain
other vehicles
   
4-6.811   Unlawful operation of vehicles on other than public streets
   
4-6.812   Vehicles on private property
Article 9. Pedestrian Regulations
   
4-6.901   Authority to establish and maintain crosswalks
   
4-6.902   Use of crosswalks
   
4-6.903   Obstructing passageways prohibited
   
4-6.904   Pedestrian or vehicular interference prohibited
Article 10. Stopping, Standing, and Parking for Certain Purposes or in Certain
Places
   
4-6.1001   Application and effect of provisions
   
4-6.1002   Authority to maintain prohibited and restricted parking zones and
areas
   
4-6.1003   Obedience to prohibited and restricted parking signs and markings
   
4-6.1004   Prohibited
   
4-6.1005   Prohibited within parkways
   
4-6.1006   Prohibited adjacent to schools
   
4-6.1007   Prohibited on narrow streets
   
4-6.1008   Prohibited for certain purposes
   
4-6.1009   Restricted for certain commercial vehicles
   
4-6.1010   Restricted on private property
   
4-6.1011   Seventy two (72) hour limit
   
4-6.1012   Peddling, vending, and services
   
4-6.1013   Authority to place emergency signs
   
4-6.1014   Obedience to emergency signs
   
4-6.1015   Display of warning devices by disabled commercial vehicle
   
4-6.1016   Removal of vehicles
   
4-6.1017   Restricted parking in Metrolink Station parking lots
   
4-6.1018   Removal of Vehicles Parked For Sale
   
4-6.1019   Restricted parking for street sweeping and trash collection services
   
4-6.1020   Oversized vehicle parking
Article 11. Stopping, Standing, and Parking Restricted or Prohibited
   
4-6.1101   Twenty four (24) minute limit
   
4-6.1102   Forty (40) minute limit
   
4-6.1103   One (1) hour limit
   
4-6.1104   Two (2) hour limit
   
4-6.1105   Parallel parking
   
4-6.1106   Diagonal parking
   
4-6.1107   Parking space markings
   
4-6.1108   No stopping zones
   
4-6.1109   Vision safety parking zones
Article 12. Stopping for Loading or Unloading
   
4-6.1201   Authority to determine and mark zones
   
4-6.1202   Designation of zones
   
4-6.1203   Authority to establish coach zones
   
4-6.1204   Obedience to coach zone regulations
   
4-6.1205   Effect of permission to load or unload
   
4-6.1206   Obedience to loading zone regulations
   
4-6.1207   Standing in alleys
Article 13. Restricted Use of Certain Streets
   
4-6.1301   Central Traffic District
   
4-6.1302   Animal-drawn vehicles
   
4-6.1303   Commercial vehicles
   
4-6.1304   Truck routes
   
4-6.1305   Permit parking zones on residential streets
Article 14. Trains
   
4-6.1401   Driving through railroad gates or barriers
Article 15. Special Speed Zones
   
4-6.1501   Increasing Local limit
   
4-6.1502   Decreasing Local limits
   
4-6.1503   Decreasing State limit between districts (Repealed)
   
4-6.1504   Regulation of speed by traffic signals
Article 16. Violations and Penalties
   
4-6.1601   Violations
   
4-6.1602   Penalties: Citations: Method of payment
   
4-6.1603   Penalties: Citations: State-mandated added penalties
Article 17. Parking At Ontario International Airport
   
4-6.1701   Restrictions and enforcement
Article 18. Interstate Trucks, Terminal Designation, and Terminal Access
   
4-6.1801   Definitions
   
4-6.1802   Purpose
   
4-6.1803   Application and determination
   
4-6.1804   Retrofitting
   
4-6.1805   Revocation of route
   
4-6.1806   Appeal process
   
4-6.1807   Routes to terminals and other jurisdictions
   
4-6.1808   Trailblazer signs
   
4-6.1809   Fees and costs
Article 19. Skateboards, Roller Skates and Roller Blades on Public and Private
Property
   
4-6.1901   Intent and purpose
   
4-6.1902   Definitions
   
4-6.1903   Roller skating, roller blading and skateboarding unlawful when
deemed a nuisance
   
4-6.1904   Posting of signs: Content
Article 20. Private Roads, Travel Ways, and Parking Lots Serving the Ontario
Mills Development
and Surrounding Commercial Developments
   
4-6.2001   Findings and declarations
   
4-6.2002   Vehicle Code applicable to private roads, travel ways, and parking
lots
Article 21. Prohibiting Cruising
   
4-6.2101   Cruising defined
   
4-6.2102   Traffic control point
   
4-6.2103   Required signs
   
4-6.2104   Written notice
   
4-6.2105   Cruising prohibited
   
4-6.2106   Exceptions
   
4-6.2107   Penalty for violations
Article 22. Valet Parking
   
4-6.2201   Purpose
   
4-6.2202   Definitions
   
4-6.2203   Designation of valet parking zones
   
4-6.2204   High-visibility safety apparel required
   
4-6.2205   Rules and regulations
   
4-6.2206   Conformance with applicable laws
   
4-6.2207   Permit required
   
4-6.2208   Application for valet parking permits
   
4-6.2209   Duration of permit
   
4-6.2210   Insurance
   
4-6.2211   Valet parking permit and valet parking operator obligations
   
4-6.2212   Permit revocation
   
4-6.2213   Penalties
Article 1. Definitions
Sec. 4-6.101. Scope of provisions.
   For the purposes of this chapter, unless otherwise apparent from the
context, certain words and phrases used in this chapter are defined in this
article.
(§ 1, Ord. 1651, eff. July 20, 1967)
Sec. 4-6.102. Vehicle Code definitions.
   Whenever any words or phrases used in this chapter are not defined in this
article but are defined in the Vehicle Code of the State, and amendments
thereto, such definitions shall apply to such words or phrases.
(§ 1.1, Ord. 1651, eff. July 20, 1967)
Sec. 4-6.103. Central Traffic District.
   “Central Traffic District” shall mean all streets and portions of streets
within the area described as follows: All that area bounded by the Southern
Pacific Company railroad tracks, G Street, Vine Avenue, and Sultana Avenue.
(§ 1.2, Ord. 1651, eff. July 20, 1967)
Sec. 4-6.104. Coach.
   “Coach” shall mean any motor bus, motor coach, trackless trolley, or
passenger stage used as a common carrier of passengers.
(§ 1.3, Ord. 1651, eff. July 20, 1967)
Sec. 4-6.105. Council.
   "Council" shall mean the Council of the City of Ontario, California.
(§ 1.4, Ord. 1651, eff. July 20, 1967)
Sec. 4-6.106. Curb.
   “Curb” shall mean the lateral boundary of the roadway, whether such curb is
marked by curbing construction or not so marked. "Curb" shall not include the
line dividing the roadway of a street from parking strips in the center of a
street nor from tracks or rights-of-way of public utility companies.
(§ 1.5, Ord. 1651, eff. July 20, 1967)
Sec. 4-6.107. Divisional island.
   “Divisional island” shall mean a raised island located in the roadway and
separating opposing or conflicting streams of traffic or painted double-double
lines.
(§ 1.6, Ord. 1651, eff. July 20, 1967)
Sec. 4-6.108. Holidays.
   (a)   “Holidays” shall mean and include the following days:
      (1)   January 1;
      (2)   January 15;
      (3)   The third Monday in January;
      (4)   February 12;
      (5)   February 17;
      (6)   February 22;
      (7)   May 30;
      (8)   July 4;
      (9)   The first Monday in September;
      (10)   September 9;
      (11)   October 12;
      (12)   November 11;
      (13)   Thanksgiving Day; and
      (14)   December 25.
   (b)   If any of the following days fall upon a Sunday, the Monday following
such day shall be deemed a holiday:
      (1)   January 1;
      (2)   January 15;
      (3)   February 12;
      (4)   February 17;
      (5)   February 22;
      (6)   May 30;
      (7)   July 4;
      (8)   September 9;
      (9)   October 12;
      (10)   November 11; and
      (11)   December 25.
(§ 1.7, Ord. 1651, eff. July 20, 1967)
Sec. 4-6.109. Loading zone.
   “Loading zone” shall mean the space adjacent to a curb reserved for the
exclusive use of vehicles during the loading or unloading of passengers or
materials.
(§ 1.8, Ord. 1651, eff. July 20, 1967)
Sec. 4-6.110. Official time standard.
   "Official time standard" means whenever certain hours are named herein, they
shall mean standard time or daylight saving time as may be in current use in
this City.
(§ 1.9, Ord. 1651, eff. July 20, 1967)
Sec. 4-6.111. Parkway.
   “Parkway” shall mean that portion of a street other than a roadway or a
sidewalk.
(§ 1.10, Ord. 1651, eff. July 20, 1967)
Sec. 4-6.112. Passenger loading zone.
   “Passenger loading zone” shall mean the space adjacent to a curb reserved
for the exclusive use of vehicles during the loading or unloading of
passengers.
(§ 1.11, Ord. 1651, eff. July 20, 1967)
Sec. 4-6.113. Pedestrian.
   “Pedestrian” shall mean any person afoot.
(§ 1.12, Ord. 1651, eff. July 20, 1967)
Sec. 4-6.114. Police officer.
   “Police officer” shall mean every officer of the Police Department of the
City or any officer authorized to direct or regulate traffic or to make arrests
for violations of traffic regulations.
(§ 1.13, Ord. 1651, eff. July 20, 1967)
Sec. 4-6.115. Stop.
   “Stop,” when required, shall mean the complete cessation of movement.
(§ 1.14, Ord. 1651, eff. July 20, 1967)
Sec. 4-6.116. Vehicle Code.
   “Vehicle Code” shall mean the Vehicle Code of the State.
(§ 1.15, Ord. 1651, eff. July 20, 1967)
Sec. 4-6.117. Commercial vehicles.
   "Commercial vehicle" shall have the same meaning as defined in Section 260
of the California Vehicle Code.
(§ 2, Ord. 3231, eff. January 19, 2023)
Article 2. Administration
Sec. 4-6.201. Traffic Division: Established: Supervision.
   There is hereby established in the Police Department a Traffic Division to
be under the control of a police supervisor appointed by, and directly
responsible to, the Police Chief.
(§ 2, Ord. 1651, eff. July 20, 1967)
Sec. 4-6.202. Traffic Division: Duties.
   The Traffic Division, with such aid as may be rendered by other members of
the Police Department, shall have the following duties:
   (a)   To enforce the street traffic regulations of the City and all the
State vehicle laws applicable to street traffic in the City;
   (b)   To make arrests for traffic violations;
   (c)   To investigate traffic accidents;
   (d)   To cooperate with the City Traffic Engineer and other officers of the
City in the administration of the traffic laws and in developing ways and means
to improve traffic conditions; and
   (e)   To carry out the duties specially imposed upon the Division by the
provisions of this chapter, other traffic laws of the City, and the Police
Chief.
(§ 2.1, Ord. 1651, eff. July 20, 1967)
Sec. 4-6.203. Traffic Division: Accident studies.
   Whenever the accidents at any particular location become numerous, the
Traffic Division shall cooperate with the City Traffic Engineer in conducting
studies of such accidents and determining remedial measures.
(§ 2.2, Ord. 1651, eff. July 20, 1967)
Sec. 4-6.204. Traffic Division: Accident reports.
   The Traffic Division shall maintain a suitable system of filing traffic
accident reports. Accident reports, or cards referring to such reports, shall
be filed alphabetically by location. Such reports shall be available for the
use and information of the City Traffic Engineer.
(§ 2.3, Ord. 1651, eff. July 20, 1967)
Sec. 4-6.205. Traffic Division: Annual safety reports.
   The Traffic Division shall annually prepare a traffic report which shall be
filed with the Council. Such report shall contain information on traffic
matters in the City as follows:
   (a)   The number of traffic accidents, the number of persons killed, the
number of persons injured, and other pertinent traffic accident data;
   (b)   The number of traffic accidents investigated and other pertinent data
on the safety activities of the Police Department; and
   (c)   The plans and recommendations of the Division for future traffic
safety activities.
(§ 2.4, Ord. 1651, eff. July 20, 1967)
Sec. 4-6.206. City Traffic Engineer: Office established.
   The office of City Traffic Engineer is hereby established. The City Traffic
Engineer shall exercise the powers and duties as provided in this chapter and
other traffic laws of the City. The City’s Traffic and Transportation Manager
shall assume the duties of the City Traffic Engineer.
(§ 2.5, Ord. 1651, eff. July 20, 1967, as amended by § 1, Ord. 2957, eff.
January 19, 2013)
Sec. 4-6.207. City Traffic Engineer: Powers and duties.
   (a)   Traffic control devices. Whenever the City Traffic Engineer is
required or authorized to place or maintain official traffic control devices,
he may cause such devices to be placed or maintained.
   (b)   General duties. The City Traffic Engineer shall have the following
general duties:
      (1)   To use modern traffic engineering methods to determine and plan the
location and application of traffic control devices.
      (2)   To conduct engineering analyses of traffic accidents and to devise
remedial measures;
      (3)   To conduct engineering and traffic investigations of traffic
conditions;
      (4)   To cooperate with other City officers in the development of ways
and means to improve traffic conditions; and
      (5) To carry out the additional powers and duties imposed by the laws of
the City.
   (c)   Delegation of powers and duties. Whenever, by the provisions of this
chapter, a power is granted to the City Traffic Engineer or a duty is imposed
upon him, the power may be exercised or the duty performed by the City
Engineer.
(§§ 2.5 and 2.6, Ord. 1651, eff. July 20, 1967, as amended by § 1, Ord. 2957,
eff. January 19, 2013)
Article 3. Enforcement and Obedience to Traffic Regulations
Sec. 4-6.301. Authority of police officers and firefighters to direct traffic.
   Officers of the Police Department and such officers as are assigned by the
Police Chief are hereby authorized to direct all traffic by voice, hand, or
audible or other signal in conformance with traffic laws; provided, however,
that in the event of a fire or other emergency or to expedite traffic or to
safeguard pedestrians, officers of the Police Department or members of the Fire
Department may direct traffic as conditions may require, notwithstanding the
provisions to the contrary in this chapter or the Vehicle Code.
(§ 3, Ord. 1651, eff. July 20, 1967)
Sec. 4-6.302. Unauthorized persons directing traffic.
   No person other than an officer of the Police Department, a member of the
Fire Department, a person authorized by the Police Chief, or a person
authorized by law, shall direct or attempt to direct traffic by voice, hand, or
other signal; provided, however, that persons may operate, as provided in this
chapter, any mechanical push-button signal erected by order of the City Traffic
Engineer.
(§ 3.1, Ord. 1651, eff. July 20, 1967)
Sec. 4-6.303. Obedience to police officers, firemen, and other authorized
persons.
   No person shall fail or refuse to comply with, or to perform any act
forbidden by, any lawful order, signal, or direction of a traffic or police
officer, or a member of the Fire Department, or a person authorized by the
Police Chief or by law.
(§ 3.2, Ord. 1651, eff. July 20, 1967)
Sec. 4-6.304. Obedience by public employees.
   The provisions of this chapter shall apply to the operator of any vehicle
owned by, or used in, the service of the United States Government, the State,
or any county or city, and it shall be unlawful for any such operator to
violate any of the provisions of this chapter except as otherwise permitted in
this chapter or by the Vehicle Code.
(§ 3.5, Ord. 1651, eff. July 20, 1967)
Sec. 4-6.305. Rights and duties of persons riding bicycles and animals.
   Every person riding a bicycle or riding or driving an animal upon a highway
shall have all the rights and shall be subject to all the duties applicable to
the driver of a vehicle pursuant to the provisions of this chapter except such
provisions which, by their very nature, can have no application.
(§ 3.3, Ord. 1651, eff. July 20, 1967)
Sec. 4-6.306. Interference with police officers, other authorized persons, and
markings.
   (a)   No person shall interfere with, or obstruct in any way, any police
officer or other officer or employee of the City in the enforcement of the
provisions of this chapter.
   (b)   The removal, obliteration, or concealment of any chalk or other
distinguishing mark used by any police officer or other employee or officer of
the City in connection with the enforcement of the parking regulations of this
chapter shall, if done for the purpose of evading the provisions of this
chapter, constitute such interference or obstruction.
   (c)   A mere change in the position of any automobile or other vehicle
within the prescribed area and within the same block during times of limited
parking, or a mere change in the stall, space, or position of any automobile or
other vehicle within the same City-owned parking lot or parking facility during
a period of seventy-two (72) or more consecutive hours, shall not constitute a
defense, excuse, or justification for any prosecution pursuant to the
provisions of this chapter.
(§ 3.4, Ord. 1651, eff. July 20, 1967, § 1, Ord. 3000, eff. October 16, 2014)
Sec. 4-6.307. Exceptions for certain vehicles.
   (a)   The provisions of this chapter regulating the operation, parking, and
standing of vehicles shall not apply to vehicles operated by the Police
Department or Fire Department, any public ambulance, any public utility
vehicle, or any private ambulance, which public utility vehicle or private
ambulance has qualified as an authorized emergency vehicle, or traffic signal
maintenance truck, when any vehicle set forth in this subsection is operated in
the manner specified in the Vehicle Code in response to an emergency call.
   (b)   The provisions of subsection (a) of this section shall not, however,
relieve the operator of any such vehicle from the obligation to exercise due
care for the safety of others or the consequences of his wilful disregard of
the safety of others.
   (c)   The provisions of this chapter regulating the parking or standing of
vehicles shall not apply to any vehicle of a City department or public utility
while necessarily in use for construction or repair work, or any vehicle owned
or operated by the United States Post Office while in use for the collection,
transportation, or delivery of United States mail.
(§ 3.6, Ord. 1651, eff. July 20, 1967)
Sec. 4-6.308. Reports of damages to certain property.
   (a)   The operator of a vehicle or the person in charge of any animal
involved in any accident resulting in damage to any property publicly owned or
owned by a public utility, including, but not limited to, any fire hydrant,
parking meter, lighting post, telephone pole, or electric light or power pole,
or resulting in damage to any tree, traffic control device, or other property
of a similar nature located in or along any street, shall, within twenty four
(24) hours after such accident, make a written report of such accident to the
Police Department.
   (b)   Every such report shall contain the following information:
      (1)   The time when and the place where the accident occurred;
      (2)   The name and address of the person owning, and of the person
operating or in charge of, such vehicle or animal;
      (3)   The license number of every such vehicle; and
      (4)   A brief description of the property damaged in such accident.
   (c)   No operator of any vehicle involved in an accident shall be subject to
the requirements or penalties of this section if, and during the time, he is
physically incapable of making a report; provided, however, that in such event
he shall make a report as required in subsection (a) of this section within
twenty four (24) hours after regaining ability to make such report.
(§ 3.7, Ord. 1651, eff. July 20, 1967)
Sec. 4-6.309. Removal of vehicles from streets, alleys and city-owned parking
lots and parking facilities.
   Any regularly employed and salaried officer of the Police Department, or any
other authorized person undertaking the enforcement of the provisions of this
chapter, may remove or cause to be removed the following vehicles:
   (a)   Any vehicle which has been parked or left standing upon a street,
alley, or City-owned parking lot or parking facility for seventy two (72) or
more consecutive hours; or
   (b)   Any vehicle which is parked or left standing upon a street, alley, or
City-owned parking lot or parking facility between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and
7:00 p.m. when such parking or standing is prohibited by law and signs are
posted giving notice of such removal; provided, however, that signs giving
notice that such vehicle may be removed shall be erected or placed at least
twenty-four (24) hours prior to the removal; or
   (c)   Any vehicle which is parked or left standing upon a street, alley, or
City-owned parking lot or parking facility where the use of such street, alley,
or City-owned parking lot or parking facility, or any portion thereof, is
necessary for the cleaning, repair, or construction of the street, alley, or
City-owned parking lot or parking facility or for the installation of
underground utilities, or where the use of the street, alley, or City-owned
parking lot or parking facility, or any portion thereof, is authorized for a
purpose other than the normal flow of traffic, or where the use of the street,
alley, or City-owned parking lot or parking facility, or any portion thereof,
is necessary for the movement of equipment, articles, or structures of unusual
size and the parking of such vehicle would prohibit or interfere with such use
or movement; provided, however, that signs giving notice that such vehicle may
be removed shall be erected or placed at least twenty four (24) hours prior to
the removal.
(§ 3.8, Ord. 1651, eff. July 20, 1967, § 2, Ord. 3000, eff. October 16, 2014)
Article 4. Traffic Control Devices
Sec. 4-6.401. Authority to place and maintain.
   (a)   The City Traffic Engineer shall have the power and duty to place and
maintain, or cause to be placed and maintained, official traffic control
devices when and as required to make effective the provisions of this chapter.
   (b)   Whenever the Vehicle Code requires, for the effectiveness of any
provisions thereof, that traffic control devices shall be installed to give
notice to the public of the application of such law, the City Traffic Engineer
is hereby authorized to install, or cause to be installed, the necessary
devices, subject to any limitations or restrictions set forth in the laws
applicable thereto.
   (c)   The City Traffic Engineer may also place and maintain, or cause to be
placed and maintained, such additional traffic control devices as he may deem
necessary or proper to regulate traffic or to guide or warn traffic; provided,
however, that he shall make such determination only upon the basis of traffic
engineering principles and traffic investigations and in accordance with the
standards, limitations, and rules set forth in this chapter or as determined by
ordinance or resolution of the Council.
(§ 4, Ord. 1651, eff. July 20, 1967)
Sec. 4-6.402. Authority to remove, relocate, and discontinue.
   The City Traffic Engineer is hereby authorized to remove, relocate, or
discontinue the operation of any traffic control device not specifically
required by the provisions of the Vehicle Code or this chapter whenever he
shall determine in any particular case that the conditions which warranted or
required the installation no longer exist or pertain.
(§ 4.6, Ord. 1651, eff. July 20, 1967)
Sec. 4-6.403. Obedience.
   The operator of any vehicle or train shall obey the instructions of official
traffic control devices placed in accordance with the provisions of this
chapter unless otherwise directed by a police officer or other authorized
person, subject, however, to the exceptions granted the operator of an
authorized emergency vehicle when responding to emergency calls.
(§ 4.2, Ord. 1651, eff. July 20, 1967)
Sec. 4-6.404. Hours of operation.
   The City Traffic Engineer shall determine the hours and days during which
any traffic control device shall be in operation or in effect, except where
such hours or days are specified in this chapter.
(§ 4.7, Ord. 1651, eff. July 20, 1967)
Sec. 4-6.405. Authority to install and maintain signals.
   (a)   The City Traffic Engineer is hereby directed to install and maintain
official traffic signals at the intersections and other places where traffic
conditions are such as to require that the flow of traffic be alternately
interrupted and released in order to prevent or relieve traffic congestion or
to protect life or property from exceptional hazard.
   (b)   The City Traffic Engineer shall ascertain and determine the locations
where such signals are required by field investigations, traffic counts, and
other traffic information as may be pertinent, and his determinations therefrom
shall be made in accordance with the traffic engineering and safety standards
and instructions set forth in the Uniform Standards and Specifications
promulgated by the California Department of Transportation.
   (c)   Whenever the City Traffic Engineer installs and maintains an official
traffic signal at any intersection, he shall likewise erect and maintain at
such intersection street name signs clearly visible to traffic approaching from
all directions unless such street name signs have previously been placed and
are maintained at such intersection.
(§ 4.3, Ord. 1651, eff. July 20, 1967)
Sec. 4-6.406. Signs required for enforcement purposes.
   No provision of the Vehicle Code or this chapter for which signs are
required shall be enforced against an alleged violator unless appropriate
legible signs are in place giving notice of such Vehicle Code or chapter
provisions.
(§ 4.1, Ord. 1651, eff. July 20, 1967)
Sec. 4-6.407. Roadway markings.
   (a)   Center and lane lines. The City Traffic Engineer is hereby authorized
to mark center lines and lane lines upon the surface of the roadway to indicate
the course to be traveled by vehicles and may place signs temporarily
designating lanes to be used by traffic moving in a particular direction,
regardless of the center line of the highway.
   (b)   Prohibiting driving on left side of roadway. The City Traffic Engineer
is hereby authorized to place and maintain distinctive roadway markings, as
described in the Vehicle Code, on those streets or parts of streets where the
volume of traffic or the vertical or other curvature of the roadway renders it
hazardous to drive on the left side of such markings or signs and markings.
Such markings or signs and markings shall have the same effect as similar
markings placed by the California Department of Transportation pursuant to the
provisions of the Vehicle Code.
(§§ 4.4 and 4.5, Ord. 1651, eff. July 20, 1967)
Sec. 4-6.408. Unauthorized painting of street and curb surfaces.
   No person, unless authorized by the City, shall paint any street or curb
surface; provided, however, that the provisions of this section shall not apply
to the painting of numbers on a curb surface by any person who has complied
with the provisions of any resolution or ordinance of the City pertaining
thereto.
(§ 4.8, Ord. 1651, eff. July 20, 1967)
Article 5. Turning Movements
Sec. 4-6.501. Authority to place turn control devices for intersections and
multiple lanes.
   The City Traffic Engineer is hereby authorized to place official traffic
control devices within or adjacent to intersections indicating the course to be
traveled by vehicles turning at such intersections, and the City Traffic
Engineer is hereby authorized to locate and indicate more than one lane of
traffic from which drivers of vehicles may make right-hand or left-hand turns.
The course to be traveled as so indicated may conform with, or be other than as
prescribed by, the traffic laws of the City.
(§ 5.1, Ord. 1651, eff. July 20, 1967)
Sec. 4-6.502. Authority to place restricted turn signs.
   (a)   The City Traffic Engineer shall post appropriate signs where he
determines that the making of right-hand turns against a red or stop traffic
signal indication would seriously interfere with the safe and orderly flow of
traffic.
   (b)   No driver of a vehicle shall make a right- hand turn against a red or
stop signal at any intersection which is signposted giving notice of the
restriction provided for in subsection (a) of this section.
(§ 5.1, Ord. 1651, eff. July 20, 1967)
Sec. 4-6.503. Application of provisions to Euclid Avenue intersections.
   For the purpose of applying the provisions of this chapter and the Vehicle
Code relating to turning and other traffic movements at intersections, where
Euclid Avenue intersects other streets, except Mission Boulevard, such
intersections on Euclid Avenue shall be considered to be two (2) separate
intersections. Each separate roadway on Euclid Avenue at its intersection with
another street shall be construed to be an intersection, and all turning and
other traffic movements shall comply with all applicable laws.
(§ 5.2, Ord. 1651, eff. July 20, 1967)
Article 6. One-Way Streets and Alleys
Sec. 4-6.601. Authority to place signs.
   Whenever any ordinance or resolution of the City designates a one-way street
or alley, the City Traffic Engineer shall place and maintain signs giving
notice thereof, and no such regulation shall be effective unless such signs are
in place. Signs indicating the direction of lawful traffic movement shall be
placed at every intersection where movement of traffic in the opposite
direction is prohibited.
(§ 6, Ord. 1651, eff. July 20, 1967)
Article 7. Special Stops Required
Sec. 4-6.701. Authority to place stop signs.
   (a)   The City Traffic Engineer is hereby directed to install and maintain
stop signs on every street intersecting a through street, as described and
designated as such by an ordinance or resolution of the City, at any other
intersection at which vehicles are required to stop at one or more entrances
thereto, and at any railroad grade crossing at which vehicles are required to
stop. Every such sign shall conform with, and be placed as provided in, the
California Vehicle Code.
   (b)   The City Traffic Engineer shall ascertain and determine the locations
where such stop signs are required by field investigations, traffic counts, and
other traffic information as may be pertinent, and his determinations there
from shall be made in accordance with the California Vehicle Code and accepted
traffic engineering standards.
   (c)   Whenever the City Traffic Engineer installs and maintains a stop sign
at any intersection, he or she shall likewise erect and maintain at such
intersections street name signs clearly visible to traffic approaching from all
directions unless such street name signs have previously been placed and are
maintained at such intersection.
(§ 7, Ord. 1651, eff. July 20, 1967, as amended by § 2, Ord. 2957, eff. January
19, 2013)
Sec. 4-6.702. Reserved.
Sec. 4-6.703. Emerging from alleys, driveways, and buildings.
   The driver of a vehicle emerging from an alley, driveway, or building shall
stop such vehicle immediately prior to driving onto a sidewalk or into the
sidewalk area extending across any alleyway or driveway.
(§ 7.2, Ord. 1651, eff. July 20, 1967)
Article 8. Miscellaneous Driving Rules
Sec. 4-6.801. Driving through funeral processions and parades.
   No operator of any vehicle shall drive between the vehicles comprising a
funeral procession or a parade; provided, the vehicles in such funeral
procession or parade are conspicuously so designated. The directing of all
vehicles and traffic on any street over which a funeral procession or parade
wishes to pass shall be subject to the orders of the Police Department.
(§ 8, Ord. 1651, eff. July 20, 1967)
Sec. 4-6.802. Clinging to moving vehicles.
   No person shall attach himself with his hands, or catch on or hold on with
his hands, or by other means, to any moving vehicle or train for the purpose of
receiving motive power therefrom.
(§ 8.1, Ord. 1651, eff. July 20, 1967)
Sec. 4-6.803. Commercial vehicles using private driveways.
   (a)   Commercial vehicle defined. For the purposes of this section, a
commercial vehicle shall mean a vehicle having a rated capacity in excess of
one (1) ton.
   (b)   Restricted. No person shall operate or drive a commercial vehicle in,
on, or across any private driveway approach, sidewalk area, or the driveway
itself without the consent of the owner or occupant of the property if a sign
or markings are in place indicating that the use of such driveway is
prohibited.
(§ 8.2, Ord. 1651, eff. July 20, 1967)
Sec. 4-6.804. Riding and driving on sidewalks and parkways.
   No person shall ride, drive, or propel, or cause to be propelled, any
vehicle or animal across or upon any sidewalk or parkway area except over
permanently constructed driveways and except when it is necessary for any
temporary purpose to drive a loaded vehicle across a sidewalk. Such sidewalk
area shall be substantially protected by wooden planks two (2) inches thick,
and written permission shall be previously obtained from the City Traffic
Engineer. Such wooden planks shall not be permitted to remain upon such
sidewalk area between the hours of 6:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m.
(§ 8.3, Ord. 1651, eff. July 20, 1967)
Sec. 4-6.805. Riding and driving over new pavement and markings.
   No person shall ride or drive any animal or vehicle over or across any
newly-made pavement or freshly-painted marking in any street when a barrier,
sign, cone marker, or other warning device is warning persons not to drive over
or across such pavement or marking or when any such device is in place
indicating that the street, or any portion thereof, is closed.
(§ 8.4, Ord. 1651, eff. July 20, 1967)
Sec. 4-6.806. Placement of barriers and signs.
   No person, public utility, or department in the City shall erect or place
any barrier or sign on any street unless of a type approved by the City Traffic
Engineer.
(§ 8.5, Ord. 1651, eff. July 20, 1967)
Sec. 4-6.807. Obedience to barriers and signs.
   No person shall disobey the instructions of, remove, tamper with, or destroy
any barrier or sign lawfully placed on any street by any person, public
utility, or by any department of the City.
(§ 8.5, Ord. 1651, eff. July 20, 1967)
Sec. 4-6.808. Obstructing traffic by entering intersections and crosswalks.
   No operator of any vehicle shall enter any intersection or a marked
crosswalk unless there is sufficient space on the other side of the
intersection or crosswalk to accommodate the vehicle he is operating without
obstructing the passage of other vehicles or pedestrians, notwithstanding any
traffic control signal indication to proceed.
(§ 8.6, Ord. 1651, eff. July 20, 1967)
Sec. 4-6.809. Driving to and from limited access roadways.
   No person shall drive a vehicle onto or from any limited access roadway
except at lawfully established entrances and exits.
(§ 8.7, Ord. 1651, eff. July 20, 1967)
Sec. 4-6.810. Use of freeways by pedestrians and operators of bicycles and
certain other vehicles.
   No person shall drive or operate any bicycle, motor-driven cycle, or any
vehicle which is not drawn by a motor vehicle upon any street established as a
freeway, as defined by State law, nor shall any pedestrian walk across or along
any such street so designated and described except in the space set aside for
the use of pedestrians; provided, official signs are in place giving notice of
such restrictions.
(§ 8.8, Ord. 1651, eff. July 20, 1967)
Sec. 4-6.811. Unlawful operation of vehicles on other than public streets.
   It shall be unlawful and a misdemeanor for any person to operate a motor
vehicle in the City upon any property not declared to be a public highway or
street, as provided in the Vehicle Code, in the following manner or for the
following purposes:
   (a)   With a wilful or wanton disregard for the safety of persons and
property;
   (b)   At a speed which endangers the safety of persons or property;
   (c)   While engaging in a motor vehicle contest or exhibition of speed; and
   (d)   To aid or abet in any motor vehicle speed contest or exhibition except
in areas specifically designated for such events.
(§ 8.9, Ord. 1651, eff. July 20, 1967, as amended by § 1, Ord. 2150, eff.
November 5, 1981)
Sec. 4-6.812. Vehicles on private property.
   (a)   Permissive operation of motor vehicles on private property. No person
shall drive a motor vehicle on any lands belonging to or occupied by another
without having and, upon request of a peace officer, displaying written
permission from the owner of such lands or his agent, or the person in lawful
possession thereof; provided, however, that this section shall not be
applicable to persons having visible or lawful business with such owner, agent,
or person in lawful possession.
   (b)   Noise level. No person shall operate on private property a motor
vehicle whose noise level is in excess of that provided in Cal. Veh. Code §
23130.
   (c)   Spark arresters and mufflers. Any motor vehicle operated on private
property within the City shall be equipped with a spark arrester and also with
a muffler as defined in Cal. Veh. Code § 27150. No person shall operate a motor
vehicle on private property unless it is so equipped with a spark arrestor and
muffler.
   (d)   Exemptions. The provisions of this section shall not apply to the
operation of vehicles upon property used for raceways or racing facilities in
accordance with a license or permit issued by the City.
(§ 1, Ord. 1744, eff. December 17, 1970)
Article 9. Pedestrian Regulations
Sec. 4-6.901. Authority to establish and maintain crosswalks.
   The City Traffic Engineer shall establish, designate, and maintain
crosswalks at intersections and other places by appropriate devices, markings,
or lines upon the surface of the roadway at all intersections within the
Central Traffic District, at such intersections outside such district, and at
other places within or outside the Central Traffic District where the City
Traffic Engineer determines that it is particularly hazardous for pedestrians
to cross the roadway.
(§ 9, Ord. 1651, eff. July 20, 1967)
Sec. 4-6.902. Use of crosswalks.
   No pedestrian shall cross a roadway other than a crosswalk in the Central
Traffic District or in any business district.
(§ 9.1, Ord. 1651, eff. July 20, 1967)
Sec. 4-6.903. Obstructing passageways prohibited.
   (a)   Purpose. The purpose of this section is to make public streets, public
property and other areas readily accessible to the public and to prevent the
willful and intentional obstruction of such property which interferes with the
rights of others to use such areas for the purposes for which they are intended
and to maintain public streets and areas within the city in a clean and
accessible condition.
   (b)   Prohibited conduct. No person shall sit or lie down upon a public
sidewalk or in the public right of way (including, but not limited to, curbs
gutters, parkways, streets, and publicly owned parking lots) or upon a blanket,
chair, stool, or any other object placed upon a public sidewalk or in the
public right of way (including, but not limited to, curbs, gutters, parkways,
streets, and publicly owned parking lots), anywhere in the City during the
hours between 7:00 a.m. and 11:00 p.m., or at anytime within certain areas of
the City established by City Council resolution.
   (c)   Exceptions. The prohibition in subsection (b) shall not apply to any
person:
      (1)   Sitting or lying down on a public sidewalk due to a medical
emergency;
      (2)   Who, as the result of a disability, utilizes a wheelchair, walker,
or similar device to move about the public sidewalk;
      (3)   Operating or patronizing a commercial establishment conducted on
the public sidewalk pursuant to a street use permit, or outdoor dining provided
by a commercial establishment in conformance with the Ontario Development Code
or applicable specific plan; or a person participating in or attending a
parade, festival, performance, rally, demonstration, meeting, or similar event
conducted on the public sidewalk pursuant to a street use or other applicable
permit;
      (4)   Sitting on a chair or bench located on the public sidewalk which is
supplied by a public agency or by the abutting private property owner;
      (5)   Sitting on a public sidewalk within a bus stop zone while waiting
for public or private transportation.
      Nothing in any of these exceptions shall be construed to permit any
conduct which is prohibited by §
4-6.904, Pedestrian interference.
   (d)   Citations. No person shall be cited under this section unless the
person engages in conduct prohibited by this section after having been notified
by a law enforcement officer, or any city enforcement officer, that the conduct
violates this section.
(§ 1, Ord. 2922, eff. June 3, 2010)
Sec. 4-6.904. Pedestrian or vehicular interference prohibited.
   (a)   Definitions. The following definitions apply in this section:
      (1)   “Obstruct pedestrian or vehicular traffic” means to walk, stand,
sit, lie, or place an object in such a manner as to block passage by another
person or a vehicle, or to require another person or a driver of a vehicle to
take evasive action to avoid physical contact. Acts authorized as an exercise
of one's constitutional right to picket or to legally protest, and acts
authorized by a street use permit, shall not constitute “obstruction of
pedestrian or vehicular traffic.”
      (2)   “Public place” means an area generally visible to public view and
includes alleys, bridges, buildings, driveways, parking lots, parks, pedestrian
malls, plazas, sidewalks and streets open to the general public, including
those that serve food or drink or provide entertainment, and the doorways and
entrances to buildings or dwellings and the grounds enclosing them.
   (b)   Prohibited conduct. A person is guilty of pedestrian interference if,
in a public place, he or she intentionally obstructs pedestrian or vehicular
traffic.
   (c)   Citations. No person shall be cited under this section unless the
person engages in conduct prohibited by this section after having been notified
by a law enforcement officer, or any city enforcement officer, that the conduct
violates this section.
(§ 2, Ord. 2922, eff. June 3, 2010)
Article 10. Stopping, Standing, and Parking for Certain Purposes or in Certain
Places
Sec. 4-6.1001. Application and effect of provisions.
   (a)   The provisions of this chapter prohibiting the stopping, standing, or
parking of a vehicle shall apply at all times, or at the times specified in
this chapter, except when it is necessary to stop a vehicle to avoid conflict
with other traffic or in compliance with the directions of a police officer or
official traffic control device.
   (b)   The provisions of this chapter imposing a time limit on standing or
parking shall not relieve any person from the duty to observe other and more
restrictive provisions of the Vehicle Code or the laws of the City prohibiting
or limiting the standing or parking of vehicles in specified places or at
specified times.
(§ 10, Ord. 1651, eff. July 20, 1967)
Sec. 4-6.1002. Authority to maintain prohibited and restricted parking zones
and areas.
   The City Traffic Engineer is hereby authorized to maintain, by appropriate
signs or by paint upon the curb surface, all no stopping zones, no parking
areas and restricted parking areas, as defined and described in this chapter.
(§ 10.1, Ord. 1651, eff. July 20, 1967)
Sec. 4-6.1003. Obedience to prohibited and restricted parking signs and
markings.
   When curb markings or signs prohibiting or restricting parking are in place,
no operator of any vehicle shall stop, stand, or park such vehicle adjacent to
any such legible curb marking or sign in violation of any of the provisions of
this chapter.
(§ 10.1, Ord. 1651, eff. July 20, 1967)
Sec. 4-6.1004. Prohibited.
   No operator of any vehicle shall stop, stand, park, or leave standing such
vehicle in any of the following places except when necessary to avoid conflict
with other traffic or in compliance with the direction of a police officer,
other authorized officer, or traffic sign or signal:
   (a)   Within any divisional island unless authorized and clearly indicated
with appropriate signs or markings;
   (b)   On either side of any street between the projected property lines of
any public walk, public steps, street, or thoroughfare termination at such
street when such area is indicated by appropriate signs or by red paint upon
the curb surface.
   (c)   in any area where the City Traffic Engineer determines that the
parking or stopping of a vehicle would constitute a traffic hazard or would
endanger life or property when such area is indicated by appropriate signs or
by red paint upon the curb surface;
   (d)   In any area established by resolution of the Council as a no parking
area when such area is indicated by appropriate signs or by red paint upon the
curb surface;
   (e)   Upon, along, or across any railroad track in such a manner as to
hinder, delay, or obstruct the movement of any car traveling upon such track;
   (f)   In any area where the parking or stopping of any vehicle would
constitute a traffic hazard or would endanger life or property;
   (g)   On any street where the use of such street, or any portion thereof, is
necessary for the cleaning, repair, or construction of the street or the
installation of underground utilities, or where the use of the street, or any
portion thereof, is authorized for a purpose other than the normal flow of
traffic, or where the use of the street, or any portion thereof, is necessary
for the movement of equipment, articles, or structures of unusual size, and the
parking of such vehicles would prohibit or interfere with such use or movement;
provided, however, that signs giving notice of such no parking shall be erected
or placed at least twenty four (24) hours prior to the effective time of such
no parking;
   (h)   At any place within twenty (20) feet of a point on the curb
immediately opposite the mid-block end of a safety zone when such place is
indicated by appropriate signs or by red paint upon the curb surface.
   (i)   At any place within twenty (20) feet of a crosswalk at intersections
in the Central Traffic District or in any business district when such place is
indicated by appropriate signs or by red paint upon the curb surface; provided,
however, that a bus may stop at a designated bus stop;
   (j)   Within twenty (20) feet of the approach to any traffic signal,
boulevard stop sign, or official electric flashing device; and
   (k)   In any area marked in accordance with the provisions of this Code as a
fire lane or a fire apparatus access road.
(§ 10.3, Ord. 1651, eff. July 20, 1967, as amended by § 1, Ord. 2462)
Sec. 4-6.1005. Prohibited within parkways.
   No person shall stop, stand, or park a vehicle within any parkway.
(§ 10.2, Ord. 1651, eff. July 20, 1967)
Sec. 4-6.1006. Prohibited adjacent to schools.
   (a)   The City Traffic Engineer is hereby authorized to erect signs
indicating no parking upon the side of any street adjacent to any school
property when such parking would, in his opinion, interfere with traffic or
create a hazardous situation.
   (b)   When official signs are erected prohibiting parking upon the side of a
street adjacent to any school property, no person shall park a vehicle in any
such designated place.
(§ 10.8, Ord. 1651, eff. July 20, 1967)
Sec. 4-6.1007. Prohibited on narrow streets.
   (a)   The City Traffic Engineer is hereby authorized to place signs or
markings indicating no parking upon any street when the width of the roadway
does not exceed thirty (30) feet, or upon one side of a street as indicated by
such signs or markings when the width of the roadway does not exceed thirty six
(36) feet.
   (b)   When official signs or markings prohibiting parking are erected upon
narrow streets, as authorized in this section, no person shall park a vehicle
upon any such street in violation of any such sign or marking.
(§ 10.9, Ord. 1651, eff. July 20, 1967)
Sec. 4-6.1008. Prohibited for certain purposes.
   (a)   No operator of any vehicle shall park such vehicle for the principal
purpose of advertising or displaying it or other objects for sale on any public
lands, or on any streets listed by ordinance or resolution of the City Council,
unless authorized by resolution of the Council.
      (1)   Section (a) shall be operative on the following list of streets
that may be amended as needed by ordinance or resolution of the City Council:
Euclid Avenue, Holt Boulevard, Mission Boulevard, Riverside Drive, Mountain
Avenue, Grove Avenue, Vineyard Avenue, Archibald Avenue, Haven Avenue, Milliken
Avenue, Philadelphia Street, San Antonio Avenue, Fourth Street from Grove
Avenue east to the City limits, any side street within two hundred fifty (250)
feet of Euclid Avenue, Riverside Drive, Holt Boulevard or Mission Boulevard, or
in the parking lots of Veterans Memorial/John Galanis Park, John Galvin Park,
or Jay Littleton Park.
      (2)   Section (a) shall not apply to any vehicle parked within two
hundred fifty (250) feet of the residence of the registered owner of the
vehicle.
   (b)   It shall be unlawful for any person to have more than two (2) vehicles
parked for the principal purpose of advertising or displaying such vehicles or
other objects for sale on any public lands or streets.
   (c)   No person shall construct, or cause to be constructed, repair, or
cause to be repaired, grease, or cause to be greased, dismantle, or cause to be
dismantled, any vehicle, or any part thereof, upon any public street or public
lands in the City, provided, however, temporary emergency repairs may be made
upon a public street.
   (d)   No person shall wash, or cause to be washed, or polish, or cause to be
polished, any vehicle, or any part thereof, upon any public street or public
lands in the City.
(§§ 10.5, 10.6, and 10.7, Ord. 1651, eff. July 20, 1967, as amended by § 1,
Ord. 2640, eff. August 14, 1997, § 1, Ord. 2915, eff. January 1, 2010)
Sec. 4-6.1009. Restricted for certain commercial vehicles.
   (a)   It shall be unlawful for the owner or driver of any commercial vehicle
to allow the semitrailer, disconnected from the truck tractor, to remain
standing upon any street, alley, or avenue in the City.
   (b)   Except in industrial zones and on designated truck routes, it shall be
unlawful for the owner or driver of any commercial vehicle, truck tractor and
semitrailer or truck tractor, exceeding a gross weight of five (5) tons, to
allow such vehicle, truck tractor and semitrailer or truck tractor, to remain
standing upon any street, alley or avenue in the City.
   (c)   In industrial zones, it shall be unlawful for the owner or driver of
any commercial vehicle, truck tractor and semitrailer or truck tractor
exceeding a gross weight of five (5) tons to allow such vehicle, truck tractor
and semitrailer or truck tractor to remain standing upon any street, alley or
avenue.
   (d)   On designated truck routes, it shall be unlawful for the owner or
driver or any commercial vehicle, truck tractor and semitrailer or truck
tractor exceeding a gross weight of five (5) tons to allow such vehicle, truck
tractor and semitrailer or truck tractor to remain standing upon said
designated truck route.
   (e)   The operator of any commercial vehicle of legal weight may park said
vehicle:
      (1)   While making pickups or deliveries of goods, wares and merchandise
from or to any building or structure, for the purpose of delivering materials
to be used in the actual and bona fide repair, alteration, remodeling or
construction of any building or structure for which a building permit has
previously been obtained therefor; or
      (2)   When such vehicle is parked in connection with and in aid of the
performance of a service to or on a property in the block in which said vehicle
is parked.
      (3)   When such vehicle is experiencing mechanical difficulties and the
operator is waiting for roadside assistance to address such difficulties.
   (f)   Except in residential zones, the City Traffic Engineer may permit, by
the posting of appropriate signs, limited truck parking where it is determined
that to prohibit such parking is not necessary in protecting the public
interest.
   (g)   The provisions of this section shall not apply to the following
vehicles:
      (1)   Passenger buses under the jurisdiction of the Public Utilities
Commission of the State; or
      (2)   Vehicles owned by a public utility or licensed contractor if
necessary for use in connection, installation or repair of any public utility.
   (h)   Within residential zoning districts and residential land use districts
of specific plans, it is unlawful for the driver, owner, or operator or any
large commercial vehicle to park, or cause to be parked, such vehicles on a
public street or alley except:
      (1)   In connection with, and in aid to, the performance of a service on
a property adjacent to where the large commercial vehicle is parked;
      (2)   While loading and unloading goods, and the large commercial vehicle
is allowed to remain parked until such work is completed;
      For the purposes of this subsection, the term "large commercial vehicle"
shall include, but not be limited to, large commercial vehicles, trailers,
motor trucks, semi-trailers, or other large portable commercial equipment that
exceeds a width of eighty (80) inches, or exceeds a height of seven (7) feet,
or exceeds a length of twenty-five (25) feet.
(§ 10.3, Ord. 1651, eff. July 20, 1967, as amended by § 1, Ord. 1846, eff.
December 19, 1974, § 1, Ord. 2296, eff. February 14, 1985, § 1, Ord. 2499, eff.
March 19, 1991, § 2, Ord. 3142, eff. October 3, 2019, and §§ 3-6, Ord. 3231,
eff. January 19, 2023)
Sec. 4-6.1010. Restricted on private property.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to park, or cause to be parked, any
vehicle upon any privately owned property, parking lot, or driveway without the
consent of the owner, lessee, tenant, or other person entitled to possession of
such premises.
(§ 19.1, Ord. 1651, eff. July 20, 1967)
Sec. 4-6.1011. Seventy two (72) hour limit.
   No person who owns or has possession, custody, or control of any vehicle
shall park such vehicle upon any street, alley, or City-owned parking lot or
parking facility for a period of seventy-two (72) or more consecutive hours.
(§ 10.4, Ord. 1651, eff. July 20, 1967, § 3, Ord. 3000, eff. October 16. 2014)
Sec. 4-6.1012. Peddling, vending, and services.
   (a)   Except otherwise provided in this section, no person shall stand or
park any vehicle, wagon, or pushcart from which goods, wares, merchandise,
fruits, vegetables, or foodstuffs are sold, displayed, solicited, offered for
sale, bartered, or exchanged, or any lunch wagon or eating car or vehicle on
any portion of any street within the City except that such vehicles, wagons, or
pushcarts may stand or park not less than seven hundred (700) feet from the
closest boundary of a public school only at the request of a bona fide
purchaser for a period of time not to exceed ten (10) minutes at any one place.
The provisions of this subsection shall not apply to persons delivering such
articles upon order of, or by agreement with, a customer from a store or other
fixed place of business or distribution.
   (b)   No person shall park or stand any vehicle or wagon used or intended to
be used in the transportation of property for hire on any street while awaiting
patronage for such vehicle or wagon without first obtaining a written permit to
do so from the City Traffic Engineer, which permit shall designate the specific
location where such vehicle may stand.
   (c)   Whenever any permit is granted pursuant to the provisions of this
section and a particular location to park or stand is specified therein, no
person shall park or stand any vehicle, wagon, or pushcart on any location
other than as designated in such permit. In the event the permittee is
convicted in a court of competent jurisdiction for violating any of the
provisions of this section, such permit shall be forthwith revoked by the City
Traffic Engineer upon the filing of the record of such conviction with the City
Traffic Engineer, and no permit shall thereafter be issued to such person until
six (6) months have elapsed from the date of such revocation.
(§ 10.10, Ord. 1651, eff. July 20, 1967, as amended by § 1, Ord. 2410, eff.
February 18, 1988)
Sec. 4-6.1013. Authority to place emergency signs.
   Whenever the City Traffic Engineer determines than an emergency traffic
congestion is likely to result from the holding of public or private
assemblages, gatherings, or functions, or for other reasons, he shall have the
power and authority to order temporary signs to be erected or posted indicating
that the operation, parking, or standing of vehicles is prohibited on such
streets and alleys as he shall direct during the time such temporary signs are
in place. Such signs shall remain in place only during the existence of such
emergency, and the City Traffic Engineer shall cause such signs to be removed
promptly thereafter.
(§ 10.13, Ord. 1651, eff. July 20, 1967)
Sec. 4-6.1014. Obedience to emergency signs.
   When signs authorized by the provisions of §
4-6.1013 of this article are in place giving notice thereof, no person shall
operate, park, or stand any vehicle contrary to the directions and provisions
of such signs.
(§ 10.13, Ord. 1651, eff. July 20, 1967)
Sec. 4-6.1015. Display of warning devices by disabled commercial vehicle.
   The display of warning devices by disabled commercial vehicles shall comply
with Cal. Veh. Code §§ 23000 et seq. and any other applicable federal, state
and local regulations.
(§ 10.14, Ord. 1651, eff. July 20, 1967)
Sec. 4-6.1016. Removal of vehicles.
   In the event of the violation of the provisions of §
4-6.309 of
Article 3, §§
4-6.1003 through
4-6.1005,
4-6.1007,
4-6.1009,
4-6.1011,
4-6.1014 and
4-6.1020 of
Article 10, §
4-6.1108 of
Article 11, and §§
4-6.1204 and
4-6.1207 of
Article 12 of this chapter, the Police Department is hereby authorized to have
the violating vehicles towed away and stored, and the owner, driver, or other
person with a right of possession of the vehicle shall pay all lawful charges
before the vehicle is returned, in addition to any fine or penalty imposed by
the City by citation as well as any bail or fine imposed by the courts for the
citation of the violation.
(§ 10.12, Ord. 1651, eff. July 20, 1967, § 4, Ord. 3000, eff. October 16, 2014,
and § 7, Ord. 3231, eff. January 19, 2023)
Sec. 4-6.1017. Restricted parking in Metrolink Station parking lots.
   (a)   No person shall park any vehicle in a Metrolink Station parking lot
unless such person is a Metrolink passenger on the day the vehicle is parked or
the vehicle is parked for the purpose of letting out or picking up a Metrolink
passenger.
   (b)   When authorized signs which have been determined by the City Traffic
Engineer to be necessary are in place giving notice thereof, no operator of any
vehicle shall stop, stand or park such vehicle in a Metrolink Station parking
lot between the hours of 9:00 p.m. on one day and 5:00 a.m. on the following
day.
   (c)   In the event of the violation of the provisions of this section, the
Police Department is hereby authorized to have the violating vehicle towed away
and stored, and the owner, driver or other person with a right of possession of
the vehicle shall pay all lawful charges before the vehicle is returned, in
addition to any civil penalty imposed for the citation of the violation.
(§ 1, Ord. 2547, eff. July 1, 1993)
Sec. 4-6.1018. Removal of Vehicles Parked For Sale.
   Any vehicle parked on any street or public lands in violation of §
4-6.1008 of this Code, or in violation of Cal. Veh. Code § 22651.9, may be
removed if all of the following requirements are satisfied:
   (a)   Within the past 30 days, the vehicle is known to have been previously
issued a notice of parking violation under §
4-6.1008 of this Code, which was accompanied by a notice containing all of the
following:
      (1)   A warning that an additional parking violation may result in the
impoundment of the vehicle;
      (2)   A warning that the vehicle may be impounded pursuant to this
section even if moved to another street listed in §
4-6.1008(a)(1) so long as the signs or placards offering the vehicle for sale
remain on the vehicle, unless the vehicle is parked within two hundred fifty
(250) feet of the residence of the registered owner;
      (3)   A statement that the streets as listed in §
4-6.1008(a)(1), and all public lands in the City are included in the
prohibition, unless the vehicle is parked within two hundred fifty (250) feet
of the residence of the registered owner; and
   (b)   The previous notice of parking violation was issued at least 24 hours
prior to the removal of the vehicle.
   The post-storage notice and hearing requirements of Cal. Veh. Code § 22852
apply to the removal of vehicles under this section.
(§ 2, Ord. 2640, eff. August 14, 1997, as amended by § 2, Ord. 2915, eff.
January 1, 2009)
Sec. 4-6.1019. Restricted parking for street sweeping and trash collection
services.
   (a)   When the City Council determines the stopping, standing or parking of
any vehicle upon any street, or portion of the street, impedes street sweeping
and/or trash collection services and affects public health, safety and welfare,
a restricted parking area may be established within the City.
   (b)   The Public Works Agency Executive Director is authorized to establish
a process for public input to propose designated restricted parking zones for
street sweeping or trash collection services.
   (c)   The City Council may establish a designated restricted parking zone
for street sweeping and trash collection services by resolution.
(§ 3, Ord. 3188, eff. August 6, 2021, § 2, Ord. 3233, eff. January 19, 2023)
Sec. 4-6.1020. Oversized vehicle parking.
   (a)   Prohibition on Public Streets. No person shall park, or leave standing
on any public street, alley or right of way in the city any oversized vehicle
without properly displaying a valid oversized vehicle temporary parking permit.
   (b)   Definitions.
      (1)   Oversized Vehicle: Any vehicle, motorized or non-motorized, that
exceeds twenty-five (25) feet in length, or exceeds eight and one-half (8.5)
feet in width, or exceeds seven (7) feet in height. Oversized vehicles shall
include all buses, truck tractors, semitrailers, motor trucks, trailers,
campers, camp trailers, house cars, trailer coaches, and other equipment or
machinery, regardless or width, length, or height.
   Notwithstanding the length, width, and height requirements for an oversized
vehicle, the following vehicles shall also be considered oversized vehicles
subject to the prohibitions contained in §
4-6.1020(a) of this article:
         (i)   Buses as defined in the California Vehicle Code;
         (ii)   Trailers, including boat trailers, and semitrailers, as these
are defined in the California Vehicle Code, and standalone boats not connected
to trailers;
         (iii)   Trailer coaches as defined in the California Vehicle Code; and
         (iv)   Recreational vehicles as defined in this article.
      (2)   Recreational Vehicle: A motor home, slide-in camper, travel
trailer, truck camper, or camping trailer, with or without motive power,
designed for human habitation for recreational or emergency occupancy.
Recreational vehicle shall also include:
         (i)   Camping Trailer: A vehicular portable unit mounted on wheels and
constructed with collapsible partial side walls which fold for towing by
another vehicle and unfold at the campsite and designed for human habitation
for recreational or emergency occupancy;
         (ii)   Motor Home: A vehicular unit built on or permanently attached
to a self-propelled motor vehicle chassis, chassis cab or van, which becomes an
integral part of the completed vehicle, designed for human habitation for
recreational or emergency occupancy;
         (iii)   Slide-In Camper: A portable unit, consisting of a roof, floor
and sides, designed to be loaded onto and unloaded from the bed of a pickup
truck, and designed for human habitation for recreational or emergency
occupancy and shall include a truck camper;
         (iv)   Travel Trailer: A portable unit, mounted on wheels, of such a
size and weight as not to require special highway movement permits when drawn
by a motor vehicle and for human habitation for recreational or emergency
occupancy.
   (c)   Exemptions. The provisions of §
4-6.1020(a) of this article shall not apply to any of the following:
      (1)   Any commercial vehicles. The parking of commercial vehicles shall
be controlled by §
4-6.1009 of Article 10 of Chapter 6 of Title 4 of the Ontario Municipal Code.
      (2)   Any ambulance, paramedic or public safety vehicle involved in
responding to an emergency.
      (3)   Any vehicle being repaired under emergency conditions for less than
eight (8) hours. For purposes of this section "emergency repairs" shall mean
sudden and unexpected repairs occurring during transport of the vehicle.
      (4)   Any vehicle belonging to federal, state or local authorities while
conducting official government business.
      (5)   Any vehicle displaying a valid permit issued pursuant to §§
4-6.1020(d) and (e) of this article.
   (d)   Temporary Parking Permits. The License Official, or his or her
designee, shall issue a temporary parking permit to any resident of the City,
for parking of an oversized vehicle that belongs to that resident, or a guest
of the household in which such resident resides, provided the following
conditions are met:
      (1)   The permit is obtained by a resident of the property in front of
which the oversized vehicle will be parked in accordance with this article.
      (2)   The oversized vehicle is parked on the street immediately adjacent
to the property upon which the person requesting the permit resides.
      (3)   The duration of the permit shall not exceed forty-eight (48) hours.
      (4)   At the discretion of the License Official, or his or her designee,
a permit may be issued for a period not to exceed seventy-two (72) hours to
accommodate houseguests.
      (5)   No more than two (2) permits shall be issued for any specific
oversized vehicle within any given calendar month. Permits may not be issued
for consecutive periods, and there must be a minimum of forty-eight (48)
consecutive hours between the issuance of permits for a specific property or a
specific oversized vehicle.
      (6)   The oversized vehicle shall not be used for overnight camping,
lodging, residing in, or any use for accommodation purposes.
      (7)   The oversized vehicle shall not visibly block or obscure any
existing safety or traffic control device, nor shall it be parked in such
position that another's driveway approach is jeopardized, and it shall
otherwise meet all other parking requirements for the street upon which it is
parked.
      (8)   The oversized vehicle is not licensed, registered or used for
commercial purposes.
      (9)   The License Official, or his or her designee, determines that the
parking of the oversized vehicle would not create a public safety hazard. Such
a determination may be made based on factors, including, without limitation,
the size of the oversized vehicle, the configuration of the street or the
location of any nearby driveways, trees, improvements or structures.
   (e)   Permit Restrictions.
      (1)   It shall be unlawful for any person to whom a permit is issued
pursuant to §
4-6.1020(d) of this article to transfer, sell, rent or lease such permit or
allow such permit to be used by any person other than a guest of that person,
either with or without consideration.
      (2)   It shall be unlawful for any person to borrow, buy or otherwise
acquire for value or use or display any parking permit, except as provided for
in §
4-6.1020(d) of this article.
      (3)   Each permit issued pursuant to §
4-6.1020(d) of this article shall be subject to all of the conditions and
restrictions set forth in §
4-6.1020(d) of this article. The issuance of such permit shall not be construed
to be a permit for or approval of any violation of any provision of this code
or any other law or regulation.
      (4)   The issuance of a permit pursuant to §
4-6.1020(d) of this article shall not be construed or interpreted as a warranty
or representation by the city or its officials, officers or employees that the
parking of any oversized vehicle is or is not in compliance with any other
provision of law. Neither the enactment of this part nor the preparation or
delivery of any permit pursuant thereto shall impose any mandatory duty upon
the City, its officials, officers or employees to completely and accurately
determine the safety of the parking of any oversized vehicle or impose any
liability on the city, its officials, officers or employees regarding the same.
      (5)   The City Council may establish a reasonable permit fee by separate
resolution to recover the City's administrative costs in preparing and issuing
permits.
   (f)   Permit Display. Parking permits issued pursuant to §
4-6.1020(d) of this article shall be clearly displayed on the oversized
vehicle's dashboard or windshield.
(§ 8, Ord. 3231, eff. January 19, 2023, § 2, Ord. 3261, eff. November 16, 2023)
Article 11. Stopping, Standing, and Parking Restricted or Prohibited
Sec. 4-6.1101. Twenty four (24) minute limit.
   Green curb markings shall mean no standing or parking for a period of time
longer than twenty four (24) minutes at any time between 9:00 a.m. and 5:00
p.m. of any day except Sundays and holidays.
   When authorized signs, parking meters, or curb makings have been determined
by the City Traffic Engineer to be necessary and are in place giving notice
thereof, no operator of any vehicle shall stop, stand, or park such vehicle
adjacent to any such legible curb making or sign or parking meter in violation
thereof.
(§ 11, Ord. 1651, eff. July 20, 1967)
Sec. 4-6.1102. Forty (40) minute limit.
   When authorized signs, parking meters, or curb markings have been determined
by the City Traffic Engineer to be necessary and are in place giving notice
thereof, no operator of any vehicle shall stop, stand, or park such vehicle
between the hours of 9:00 a.m. and 5:00 p.m. of any day except Sundays and
holidays for a period of time longer than forty (40) minutes.
(§ 11.1, Ord. 1651, eff. July 20, 1967)
Sec. 4-6.1103. One (1) hour limit.
   When authorized signs, parking meters, or curb markings have been determined
by the City Traffic Engineer to be necessary and are in place giving notice
thereof, no operator of any vehicle shall stop, stand, or park such vehicle
between the hours of 9:00 a.m. and 5:00 p.m. of any day except Sundays and
holidays for a period of time longer than one (1) hour.
(§ 11.2, Ord. 1651, eff. July 20, 1967)
Sec. 4-6.1104. Two (2) hour limit.
   When authorized signs, parking meters, or curb markings have been determined
by the City Traffic Engineer to be necessary and are in place giving notice
thereof, no operator of any vehicle shall stop, stand, or park such vehicle
between the hours of 9:00 a.m. and 5:00 p.m. of any day except Sundays and
holidays for a period of time longer than two (2) hours.
(§ 11.3, Ord. 1651, eff. July 20, 1967)
Sec. 4-6.1105. Parallel parking.
   (a)   Subject to other and more restrictive limitations, a vehicle may be
stopped or parked within eighteen (18) inches of the left-hand curb facing in
the direction of traffic movement upon any one-way street unless signs are in
place prohibiting such stopping or standing.
   (b)   In the event a highway includes two (2) or more separate roadways and
traffic is restricted to one direction upon any such roadway, no person shall
stand or park a vehicle upon the left-hand side of such one-way roadway unless
signs are in place permitting such standing or parking.
   (c)   The City Traffic Engineer is hereby authorized to determine, and shall
erect signs giving notice thereof, when standing or parking shall be prohibited
upon the left-hand side of any one-way street or when standing or parking may
be permitted upon the left-hand side of any one-way roadway of a highway having
two (2) or more separate roadways.
   (d)   The requirement of parallel parking imposed by the provisions of this
section shall not apply in the event any commercial vehicle is actually engaged
in the process of loading or unloading freight or goods. In such event such
vehicle may be backed up to the curb; provided, the vehicle does not extend
beyond the center line of the street and does not block traffic thereby.
(§ 11.4, Ord. 1651, eff. July 20, 1967)
Sec. 4-6.1106. Diagonal parking.
   On any of the streets or portions of streets established by resolution of
the Council as diagonal parking zones and when signs or pavement markings are
in place indicating such diagonal parking, it shall be unlawful for the
operator of any vehicle to park such vehicle except as follows:
   (a)   At the angle to the curb indicated by signs or pavement markings
allotting space to parked vehicles and entirely within the limits of such
allotted space; and
   (b)   With the front wheel nearest the curb within six (6) inches of such
curb.
   The provisions of this section shall not apply when such vehicle is actually
engaged in the process of loading or unloading passengers, freight, or goods.
In such event the provisions of §
4-6.1105 of this article shall be complied with.
(§ 11.5, Ord. 1651, eff. July 20, 1967)
Sec. 4-6.1107. Parking space markings.
   The City Traffic Engineer is hereby authorized to install and maintain
parking space markings to indicate parking spaces adjacent to curbing where
authorized parking is permitted.
   When such parking space markings are placed on the highway, subject to other
and more restrictive limitations, no vehicle shall be stopped, left standing,
or parked other than within a single space, unless the size or shape of such
vehicle makes compliance impossible.
(§ 11.6, Ord. 1651, eff. July 20, 1967)
Sec. 4-6.1108. No stopping zones.
   The City Traffic Engineer shall designate established no stopping zones by
placing and maintaining appropriate signs indicating that the stopping of
vehicles is prohibited and the hours and days when stopping is prohibited.
   During the hours and on the days designated on such signs, it shall be
unlawful for the operator of any vehicle to stop such vehicle on any of the
streets or parts of streets established by resolution of the Council as no
stopping zones.
(§ 11.7, Ord. 1651, eff. July 20, 1967)
Sec. 4-6.1109. Vision safety parking zones.
   (a)   Vision safety parking zones, not in excess of one hundred (100) feet
from the point of intersection of curb lines extended, may be established by
the City Traffic Engineer.
   (b)   It shall be unlawful for any vehicle, except passenger vehicles
(including station wagons) less than six (6) feet in height with windows on all
four (4) sides that are transparent and unobstructed, to park in an area
designated as a vision safety parking zone.
   (c)   The City Traffic Engineer shall provide for the placement of signs
marking vision safety parking zones and which give notice that: "Passenger
vehicles (including station wagons) less than six (6) feet in height with
windows on all sides that are transparent and unobstructed may park in the
signed area. All other vehicles are prohibited."
(§ 1, Ord. 2069, eff. February 1, 1980)
Article 12. Stopping for Loading or Unloading
Sec. 4-6.1201. Authority to determine and mark zones.
   (a)   The City Traffic Engineer is hereby authorized to determine and mark
loading zones and passenger loading zones as follows:
      (1)   At any place in the Central Traffic District or any business
district; and
      (2)   Elsewhere in front of the entrance to any place of business or in
front of any hall or place used for the purpose of public assembly.
   (b)   In no event shall more than one-half (½) the total curb length in any
block be reserved for loading zone purposes.
   (c)   Loading zones shall be indicated by yellow paint upon the top of all
curbs within such zones.
   (d)   Passenger loading zones shall be indicated by white paint upon the top
of all curbs in such zones.
(§ 12, Ord. 1651, eff. July 20, 1967)
Sec. 4-6.1202. Designation of zones.
   (a)   The City Traffic Engineer is hereby authorized, subject to the
provisions and limitations of this chapter to place, and when required by the
provisions of this chapter shall place, the following curb markings to indicate
parking or standing regulations, which curb markings shall have the following
meanings:
      (1)   Red shall mean no stopping, standing, or parking at any time except
as permitted by the Vehicle Code and except that a bus may stop in a red zone
marked or signed as a bus zone.
      (2)   Yellow shall mean no stopping, standing, or parking at any time
between 7:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m. of any day except Sundays and holidays for any
purpose other than the loading or unloading of passengers or materials;
provided, however, the loading or unloading of passengers shall not consume
more than three (3) minutes, and the loading or unloading of materials shall
not consume more than twenty (20) minutes.
      (3)   White shall mean no stopping, standing, or parking for any purpose
other than the loading or unloading of passengers, including valet parking, or
for the purpose of depositing mail in an adjacent mailbox, which shall not
exceed three (3) minutes, and such restrictions shall apply between 7:00 a.m.
and 6:00 p.m. of any day except Sundays and holidays and except as follows:
         (i)   When such zone is in front of or adjacent to a terminal serving
a public transportation agency, a hotel, or a mailbox, the restrictions shall
apply at all times.
         (ii)   When such zone is in front of a theater, the restrictions shall
apply at all times except when such theater is closed.
   (b)   When the City Traffic Engineer, as authorized by the provisions of
subsection (a) of this section, has caused curb markings to be placed, no
person shall stop, stand, or park a vehicle adjacent to any such legible curb
markings in violation of the provisions of this section.
(§ 12.1, Ord. 1651, eff. July 20, 1967, as amended by § 1, Ord. 1690, eff. July
18, 1968, § 3, Ord. 3276, eff. August 15, 2024)
Sec. 4-6.1203. Authority to establish coach zones.
   The City Traffic Engineer is hereby authorized to determine the location of,
and to establish, bus zones and taxi zones opposite curb space for the loading
and unloading of buses, taxis, or common carriers of passengers. Coach zones
shall normally be established on the far side of an intersection.
(§ 12.6, Ord. 1651, eff. July 20, 1967)
Sec. 4-6.1204. Obedience to coach zone regulations.
   It shall be unlawful for any vehicle other than a bus, taxi, or common
carrier to be parked in established coach zones, and it shall be unlawful for
the operator of any bus, taxi, common carrier, or vehicle used for local
passenger hire to park such bus, taxi, common carrier, or vehicle in any
parking space for the purpose of soliciting or accepting patronage except in
such locations in the business districts as have been reserved and designated
by the City Traffic Engineer for the exclusive use of such vehicles.
(§ 12.6, Ord. 1651, eff. July 20, 1967)
Sec. 4-6.1205. Effect of permission to load or unload.
   (a)   Permission granted by the provisions of this chapter to stop or stand
a vehicle for purposes of loading or unloading of materials shall apply only to
commercial vehicles and shall not extend beyond the time necessary therefor and
in no event for more than twenty (20) minutes.
   (b)   The loading or unloading of materials shall apply only to commercial
deliveries and to the delivery or pickup of express and parcel post packages
and United States mail.
   (c)   Permission granted by the provisions of this chapter to stop or park
for purposes of loading or unloading passengers shall include the loading or
unloading of personal baggage but shall not extend beyond the time necessary
therefor and in no event for more than three (3) minutes.
   (d)   Within the total time limits set forth in subsections (a) through (c)
of this section, the provisions of this section shall be enforced so as to
accommodate necessary and reasonable loading or unloading but without
permitting abuse of the privileges hereby granted.
(§ 12.2, Ord. 1651, eff. July 20, 1967)
Sec. 4-6.1206. Obedience to loading zone regulations.
   (a)   No person shall stop, stand, or park a vehicle in any yellow loading
zone for any purpose other than loading or unloading passengers or materials
for such time as is permitted in §
4-6.1205 of this article.
   (b)   No person shall stop, stand, or park a vehicle in any passenger
loading zone for any purpose other than the loading or unloading of passengers
for such time as is permitted in §
4-6.1205 of this article.
(§§ 12.3 and 12.4, Ord. 1651, eff. July 20, 1967)
Sec. 4-6.1207. Standing in alleys.
   No person shall stop, stand, or park a vehicle for any purpose other than
the loading or unloading of persons or materials in any alley.
(§ 12.5, Ord. 1651, eff. July 20, 1967)
Article 13. Restricted Use of Certain Streets
Sec. 4-6.1301. Central Traffic District.
   (a)   No person shall operate the following vehicles in the Central Traffic
District except on Euclid Avenue and Holt Boulevard between the hours of 7:00
a.m. and 6:00 p.m. of any day:
      (1)   Any freight vehicle more than eight and one-half (8½) feet in
width, with load, or any freight vehicle so loaded that any part of its load
extends more than twenty (20) feet to the front or rear of such vehicle;
      (2)   Any vehicle carrying building materials which have not been loaded,
or are not to be unloaded, at some point within the Central Traffic District;
and
      (3)   Any vehicle conveying refuse, rubbish, garbage, or dirt, except
City vehicles.
   (b)   The City Traffic Engineer may, by a written permit, authorize the
operation of any such vehicle for the purpose of making necessary emergency
deliveries to or from points within the Central Traffic District.
(§ 13, Ord. 1651, eff. July 20, 1967)
Sec. 4-6.1302. Animal-drawn vehicles.
   No person shall drive any animal-drawn vehicle into or within the Central
Traffic District except during parades or events which have been authorized by
the Council.
(§ 13.1, Ord. 1651, eff. July 20, 1967)
Sec. 4-6.1303. Commercial vehicles.
   (a)   Whenever any resolution of the Council designates and describes any
street, or portion thereof, as a street the use of which is prohibited by any
commercial vehicle, the City Traffic Engineer shall erect and maintain
appropriate signs on the streets affected by such resolution.
   (b)   The streets and parts of streets established by resolution of the
Council are hereby declared to be streets the use of which is prohibited by any
commercial vehicle. The provisions of this section shall not apply to passenger
buses under the jurisdiction of the Public Utilities Commission of the State.
(§ 13.3, Ord. 1651, eff. July 20, 1967)
Sec. 4-6.1304. Truck routes.
   (a)   Whenever any ordinance of the Council designates and describes any
street, or portion thereof, as a street the use of which is permitted by any
vehicle exceeding a maximum gross weight limit of five (5) tons, the City
Traffic Engineer is hereby authorized to designate such streets by appropriate
signs as truck routes for the movement of vehicles exceeding a maximum gross
weight limit of five (5) tons.
   (b)   When any such truck routes are established and designated by
appropriate signs, the operator of any vehicle exceeding a maximum gross weight
limit of five (5) tons shall drive on such routes and none other: provided,
however, the provisions of this section shall not prohibit the operator of any
vehicle exceeding a maximum gross weight of five (5) tons from coming from a
truck route having ingress and egress by direct route to and from restricted
streets when necessary for the purpose of making pickups or deliveries of
goods, wares, and merchandise from or to any building or structure located on
such restricted streets or for the purpose of delivering materials to be used
in the actual and bona fide repair, alteration, remodeling, or construction of
any building or structure upon such restricted streets for which work a
building permit has previously been obtained.
   (c)   The provisions of this section shall not apply to the following
vehicles:
      (1)   Passenger buses under the jurisdiction of the Public Utilities
Commission of the State under Cal. Pub. Util. Code §§ 1031 through 1036;
      (2)   Vehicles owned or operated by a public utility or licensed
contractor while necessarily in use in the construction, installation, or
repair of any public utility; and
      (3)   Any vehicle defined in the Vehicle Code of the State as a house car
(motor home) or vehicles used for recreation only.
   (d)   The streets and parts of streets established by ordinance of the
Council are hereby declared to be truck routes for the movement of vehicles
exceeding a maximum gross weight of five (5) tons.
(§ 13.2, Ord. 1651, eff. July 20, 1967, as amended by § 1, Ord. 1855, eff. June
5, 1975)
Sec. 4-6.1305. Permit parking zones on residential streets.
   (a)   Definitions. For the purposes of this section, unless otherwise
apparent from the context, certain words, terms, and phrases used in this
section are defined as follows:
      (1)   “Adjacent residence” shall mean a residential dwelling unit
fronting upon or having direct access to a residential street.
      (2)   “Nonresident vehicle” shall mean a vehicle operated or parked by a
person whose destination is to a nonresidential location.
      (3)   “Permit parking zone” shall mean certain residential street, or
portions thereof, which are designated by the Council as a permit parking zone
for the benefit of the adjacent residences, in which zone vehicles may not park
unless an authorized permit or other indicia is displayed thereon or unless
such vehicle is otherwise exempt as provided in this section.
   (b)   Designation of permit parking zones. The Council, by resolution, may
designate a permit parking zone and establish the days and hours during such
days when parking in such permit parking zone shall be restricted.
   (c)   Findings. Prior to designating certain residential streets, or
portions thereof, as a permit parking zone, the Council shall find with respect
to such streets or portions:
      (1)   That such zone is necessary to provide reasonably available and
convenient parking for the benefit of the adjacent residences;
      (2)   That the proposed zone is desirable to encourage the use of car
pooling;
      (3)   That the proposed zone is desirable to enhance or protect the
quality of life in the area of the proposed zone; and
      (4)   That the proposed zone will tend to encourage nonresident vehicles
to park in off-street parking facilities.
   (d)   Considerations. Before making its findings with respect to any
proposed permit parking zone, the Council shall consider such factors as it
deems appropriate, including the following:
      (1)   Whether nonresident vehicles do or may substantially and regularly
interfere with the use by or for the benefit of adjacent residences of a
majority of available public street parking spaces in the proposed permit
parking zone, and whether such interference occurs at regular and significant
intervals;
      (2)   Whether nonresident vehicles driven or parked in the proposed
permit parking zone are a source of unreasonable litter, noise, traffic
hazards, environmental pollution, or devaluation of real property in the area
of the proposed permit parking zone;
      (3)   Whether the occupants of adjacent residences in the proposed permit
parking zone desire its establishment;
      (4)   Whether a shortage of residential-related parking spaces exists in
the area of the proposed permit parking zone: and
      (5)   Whether an alternative solution is feasible or practical.
   (e)   Posting required. The City Traffic Engineer shall designate
established permit parking zones by placing and maintaining appropriate signs
indicating that the parking of vehicles which do not display a permit issued
for such zone is prohibited and the hours and days when such parking is
prohibited.
   During the hours and on the days designated on such signs, it shall be
unlawful for the operator of any vehicle to park such vehicle on any street in
a permit parking zone unless there is displayed on such vehicle a valid permit
issued for such zone or such vehicle is otherwise exempt.
   (f)   Parking permits. Permits, of a type and design established by
resolution of the Council authorizing parking in the permit parking zone for
which issued, shall be issued by the License Official.
      (1)   Upon submitting such application and supplying such proof of
residence as is required by the License Official, the License Official shall
issue to the occupant(s) of an adjacent residence within a permit parking zone
a number of parking permits for such zone, not to exceed three (3), except as
hereinafter provided. The License Official may issue more than three (3)
parking permits for an adjacent residence if it is shown, by proof satisfactory
to the License Official, that there are more than three (3) vehicles registered
to occupants of the adjacent residence and that insufficient off-street parking
is available to them during the restricted hours.
      (2)   A permit issued pursuant to this section shall remain valid for so
long as the person to whom it was issued continues to reside in the adjacent
residence for which the permit was issued or until the permit parking zone for
which such permit was issued is disestablished.
      (3)   It shall be unlawful for any person to whom a permit is issued
pursuant to this section to transfer, sell, rent, or lease such permit, or to
allow such permit to be used on a nonresident vehicle not owned by the
applicant, either with or without consideration. The License Official shall
revoke the parking permit of any person who is convicted of a violation of this
subsection.
      (4)   It shall be unlawful for any person to pay any consideration for
the purchase or use of a parking permit issued pursuant to this section. It
shall be unlawful for any person who is not an occupant of an adjacent
residence to display in a vehicle any parking permit issued pursuant to this
section, except while visiting an adjacent residence in the zone for which the
permit was issued.
   (g)   Exempt vehicles. The posted restrictions of a permit parking zone
shall not apply to commercial vehicles which are otherwise lawfully in use or
parked within a permit parking zone.
   (h)   Disestablishment. The Council, by resolution, may disestablish or
modify a permit parking zone whenever the Council finds that it is in the
public interest to do so.
   (i)   Penalties.
      (1)   Any person violating any of the provisions of this section shall be
guilty of an infraction.
      (2)   The penalties for violating any of the provisions of this section
are set forth in the Citywide Fee Schedule.
(§ 1, Ord. 2074, eff. March 20, 1980, as amended by § 1, Ord. 2085, eff. May 7,
1980, § 1, Ord. 2180, eff. July 7, 1982, § 1, Ord. 2366, eff. October 2, 1986,
and § 1, Ord. 2464, eff. April 5, 1990, § 3, Ord. 3311, eff. September 18,
2025)
Article 14. Trains
Sec. 4-6.1401. Driving through railroad gates or barriers.
   No person shall drive any vehicle through, around, or under any crossing
gate or barrier at a railroad grade crossing while such gate or barrier is
closed or is being opened or closed.
(§ 14, Ord. 1651, eff. July 20, 1967)
Article 15. Special Speed Zones
Sec. 4-6.1501. Increasing local limit.
   Whenever it has been determined, upon the basis of an engineering and
traffic survey, that a speed greater than twenty-five (25) miles per hour would
facilitate the orderly movement of traffic and would be reasonable and safe
upon any highway otherwise subject to a prima facie limit of twenty-five (25)
miles per hour under Vehicle Code, the Council may by resolution declare such
increased speed limits of 30, 35, 40, 45, 50, 55, 60, or 65 miles per hour. The
declared prima facie speed limits shall be effective when appropriate signs
giving notice thereof are posted on the street.
(§ 15, Ord. 1651, eff. July 20, 1967, as amended by § 1, Ord. 1958, eff. August
18, 1977, § 1, Ord. 1967, eff. November 3, 1977, § 1, Ord. 1981, eff. January
5, 1978, § 1, Ord. 1989, eff. March 9, 1978, § 1, Ord. 2024, eff. December 2,
1978, § 1, Ord. 2036, eff. April 19, 1979, § 1, Ord. 2307, eff. June 20, 1985,
§ 1, Ord. 2398, eff. October 15, 1987, Ord. 2650, eff. February 19, 1998, Ord.
2674, eff. November 19, 1998, Ord. 2757, eff. May 16, 2002, § 1, Ord. 2772,
eff. April 3, 2003, Ord. 2872, eff. October 4, 2007, § 1, Ord. 2891, eff. July
3, 2008, and Ord. 2919, eff. May 19, 2010)
Sec. 4-6.1502. Decreasing local limits.
   Whenever it has been determined, upon the basis of an engineering and
traffic survey, that a speed less than sixty-five (65) miles per hour would
facilitate the orderly movement of traffic and would be reasonable and safe
upon any highway otherwise subject to a prima facie limit of sixty-five (65)
miles per hour under the Vehicle Code, the Council may by resolution declare
such decreased speed limits of 60, 55, 50, 45, 40, 35, 30, or 25 miles per
hour. The declared prima facie speed limits shall be effective
when appropriate signs giving notice thereof are posted on the street.
(§ 15.1, Ord. 1651, eff. July 20, 1967, as amended by § 2, Ord. 1958, eff.
August 18, 1977, § 2, Ord. 1967, eff. November 3, 1977, § 2, Ord. 1981, eff.
January 5, 1978, § 2, Ord. 1989, eff. March 9, 1978, § 2, Ord. 2024, eff.
December 2, 1978, § 1, Ord. 2055, eff. November 1, 1979, § 2, Ord. 2307, eff.
June 20, 1985, § 1, Ord. 2403, eff. November 19, 1987, § 1, Ord. 2447, eff.
July 20, 1989, § 1, Ord. 2510, eff. August 15, 1991, § 1, Ord. 2517, eff.
February 6, 1992, § 1, Ord. 2564, eff. February 3, 1994, Ord. 2650, eff.
February 19, 1998, Ord. 2674, eff. November 19, 1998, Ord. 2757, eff. May 16,
2002, Ord. 2872, eff. October 4, 2007, § 1, Ord. 2891, eff. July 3, 2008, and
Ord. 2919, eff. May 19, 2010)
Sec. 4-6.1503. Decreasing State limit between districts (Repealed).
(§ 15, Ord. 1651, repealed by § 3, Ord. 2307)
Sec. 4-6.1504. Regulation of speed by traffic signals.
   The City Traffic Engineer is hereby authorized to regulate the timing of
traffic signals so as to permit the movement of traffic in an orderly and safe
manner at speeds slightly at variance from the speed otherwise applicable
within the district or at intersections and shall erect appropriate signs
giving notice thereof.
(§ 15.3, Ord. 1651, eff. July 20, 1967)
Article 16. Violations and Penalties
Sec. 4-6.1601. Violations.
   Subsection (a) of §
1-2.01 of this Code shall not apply to parking violations referred to in this
article. Any person violating any of the provisions of Articles
9,
10,
11,
12,
13 and
17 of this chapter shall be liable to the City for a civil penalty in the
amount set forth in this article.
(§ 16, Ord. 1651, eff. July 20, 1967, as amended by § 1, Ord. 2030, eff.
February 1, 1979, Ord. 2179, eff. August 5, 1982, and § 1, Ord. 2556, eff.
September 2, 1993)
Sec. 4-6.1602. Penalties: Citations: Method of payment.
   The penalties set forth in the Citywide Fee Schedule shall be paid within
thirty (30) days after the writing of the citation by payment to the Ontario
Police Department (2500 South Archibald, Ontario, California 91761); or by
mailing the payment postmarked within the thirty (30) day time limit to the
Ontario Police Department at the address listed above. Additional fees may be
imposed if payment is made after the thirty (30) day time limit noted above.
The payment of such penalties shall constitute full satisfaction for the
violations referred to therein. If a payment is made by check, it should be
addressed to the City of Ontario (303 East B Street, Ontario, California
91764).
(§ 16.3, Ord. 1651, eff. July 20, 1967, as amended by § 1, Ord. 2365, eff.
October 2, 1986, § 1, Ord. 2903, eff. May 21, 2009, § 2 Ord. 3295, eff. March
6, 2025, § 3, Ord. 3311, eff. September 18, 2025)
Sec. 4-6.1603. Penalties: Citations: State- mandated added penalties.
   The penalty amounts set forth in §
4-6.1602 are exclusive of and do not include any penalties or surcharges
imposed by State law. Any state mandated penalties or surcharges shall be added
to the amounts as set forth in §
4-6.1602 and be paid at the same time and by the same method as set forth in §
4-6.1603.
(§ 1, Ord. 2513, eff. October 31, 1991, as amended by § 3, Ord. 2556, eff.
September 2, 1993, § 2, Ord. 2903, eff. May 21, 2009)
Article 17. Parking At Ontario International Airport
Sec. 4-6.1701. Restrictions and enforcement.
   (a)   No person shall park a vehicle at any location within the Ontario
International Airport in any restricted parking zone for a time longer than
stipulated by the display of appropriate signs and/or curb markings. Violators
shall be subject to a fine, and, when parked for a period of five (5) times
longer than the stipulated time, vehicles may be towed away, and the operator
or owners of such vehicles shall pay all towing and storage fees.
   (b)   No person shall park a vehicle at any location within the Ontario
International Airport in any zone where the display of appropriate signs and/or
curb markings indicate that parking at such a location is not permitted.
Violators shall be subject to a fine, and offending vehicles may be towed away,
and the owners or operators of such vehicles shall pay all towing and storage
fees.
   (c)   No person shall park a vehicle in any parking lot within the Ontario
International Airport where public parking is prohibited and the public is so
informed by the placement of appropriate signs. Violators shall be subject to a
fine, and vehicles in violation shall be towed away, and the owners or
operators of such vehicles shall pay all towing and storage fees.
   (d)   The Police Department of the City and the safety officers of the
Ontario International Airport shall be responsible for the enforcement of the
provisions of this article and shall issue citations and effect the removal of
vehicles in violation.
(§ 2, Ord. 1772, eff. January 6, 1972)
Article 18. Interstate Trucks, Terminal Designation, and Terminal Access
Sec. 4-6.1801. Definitions.
   For the purposes of this article, the following words and phrases shall have
the meaning attributed. Other words and phrases used in this article shall have
the same meanings as they have when used in the California Vehicle Code.
   (a)   “Terminal” means a facility at which freight is consolidated to be
shipped, or where full load consignments may be loaded or off-loaded, or at
which the vehicles are regularly maintained, stored, or manufactured, and to
which interstate trucks have approved access.
   (b)   “Interstate trucks” means vehicle combinations specified in Cal. Veh.
Code § 35401.5(a).
   (c)   “City Traffic Engineer” means the Traffic Engineer of the City of
Ontario or his authorized representative.
   (d)   “Caltrans” means the State of California Department of Transportation,
or its successor agency.
   (e)   “Applicant” means an authorized representative of an existing or
proposed terminal.
   (f)   “Route” means access route for interstate trucks to a terminal.
(§ 1, Ord. 2305, eff. June 6, 1985)
Sec. 4-6.1802. Purpose.
   The purpose of this article is to establish procedures for terminal
designation and truck route designation to terminals for interstate trucks
operating on a federally designated highway system.
(§ 1, Ord. 2305, eff. June 6, 1985)
Sec. 4-6.1803. Application and determination.
   (a)   An applicant who desires designation of a route for access to a
terminal may submit an application on a form provided by the City. Such
application shall be accompanied by such other information as may be required
by the City Traffic Engineer. The application must be filed with the
Engineering Department, and all applicable fees must be paid at the time of
filing.
   (b)   Upon receipt of an application, the City Traffic Engineer will
determine whether the proposed terminal is located in a zone which permits such
use, and whether such use could otherwise be lawfully conducted at the proposed
location.
   (c)   If the terminal may lawfully be located where it is proposed, then the
City Traffic Engineer will determine the capability of the route requested, and
alternative routes, whether requested or not. Determination of route capability
will include, without limitation, a review of adequate turning radius and lane
widths of ramps, intersections and highways, and general traffic conditions,
such as site distance, speed, and traffic volumes.
   (d)   At the completion of his investigation, the City Traffic Engineer
shall notify the applicant, and Caltrans, as to which routes, if any, are
satisfactory, which routes, if any, are unsatisfactory, and which routes, if
any, are unsatisfactory, but could be made satisfactory through retrofitting.
   (e)   No route shall be approved unless it is also approved by Caltrans.
(§ 1, Ord. 2305, eff. June 6, 1985)
Sec. 4-6.1804. Retrofitting.
   (a)   If all feasible routes to a requested terminal are found
unsatisfactory by the City Traffic Engineer, the applicant may request
retrofitting the deficiencies. All costs of engineering, construction, and
inspection will be the responsibility of the applicant. Except when
retrofitting of deficiencies is within the jurisdiction of Caltrans, the actual
construction will be done by the City or by a contractor acceptable to it, at
the City's election.
   (b)   When the work is done by the City, the applicant will deposit with the
City of Ontario the estimated cost of retrofitting. The adjustments between the
estimated and actual cost shall be made after completion of the work, and any
difference between the actual and the estimated cost shall be billed or
refunded to the applicant, as the case may be. When the work is done by the
applicant, the applicant may file with the City Traffic Engineer, on a form
satisfactory to the City Traffic Engineer, a statement detailing the actual
cost of the retrofitting.
   (c)   If, at any time within five (5) years from the date of completion of
the retrofitting by the applicant, should any applicant seek terminal approval
which would use the route upon which such retrofitting was accomplished, any
such applicant's fee may include that applicant's proportionate share of the
retrofitting, as determined by the City Traffic Engineer, which proportionate
share, if collected, shall be disbursed by the City of Ontario to the applicant
who paid for the retrofitting, as well as any applicant who contributed to the
cost of retrofitting under this subsection. Nothing herein shall require the
payment of a proportionate share if the applicant doing the work failed to file
the report with the City Traffic Engineer required by subsection (b) above.
(§ 1, Ord. 2305, eff. June 6, 1985)
Sec. 4-6.1805. Revocation of route.
   (a)   The City Traffic Engineer may revoke any approved terminal or route
designation if the terminal or route becomes unsatisfactory for interstate
truck traffic, or as established by a resolution of the City Council. An
unsatisfactory route includes the inability of interstate trucks to negotiate
the route or said vehicles causing undesirable driving conditions for other
vehicular traffic or pedestrians.
   (b)   The City Traffic Engineer may revoke any approved terminal or route
designation if any billing to an applicant, for fees, charges or other sums due
the City under this article, or any resolution adopted pursuant to this
article, is not paid within sixty (60) days. This subsection shall not affect
the City's right to recover the sums represented by any such billing by an
action of law or otherwise.
   (c)   The City Traffic Engineer shall give written notice of his decision to
revoke any approved terminal or route to each affected applicant. The action of
the City Traffic Engineer shall be effective when the time to appeal the same
has expired, if no appeal is taken. If the decision of the City Traffic
Engineer is appealed in a timely manner, the action of the City Traffic
Engineer shall be effective upon the date of any City Council action upholding
that decision.
(§ 1, Ord. 2305, eff. June 6, 1985)
Sec. 4-6.1806. Appeal process.
   (a)   If the City's Traffic Engineer denies terminal designation, route
feasibility, or revokes a previously approved terminal or route designation,
any affected applicant, within ten (10) calendar days following the date of
receipt of the decision of the City Traffic Engineer, may appeal said decision
to the City Council in writing. The applicant shall pay a nonrefundable fee as
established by the City by resolution, sufficient to pay the cost of the review
of the appeal. An appeal shall be made on a form prescribed by the Engineering
Department, and shall be filed with the City Clerk. The appeal shall state
specifically wherein there was an error or abuse of discretion by the City
Traffic Engineer. Within ten (10) days of the filing of an appeal, the City
Traffic Engineer shall submit to the City Clerk the terminal application, the
sketches of the revoked route, and all other data filed therein, the report of
the City Traffic Engineer, and his decision on the application.
   (b)   The appeal shall be heard within forty five (45) days after the notice
of appeal is filed. The City Clerk shall make copies of the data provided by
the City Traffic Engineer available to the appellant, and may give notice to
any party who requested notice of the time when the appeal will be considered
by the City Council.
   (c)   Within ten (10) days after the hearing, the City Council shall render
its decision on the appeal.
   (d)   If Caltrans, and not the City Traffic Engineer, denies or revokes
terminal access from federally designated highways, no appeal may be made to
the City Council, but must be made to Caltrans, as may be permitted by
Caltrans.
(§ 1, Ord. 2305, eff. June 6, 1985)
Sec. 4-6.1807. Routes to terminals and other jurisdictions.
   Should a requested route pass through the City to a terminal located in
another jurisdiction, the applicant shall also comply with that other
jurisdiction's application process. Coordination of the approval of the route
through the City will be the responsibility of the jurisdiction which controls
the terminal's land use.
(§ 1, Ord. 2305, eff. June 6, 1985)
Sec. 4-6.1808. Trailblazer signs.
   Trailblazer signs will be required at every decision point within the City
en route to the terminal. Upon completion of installation of the signs, the
actual cost shall be computed, and any difference between the actual and the
estimated cost shall be billed or refunded to the applicant, whichever the case
may be. No terminal or route may be used until such signs as may be required
are in place. Costs of trailblazer signs may be apportioned in accordance with
the procedures in §
4-6.1604(c).
(§ 1, Ord. 2305, eff. June 6, 1985)
Sec. 4-6.1809. Fees and costs.
   (a)   The applicant shall pay a nonrefundable application fee as established
by the City by resolution, sufficient to pay the cost of the review of the
terminal designation and the review of the proposed route and alternate routes.
   (b)   Upon approval of the terminal designation and route by the City, and
by Caltrans, the applicant shall deposit with the City of Ontario sufficient
funds as estimated by the City Traffic Engineer to pay for the purchase and
installation of terminal trailblazer signs.
(§ 1, Ord. 2305, eff. June 6, 1985)
Article 19. Skateboards, Roller Skates and Roller Blades on Public and Private
Property
Sec. 4-6.1901. Intent and purpose.
   (a)   Cal. Veh. Code § 21113(f) allows a local agency to adopt rules or
regulations to restrict, or specify the conditions for, the use of bicycles,
motorized bicycles, skateboards and roller skates on public property under the
jurisdiction of that local agency. The intent and purpose of this article is to
enable the local law enforcement agency, on behalf of the City, to prohibit
skateboarding, roller skating or roller blading on public and private property
only when those activities create a nuisance.
   (b)   Enforcement of this article would occur on school grounds only if the
school district board governing public schools chooses to post signage at a
designated school stating that (1) it is the school's policy to prohibit
skateboarding or other similar activities on a school campus, and (2) that the
City prohibits the riding of skateboards, roller skates and roller blades in a
manner which creates a nuisance.
(§ 1, Ord. 2608, eff. February 15, 1996)
Sec. 4-6.1902. Definitions.
   For the purposes of this article, the following words have the meaning
attributed.
   (a)   “Private property” means any property held by private interests which
is used primarily for business, commercial, office space, business park,
religious, multifamily, or recreational purposes. This shall also include the
parking facilities for these “private property” areas.
   (b)   “Public property” means any property owned or maintained by the City,
any public agency or public school district and any public utility within the
geographical boundaries of the City, including any public square, street,
sidewalk or highway.
   (c)   “Roller skates” or “roller blades” means any footwear, or device which
may be attached to the foot or footwear, to which wheels are attached,
including wheels that are “in line” and where such wheels may be used to aid
the wearer in moving or propulsion.
   (d)   “Skateboard” means a board of any material, which has wheels attached
to it and which is propelled or moved by human, gravitational, or mechanical
power, and to which there is not fixed any device or mechanism to turn or
control the wheels.
   (e)   “Nuisance” is defined as any activity which (1) threatens injury to
persons or property, (2) creates an obstruction or presents a hazard to the
free use of public or private property by pedestrians or motorists, or (3)
generates loud or unreasonable noise.
(§ 1, Ord. 2608, eff. February 15, 1996)
Sec. 4-6.1903. Roller skating, roller blading and skateboarding unlawful when
deemed a nuisance.
   (a)   No person shall use a skateboard, roller blades or roller skates in a
manner which creates a nuisance as defined in §
4-6.1902(e).
   (b)   Notwithstanding §§
4-6.1901(b) and
4-6.1903(a), school officials may permit skateboarding, roller skating or
roller blading on a posted campus as part of a school-supervised recreational
or athletic activity.
(§ 1, Ord. 2608, eff. February 15, 1996)
Sec. 4-6.1904. Posting of signs: Content.
   (a)   Prior to the enforcement of the prohibition of skateboarding, roller
skating or roller blading at any school campus, only when these activities
create a nuisance as defined in §
4-6.1902(e), a sign announcing a school's policy prohibiting these activities
must be posted along with a sign announcing the section of this article
pertaining to the regulation of skateboarding, roller skating and roller
blading, §
4-6.1903(a).
   (b)   Signs so posted shall be a minimum of seventeen (17) inches by twenty
two (22) inches in size with lettering not less than one (1) inch in height and
shall provide substantially as follows:
      (1)   The school's policy to prohibit skateboarding; and
      (2)   “Skateboarding, roller skating or roller blading are prohibited
when deemed to be a nuisance under §§
4-6.1902(e) and
4-6.1903 of the Ontario Municipal Code. Any violation is an infraction.”
(§ 1, Ord. 2608, eff. February 15, 1996)
Article 20. Private Roads, Travel Ways, and Parking Lots Serving the Ontario
Mills Development and Surrounding Commercial Developments
Sec. 4-6.2001. Findings and declarations.
   The City Council hereby finds and declares:
   (a)   That the privately owned and maintained roads described in §
4-6.2002 are, or will be, generally held open to the public for purposes of
vehicular travel to serve a commercial establishment, namely the Ontario Mills
Development and Surrounding Commercial Developments; and
   (b)   That the privately owned and maintained off-street parking facilities
which serve the Ontario Mills Development and Surrounding Commercial
Developments are, or will be, generally held open for use of the public for
purposes of vehicular parking.
(§ 1, Ord. 2662, eff. May 6, 1998)
Sec. 4-6.2002. Vehicle Code applicable to private roads, travel ways, and
parking lots.
   The provisions of the Vehicle Code shall apply to the following privately
owned and maintained roads, travel ways, and parking lots described serving
commercial developments bounded by:
   (a)   Fourth Street on the North.
   (b)   Milliken Avenue on the West.
   (c)   Interstate 15 on the East.
   (d)   Interstate 10 on the South.
(§ 1, Ord. 2662, eff. May 6, 1998)
Article 21. Prohibiting Cruising
Sec. 4-6.2101. Cruising defined.
   Cruising shall be defined as the repetitive driving of a motor vehicle two
or more times within a four- hour period past a traffic control point in
traffic which is congested at or near the traffic control point, as determined
by the ranking police officer on duty within the affected area, and after the
operator or passenger has been given a written notice that further driving past
the control point will be a violation of this Article.
(§ 1 (part), Ord. 2710, eff. May 20, 2000)
Sec. 4-6.2102. Traffic control point.
   The ranking police officer on duty, or his/her designee, patrolling an area
affected by traffic congestion may establish one or more traffic control points
at or near the area(s) of traffic congestion.
(§ 1 (part), Ord. 2710, eff. May 20, 2000)
Sec. 4-6.2103. Required signs.
   The provisions of this Article shall not be enforced until signs have been
placed at the beginning and end of any street or portion of any street or other
roadway where traffic laws are enforced that are determined to be subject to
cruising controls. Such signs shall briefly and clearly state the appropriate
provisions of this chapter and of Cal. Veh. Code § 21100(K).
(§ 1 (part), Ord. 2710, eff. May 20, 2000)
Sec. 4-6.2104. Written notice.
   Any person who, as the operator of, or passenger in, any motor vehicle
driven in a particular direction past a traffic control point established
pursuant to §
4-6.2102 shall be given written notice that further driving past the traffic
control point within a four-hour interval will be a violation of §
4-6.2105.
(§ 1 (part), Ord. 2710, eff. May 20, 2000)
Sec. 4-6.2105. Cruising prohibited.
   It shall be unlawful for any person, as a driver or passenger of a motor
vehicle, to engage in cruising, as defined in §
4-6.2101, on any public or private street, alley or other roadway where the
traffic laws of the City of Ontario are enforced and which has been posted
pursuant to §
4-6.2103. After written notice pursuant to §
4-6.2104 has been provided to a driver or passenger, each successive trip
within a four-hour period past the traffic control point established pursuant §
4-6.2102 shall constitute a separate violation and no additional written notice
shall be required for such separate violation.
(§ 1 (part), Ord. 2710, eff. May 20, 2000)
Sec. 4-6.2106. Exceptions.
   This section shall not apply to:
   (a)   Persons who reside within a designated No-Cruising area;
   (b)   Authorized emergency vehicles as defined in Cal. Veh. Code § 165;
   (c)   Vehicles licensed for public transportation;
   (d)   Publicly owned vehicles of any city, county, district, state or
federal agency.
(§ 1 (part), Ord. 2710, eff. May 20, 2000)
Sec. 4-6.2107. Penalty for violations.
   Any person violating any provision of this Article is guilty of an
infraction, and upon conviction thereof, shall be subject to the payment of
penalties as provided in Cal. Veh. Code § 42001.
(§ 1 (part), Ord. 2710, eff. May 20, 2000)
Article 22. Valet Parking
Sec. 4-6.2201. Purpose.
   The primary purpose of public streets and rights-of-way is the free and
unobstructed right of travel. The City recognizes that the use of public
streets and rights-of-way for valet parking operations, while providing a
public benefit, may impede travel, interfere with rights of others using the
streets and rights-of-way, and may affect the public safety and create a public
nuisance. The City may therefore permit and restrict valet parking operations
as a special privilege, not as a matter of right, in order to foster public
safety and to prevent public nuisances. The approval of any permit under this
chapter for the use of the public right-of-way is on a temporary and
nonpermanent basis and is for a nonexclusive use of that public right-of-way.
Permittees shall have neither a property interest in nor any entitlement to the
granting or continuation of any permit for the use of any public right-of-way.
For the reasons set forth in this article, a system of valet parking permits is
enacted for the City of Ontario.
(§ 2, Ord. 3276, eff. August 15, 2024)
Sec. 4-6.2202 Definitions.
   For purposes of this article, the following terms shall have the prescribed
meaning:
   (a)   "City Council" shall mean the City Council of the City of Ontario.
   (b)   "High-visibility safety apparel" means any vest, shirt, or jacket
which meets the following conditions: the outer material color shall be
fluorescent orange-red, fluorescent yellow-green or a combination of the two as
defined by the American National Standards Institute/International Equipment
Safety Association for class 2 or 3 risk exposure; the retroreflective material
shall be orange, yellow, white, silver, yellow-green, or a fluorescent version
of these colors; and the apparel shall be designed to clearly identify the
wearer as a person.
   (c)   "Parking facility" shall mean any area dedicated for public parking,
including but not limited to dedicated curbside parking areas, parking lots,
and parking structures.
   (d)   "Permittee" shall mean any person who holds a valid valet parking
permit and who is engaged in running a valet parking operation.
   (e)   "Person" shall mean a natural person, firm, partnership, association,
corporation or other business entity, and employees, agents and subcontractors
thereof.
   (f)   "Public right-of-way" shall mean any area within the City of Ontario
designated for public use as a public street, pedestrian way, or other
thoroughfare, including but not limited to roadways, parkways, alleys,
sidewalks, and pedestrian ways.
   (g)   "Sponsor" shall mean any person who operates, or causes to be
operated, a valet parking operation at the sponsor's place of business or
function.
   (h)   "Valet parking" shall mean and include any person, firm or corporation
engaged in, conducting or managing the receiving, taking possession of,
driving, moving, parking, or leaving standing other persons' motor vehicles,
whether or not a charge is levied, and whether or not such persons are employed
by, or under contract to the business for which the vehicles are being parked.
   (i)   "Valet parking attendant" means any employee or agent of a permittee
or valet parking operator, or any employee or agent of a sponsor providing
valet parking to its customers, who receives, takes possession of or moves any
vehicle, or who handles the keys to any vehicle left with the attendant for
valet parking.
   (j)   "Valet parking operator" means any permittee or person engaged in the
business of valet parking operations, including any person contracting with a
valet parking operator to provide valet parking, or any person engaged in
providing valet parking services to the public.
   (k)   "Valet parking permit" means a permit issued in accordance with this
division for the approved use of valet parking in a valet parking zone.
   (l)   "Valet parking zone" means an area for a standard single passenger
vehicle on the public right-of-way that has been set aside by the City Engineer
for valet parking.
(§ 2, Ord. 3276, eff. August 15, 2024)
Sec. 4-6.2203. Designation of valet parking zones.
   (a)   The City Engineer shall consider the following in evaluating approval
of valet parking zones:
      (1)   Safety and convenience for the people of the City of Ontario;
      (2)   Actual number of passengers to be served by the zone;
      (3)   Proximity of existing valet parking zones;
      (4)   Existing demands for curb use such as the number and location of
existing transit, taxi, and transportation network company loading zones, and
existing commercial loading zones in the general area of the requested zone;
      (5)   Overall determination of available on street parking for the area;
and
      (6)   Designation of the valet parking zone will cause no significant
impact on the environment.
   (b)   Valet parking zones may also be used for on-street public parking, or
for loading and unloading of persons or property.
(§ 2, Ord. 3276, eff. August 15, 2024)
Sec. 4-6.2204. High-visibility safety apparel required.
   (a)   No valet parking operator shall employ, direct or otherwise permit, a
valet parking attendant to park or retrieve any vehicle on, along, or across
any public right-of-way, unless that valet parking attendant is wearing high-
visibility safety apparel as specified in this chapter.
   (b)   Valet parking attendants shall wear high-visibility safety apparel at
all times while valet parking on any public right-of-way, including while
walking on, along or across any public right-of-way.
(§ 2, Ord. 3276, eff. August 15, 2024)
Sec. 4-6.2205. Rules and regulations.
   The City Council may establish rules and regulations, by resolution, for the
implementation and enforcement of the provisions of this chapter and when duly
adopted by the City Council such rules shall be in full force and effect.
(§ 2, Ord. 3276, eff. August 15, 2024)
Sec. 4-6.2206. Conformance with applicable laws.
   Nothing in this article is intended to authorize the parking of motor
vehicles by valet parking operators, their agents, employees, and valet parking
attendants in a manner contrary to any applicable state laws and local parking
and traffic regulations, including this code.
(§ 2, Ord. 3276, eff. August 15, 2024)
Sec. 4-6.2207. Permit required.
   No person shall operate, engage in, conduct, manage, or cause to be operated
any valet parking operation or any related activity upon any portion of a
public street or public right-of-way or other City property, including any
city-owned parking facility, except under the terms and conditions of a current
valet parking permit and, if using the public street or public right-of-way in
any manner for drop-off and pick-up of vehicles, under the terms and conditions
of a current sponsor's valet parking permit.
(§ 2, Ord. 3276, eff. August 15, 2024)
Sec. 4-6.2208. Application for valet parking permits.
   (a)   The City Engineer is authorized to issue, upon written application, a
valet parking permit in accordance with Section
7-3.04. Applications for valet parking shall be made upon application forms
provided by the City Engineer and shall be accompanied by a filing fee. The fee
for each permit application shall be paid at the time of application. The
permit fees shall be based on the reasonable cost of application, plan review,
study, and other services as required for permit approval. Other fees based on
the cost of private usage of the public right-of-way will also be assessed per
valet parking zone spaces. Such fees shall be established by resolution of the
City Council.
   (b)   The application shall include:
      (1)   The business name and address of the corporation, partnership or
other business entity seeking the permit;
      (2)   The identifying number of the applicant's City of Ontario business
license;
      (3)   The business name, address, contact information, and seating
capacity of the business served by the valet parking valet parking operator.
      (4)   Proof of insurance pursuant to Section
4-6.2210.
      (5)   Any other information consistent with this chapter or Section
7-3.04 of this Code that the City Engineer deems necessary for persons applying
for valet parking permits.
      (6)   A map of the immediate area showing the location of the valet
service and the off-street parking lot(s) to be used for the storage of
vehicles. Any changes in this provision shall require the approval of the City
Engineer.
      (7)   Any agreement between the valet parking operator and the off-street
parking lot operator for the storage of vehicles.
   (c)   An applicant may appeal the denial of a valet parking permit as set
forth in Section
7-3.06 of this Code.
(§ 2, Ord. 3276, eff. August 15, 2024)
Sec. 4-6.2209. Duration of permit.
   Each valet parking permit issued by the City Engineer shall be valid for not
more than one (1) year from date of issuance. Each application renewal of a
valet parking permit will be subject to an annual valet parking zone
inspection. All renewals granted under this chapter shall also require a fee as
may be set from time to time by the City Council.
(§ 2, Ord. 3276, eff. August 15, 2024)
Sec. 4-6.2210. Insurance.
   Required insurance. Permittee shall provide upon request proof of insurance
as required by the City Engineer.
(§ 2, Ord. 3276, eff. August 15, 2024)
Sec. 4-6-2211. Valet parking permit and valet parking operator obligations.
   (a)   The valet parking permit shall authorize the valet parking operator to
provide valet parking in a designated valet parking zone.
   (b)   The valet parking operator shall operate the valet parking zone in
such a manner as to provide ample opportunities for its use by motorists who do
not wish to utilize the valet parking service.
   (c)   The valet parking operator shall be the business owner, under contract
to or employed by the business or businesses to be served.
   (d)   (1)   The valet parking operator shall agree to provide and maintain
one moveable ground sign or pedestal sign identifying the availability of valet
parking, the valet parking operator's name, the address and telephone number of
the business, the hours of operation, the valet parking permit number, and the
valet parking fees, if any. If fees are charged, such fees also shall be stated
as follows:
         (i)   Rates per hour;
         (ii)   Rates per fraction of an hour, if any;
         (iii)   Rates for subsequent hours or fractions thereof;
         (iv)   Parking taxes, if applicable, per the
Title 3, Chapter 8 of the Ontario Municipal Code; and
         (v)   The maximum charge.
      (2)   Prior to placement of any sign or pedestal sign in the public
right-of-way, the sign owner must first obtain approval of its location and
size from the City Engineer. The sign or pedestal sign shall only be visible
from the public right-of-way during the approved hours that valet parking is in
operation. The sign or pedestal sign shall be no more than twenty-four (24)
inches wide and not more than four (4) feet high. The sign or pedestal sign
must be located within twenty-four (24) inches of the face of the curb and be
placed in such a manner as not to create an impediment to pedestrians. All
signs and stands shall be set so that a continuous clear width of pedestrian
access complies with the Americans with Disability Act of 1990 and any minimum
clearances set forth in this Code.
   (e)   The valet parking operator shall not allow the valet parking zone or
any other public right-of-way to be used for the storing of valet parked cars.
   (f)   Valet parking operator shall ensure that pedestrian walkways are not
blocked at any time during valet parking operations.
   (g)   The valet parking operator shall at no time allow any patron's vehicle
to be parked upon private property without a signed statement of authorization
by the owner or other person having legal control of such private property.
   (h)   The valet parking operator shall employ sufficient valet parking
attendants to park vehicles so that traffic on streets or sidewalks will not be
impeded by the activities of the valet parking operator.
   (i)   The valet parking operator shall ensure that all valet parking
attendants who drive a patron's vehicle or who handle a patron's vehicle keys
have a current and valid California driver's license and wear a standard
uniform that conspicuously identifies the attendant by their full name and the
name of the operator. The valet parking operator shall ensure that all valet
parking attendants who receive, take possession of, or move a patron's vehicle
upon any portion of the public right-of-way wear high-visibility apparel.
   (j)   The valet parking operator shall not allow any valet parking attendant
who has been convicted within the previous seven (7) years of a felony or any
offense involving violence, dishonesty, automobile theft, automobile,
vandalism, reckless driving or driving under the influence of drugs or alcohol
to drive a patron's vehicle or handle a patron's vehicle keys.
   (k)   Every valet parking operator shall maintain:
      (1)   A continuously updated list of the names and residence addresses of
its employees and valet parking attendants who perform valet parking. Such list
shall be maintained at the business address listed on the permit application
and shall be produced on demand of any peace officer or City official.
      (2)   All financial records related to the valet parking operation for a
minimum of three (3) years and shall make them available to the City Engineer
for inspection at any time during the valet parking operator's hours of
operation.
   (l)   Nothing in this chapter is intended to authorize, or authorizes, the
parking of motor vehicles by the valet parking operator in a manner contrary to
applicable state laws or local parking and traffic regulations.
   (m)   Valet parking operators that conduct, manage, or operate a valet
parking operation shall comply with all of the requirements set forth in this
article.
(§ 2, Ord. 3276, eff. August 15, 2024)
Sec. 4-6.2212. Permit revocation.
   (a)   The permittee is responsible for the proper operation of the valet
parking zone. Any violation of the conditions enumerated in this article shall
be sufficient cause for revocation of the valet parking permit by the City
Engineer.
   (b)   A valet parking permit may be temporarily suspended without a hearing
if the City Engineer determines that the continued operation is an immediate
hazard to public safety or is in violation of this article. The suspension will
be effective for sixty (60) days or until a hearing, whichever is less. Once a
hearing has convened, the suspension will continue through its conclusion.
   (c)   The City Engineer shall revoke a valet parking permit if, after a
hearing on the matter, the hearing officer finds the grounds exist which would
have constituted just cause for refusal to issue the permit, or that the
permittee has failed to comply with any requirements imposed by this article or
conditions of the permit. Written notice of the revocation hearing, setting
forth the time and place of hearing and a brief statement of the reason(s) for
the proposed revocation, shall be served on or mailed to the permittee at the
business address listed in the permit application no less than ten (10) days
prior to the hearing.
(§ 2, Ord. 3276, eff. August 15, 2024)
Sec. 4-6.2213. Penalties.
   (a)   The City has determined that this chapter is necessary to protect
health, life, and property of the City and its inhabitants.
   (b)   Any violation of the provisions of this chapter by any person shall be
subject to the administrative penalty provisions set forth in section 7-3.20
and the Penalty Schedule contained within this code.
   (c)   It is unlawful and a violation of this chapter for any person to
operate, engage in, conduct, manage, or cause to be operated on any public
street or right-of-way any valet parking without a valid valet parking permit
issued by the City Engineer.
   (d)   This article authorizes any deputy sheriff, or City employee or agent
of the City designated by the director of any City department, to administer,
implement, and enforce the provisions of this chapter.
   (e)   It is unlawful and a violation of this chapter for a person to falsely
represent themselves as eligible for a valet parking permit or to furnish false
information in an application for a valet parking permit.
   (f)   It is unlawful and a violation of this chapter for a person holding a
valet parking permit to permit the use or display of the permit for any purpose
other than that for which the permit is issued.
   (g)   It is unlawful and a violation of this chapter for a person to copy,
produce or otherwise bring into existence a facsimile or counterfeit valet
parking permit without written authorization from the City Manager. It shall
further be unlawful and a violation of this chapter for a person to transfer
the beneficial ownership of or a continuous right to use a valet parking
permit.
   (h)   Any person violating any of the provisions of this article or the
regulations hereunder or the terms and conditions of any valet parking permit
issued hereunder is deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction
thereof, shall be punishable in accordance with
Title 1, Chapter 2 of this Code.
(§ 2, Ord. 3276, eff. August 15, 2024)
CHAPTER 7: TENTS AND STRUCTURES OF SIMILAR FLAMMABLE MATERIALS *
*Sections 4-7.01 through 4-7.06 added by Ord. 1701, eff. February 6, 1969,
repealed by implication by Ord. 1768, eff. October 21, 1971.
   
4-7.01   Definition: Tent
   
4-7.02   Tents prohibited in agricultural and residential zones
   
4-7.03   Exemptions
   
4-7.04   Permits
   
4-7.05   Compliance with permits
   
4-7.06   Penalties (Repealed)
Sec. 4-7.01. Definition: Tent.
   For the purposes of this chapter, “tent” shall mean any structure or
enclosure constructed of canvas or other combustible fabric, or of any other
material that is more conductive to the rapid spread of fire than one (1) inch
nominal thickness Oregon pine wood.
(§ 1, Ord. 1768, eff. October 21, 1971)
Sec. 4-7.02. Tents prohibited in agricultural and residential zones.
   The erection, use, and maintenance of canvas tents and structures of similar
flammable materials are hereby prohibited within agricultural and residential
zones in the City and within four hundred (400) feet of any occupied dwelling
without the written consent of the occupant of such dwelling.
(§ 1, Ord. 1768, eff. October 21, 1971)
Sec. 4-7.03. Exemptions.
   Tents used exclusively for camping purposes, not exceeding two hundred (200)
square feet, and air supported covers for private swimming pools shall be
exempt from the provisions of this chapter.
(§ 1, Ord. 1768, eff. October 21, 1971)
Sec. 4-7.04. Permits.
   Tents or similar structures may be erected or maintained in zones other than
agricultural or residential under a permit from the Fire Chief upon proof that
an applicant has the written approval of any occupant of a dwelling within four
hundred (400) feet of the site of such tent. Such use shall not extend for more
than thirty (30) days.
(§ 1, Ord. 1768, eff. October 21, 1971)
Sec. 4-7.05. Compliance with permits.
   If a permit is granted by the Fire Chief for the use of tents or similar
structures, the permittee shall comply with the regulations pertaining to tents
and similar structures contained in the Uniform Fire Code and/or in the
California Code of Regulations Title 19. Toilets and sanitary facilities shall
be provided as required by the County Health Department.
(§ 1, Ord. 1768, eff. October 21, 1971)
Sec. 4-7.06. Penalties (Repealed).
(§ 1, Ord. 1768, eff. October 21, 1971, repealed by § 8, Ord. 2094, eff. August
14, 1980)
CHAPTER 8: USE OF AUTOMATIC DIALING AND TAPED MESSAGE BURGLAR AND FIRE ALARM
SYSTEMS
   
4-8.01   Automatic dialing into City lines prohibited
   
4-8.02   Live answering services
   
4-8.03   Permits to install: Requirements
Sec. 4-8.01. Automatic dialing into City lines prohibited.
   No person shall install, use, or cause to be used any telephonic device
which is activated electronically to automatically dial a public telephone line
of the City.
(§ 1, Ord. 1760, eff. June 17, 1971)
Sec. 4-8.02. Live answering services.
   Any automatic telephonic dialing system shall dial to, and the message shall
be received by, a live answering service, such as a private alarm dispatch
center. In no event shall any automatic direct dialing be permitted into a
public telephone line to the City.
(§ 1, Ord. 1760, eff. June 17, 1971)
Sec. 4-8.03. Permits to install: Requirements.
   No person shall install, use, or cause to be used any telephonic device
which is activated electronically to automatically dial a telephone within the
City without first obtaining a permit from the Police Chief or Fire Chief to
install and use such telephonic device. The Police Chief or his designee shall
review all requests for telephonic burglar alarms, and the Fire Chief shall
review all requests for telephonic fire alarms. Before a permit may be issued,
the following requirements shall first be complied with:
   (a)   The current subscriber of the telephone which contains an automatic
device, the telephone number, and the location of such telephone shall be on
file at the Police Department and Fire Department of the City.
   (b)   The current subscriber of the telephone which receives calls from an
automatic telephone dialing system, the telephone number, and the location of
such telephone shall be on file at the Police Department and Fire Department of
the City.
(§ 1, Ord. 1760, eff. June 17, 1971)
CHAPTER 9: ALARM SYSTEMS *
*Chapter 9, consisting of §§ 4-9.01 through 4-9.13, codified from Ord. 1990,
eff. March 9, 1978, was amended by Ord. 2278, eff. June 14, 1984, repealed and
reenacted in its entirety by Ord. 2790, effective November 20, 2003. Sections
4-9.100 through 4-9.830 repealed by § 1, Ord. 3151, effective January 1, 2020.
Sections 4-9.010 through 4-9.190 enacted by § 1, Ord. 3151, effective January
1, 2020.
   
4-9.010   Purpose
   
4-9.020   Definitions
   
4-9.030   Administration; funding; increases in fees and fines; annual
evaluation
   
4-9.040   Alarm registrations required; terms; fees and fee collection
   
4-9.050   Registration application; contents
   
4-9.060   Transfer of registration prohibited
   
4-9.070   Duties of alarm users
   
4-9.080   Audible alarms; restrictions, abatement of malfunctioning alarm
   
4-9.090   Registration and duties of alarm installation companies and
monitoring companies
   
4-9.100   Duties and authority of the Alarm Administrator
   
4-9.110   False alarm fines; fees; late charges
   
4-9.120   Notice to alarm users of false alarms and suspension of a police
response
   
4-9.130   Alarm registration suspension, fees, fines, violation to make alarm
dispatch request for suspended alarm site
   
4-9.140   Appeals of determinations regarding alarm registrations, fees and
fines
   
4-9.150   Reinstatement of suspended alarm registrations
   
4-9.160   Suspension of police response to dispatch requests from certain alarm
installation companies and monitoring companies
   
4-9.170   Police Department response
   
4-9.180   Confidentiality of alarm information
   
4-9.190   Scope of police duty; immunities preserved
Sec. 4-9.010. Purpose.
   The City of Ontario Council finds and declares that:
   (a)   The vast majority of alarms to which the Police Department responds
are false alarms, which are reported to the police by alarm companies.
   (b)   Most false alarms are the result of improper maintenance or improper
or careless use of an alarm system.
   (c)   The public and police officers are subjected to needless danger when
the officers are called to respond to false alarms.
   (d)   Officers responding to false alarms are not available to carry out
other police duties.
   (e)   In the interest of using limited police resources most effectively and
efficiently, the number of false alarms can and must be reduced.
   (f)   The purpose of this chapter is to reduce the dangers and
inefficiencies associated with false alarms and to encourage alarm companies
and property owners to maintain the operational reliability, properly use alarm
systems, and to reduce or eliminate false alarm dispatch requests.
   (g)   This chapter governs systems intended to summon a police response,
establishes fees, fines, establishes a system of administration, sets
conditions for the suspension of a police response and establishes a public
education and training program.
(§ 1, Ord. 3151, eff. February 20, 2020)
Sec. 4-9.020. Definitions.
   For purposes of this chapter, the following terms shall have the following
meanings:
   (a)   "Alarm Administrator" means the person or persons designated by the
Police Department to administer the provisions of this chapter.
   (b)   "Alarm agreement" means the legal contract or agreement by and between
the alarm installation company and/or monitoring company and the alarm user.
   (c)   "Alarm agreement holding company" means the alarm installation company
or monitoring company that holds the alarm agreement with the alarm user.
   (d)   "Alarm installation company" means a person in the business of
selling, providing, maintaining, servicing, repairing, altering, replacing,
moving or installing an alarm system at an alarm site for compensation, and
includes individuals or firms that install and service alarm systems used in a
private business or proprietary facility.
   (e)   "Alarm dispatch request" means a notification to the Police Department
that an alarm, either manual or automatic, has been activated at a particular
alarm site.
   (f)   "Alarm registration" means a registration and unique number issued by
the Alarm Administrator to an alarm user, which authorizes the operation of an
alarm system.
   (g)   "Alarm Response Manager (ARM)" means a person designated by an alarm
installation company and monitoring company to handle alarm issues for the
company and act as the primary point of contact for the city's Alarm
Administrator.
   (h)   "Alarm site" means a location served by one or more alarm systems. In
a multi-unit building or complex, each unit shall be considered a separate
alarm site if served by a separate alarm system. In a single unit building that
houses two or more separate businesses with separate alarm systems, each
business will be considered a separate alarm site.
   (i)   "Alarm system" means a device or series of devices, which emit or
transmit an audible or remote visual or electronic alarm signal, which is
intended to summon police response. The term includes hardwired systems,
surveillance cameras and systems interconnected with a radio frequency method
such as cellular or private radio signals, and includes local alarm systems,
but does not include an alarm installed in a motor vehicle or a system which
will not emit a signal either audible or visible from the outside of the
building, residence or beyond, but is designed solely to alert the occupants of
a building or residence.
   (j)   "Alarm user" means any person who has contracted for monitoring,
repair, installation or maintenance service for an alarm system from an alarm
installation company or monitoring company, or who owns or operates an alarm
system which is not monitored, maintained or repaired under agreement.
   (k)   "Alarm user awareness class" means a class conducted for the purpose
of educating alarm users about the responsible use, operation, and maintenance
of alarm systems and the problems created by false alarms.
   (l)   "Alarm user list" means a list provided by the alarm user's alarm
installation company or if no alarm agreement exists between the alarm user and
an alarm installation company, the alarm user's monitoring company.
   (m)   "Arming station" means a device that controls an alarm system.
   (n)   "Automatic voice dialer" means any electronic, mechanical, or other
device which, when activated, is capable of being programmed to send a
prerecorded voice message to the Police Department or City requesting an
officer dispatch to an alarm site.
   (o)   "Burglar alarm" means an alarm intended to identify the presence of an
intruder in either a business or residence.
   (p)   "Business license" means a business license issued by the City of
Ontario Business License Division to an alarm installation company or
monitoring company to conduct business in the City.    (q)   "Cancellation"
means the termination of a police response to an alarm site after an alarm
dispatch request is made but before an officer's arrival at the alarm site.
   (r)   "Conversion of alarm user" means the transaction or process by which
one alarm installation company or monitoring company begins the servicing or
monitoring of a previously unmonitored alarm system or an alarm system that was
previously serviced or monitored by another alarm company.
   (s)   "City" means City of Ontario.
   (t)   "Duress alarm" means a silent alarm system signal generated by the
entry of a designated code into an arming station in order to signal that the
alarm user is being forced to turn off the system and requires an officer
response.
   (u)   "Enhanced Call Confirmation" (ECC) means an attempt by the monitoring
company, or its representative, to contact the alarm site and/or alarm user
and/or the alarm user's designated representatives by telephone and/or other
electronic means, whether or not actual contact with a person is made, to
determine whether an alarm signal is valid before requesting a police burglar
alarm dispatch, in an attempt to avoid an unnecessary alarm dispatch request.
For the purpose of this chapter, telephone confirmation shall require, as a
minimum that a second call be made to a different number, if the first attempt
fails to reach an alarm user who can properly identify themselves to determine
whether an alarm signal is valid before requesting an officer dispatch. Names
and numbers of those contacted or attempted to contact, shall be provided when
requested.
   (v)   "False alarm" means an alarm dispatch request to the Police
Department, which results in the responding officer finding no evidence of a
criminal offense or attempted criminal offense after completing an
investigation of the alarm site.
   (w)   "Holdup alarm" means a silent alarm signal generated by the manual
activation of a device intended to signal a robbery in progress.
   (x)   "Local alarm system" means an unmonitored alarm system that
annunciates an alarm only at the alarm site or is a self-monitored alarm site.
   (y)   "Monitoring" means the process by which a monitoring company receives
signals from an alarm system and relays an alarm dispatch request to the Police
Department.
   (z)   "Monitoring company" means a person in the business of providing
monitoring services.
   (aa)   "One Plus Duress Alarm" means the manual activation of a silent alarm
signal by entering a code that adds one number to the last digit of the normal
arm/disarm code (e.g., normal code = 1234, one plus duress code = 1235).
   (bb)   "Panic alarm" means an alarm system signal generated by the manual
activation of a device intended to signal a life threatening or emergency
situation requiring an officer response.
   (cc)   "Person" means an individual, corporation, limited liability company,
partnership, association, organization or similar entity.
   (dd)   "Police Department" means the Ontario Police Department.
   (ee)   "Protective or reactive alarm system" means an alarm system that
produces a temporary disability or sensory deprivation through use of chemical,
electrical, sonic or other means, including use of devices that obscure or
disable a person's vision.
   (ff)   "Registration number" means a unique individual number assigned to an
alarm user as part of alarm registration issued by the Police Department.
   (gg)   "Responsible party" means a person capable of appearing at the alarm
site upon request who has access to the alarm site, the code to the alarm
system and the authority to approve repairs to the alarm system.
   (hh)   "Robbery alarm" means an alarm signal generated by the manual or
automatic activation of a device, or any system, device or mechanism on or near
the premises intended to signal that a robbery is in progress and that a person
is in need of immediate police assistance in order to avoid bodily harm, injury
or death. The term has the same general meaning as "holdup alarm" or "duress
alarm."
   (ii)   "Takeover" means the transaction or process by which an alarm user
takes over control of an existing alarm system that was previously controlled
by another alarm user.
   (jj)   "Zones" mean a division of devices into which an alarm system is
divided to indicate the general location from which an alarm system signal is
transmitted.
(§ 1, Ord. 3151, eff. February 20, 2020)
Sec. 4-9.030. Administration; funding; increases in fees and fines; annual
evaluation.
   (a)   Responsibility for administration of this chapter is vested with the
Police Department.
   (b)   The Police Department shall designate an Alarm Administrator to carry
out the duties and functions described in this section.
   (c)   Monies generated by fees and fines assessed pursuant to this section
shall be deposited into the city's General Fund.
   (d)   The amount of the fees and fines set forth in this section shall be
specified in the City Fee Schedule, which may only be revised by a duly-adopted
resolution of the City Council. For purposes of this subsection, "fees" include
any type or class of fee and includes late charges.
   (e)   The Alarm Administrator shall conduct an annual evaluation and
analysis of the effectiveness of this chapter and identify and implement system
improvements as warranted.
(§ 1, Ord. 3151, eff. February 20, 2020)
Sec. 4-9.040. Alarm registrations required; terms; fees and fee collection.
   (a)   An alarm user shall not operate, or cause to be operated, any alarm
system without a valid alarm registration. A separate alarm registration is
required for each alarm site having a distinct address or business name. A
registration fee including a completed alarm registration application shall be
received and approved by the Alarm Administrator prior to any alarm system
activation. A thirty (30) day grace period shall be granted from the date of
all new alarm installations or takeovers between two alarm users, to
accommodate the registration application process. There shall be reduced
residential registration fees for senior citizens, low-income, disabled persons
and veterans. The City Council shall establish such classes of persons by
resolution.
   (b)   Owners of local alarm systems are required to adhere to all sections
of this chapter and are subject to all fees, fines, suspensions, penalties or
other requirements that are applicable.
   (c)   The fee for a new initial alarm registration and the alarm
registration renewal fee shall be collected by the Alarm Administrator.
   (d)   Existing alarm systems.
      (1)   Any alarm system that has been installed before February 20, 2020
shall be registered and a registration fee collected by the Alarm
Administrator.
         (a)   The alarm agreement holding company shall provide within forty
(40) days of February 20, 2020, an alarm user list of existing alarm users in
the City, in a format approved by the Alarm Administrator, including name,
address, billing address and telephone number to the Alarm Administrator.
         (b)   The alarm agreement holding company may apply to the Alarm
Administrator for an extension of the time limit in subsection (a) based on
extenuating circumstances. Extensions are at the sole discretion of the Alarm
Administrator.
      (2)   The alarm agreement holding company may, through a mutual written
agreement, have another alarm company provide the alarm user's list.
   (e)   New alarm systems.
      (1)   Any alarm installation company that installs an alarm system on
premises located within the City of Ontario shall notify the Alarm
Administrator within twenty (20) days that an alarm system has been installed
and send the Alarm Administrator the required information listed in subsection
(d)(1)(i) of this section.
      (2)   In the case of self-installed alarm systems that are to be
monitored by a monitoring company, the monitoring company shall act as the
alarm installation company regarding the duties to notify the Alarm
Administrator.
      (3)   Failure of an alarm installation company to notify the Alarm
Administrator of a new alarm system installation within twenty (20) days of
installation shall result in a fine as established by resolution of the City
Council to be imposed on the alarm installation company.
      (4)   The initial alarm registration fee shall be collected by the Alarm
Administrator. Failure of the alarm user to submit an application and
registration fee within the thirty (30) days after notice shall result in the
alarm system being classified as non-registered and late charges being
assessed.
   (f)   Alarm registration and renewal fees.
      (1)   An alarm registration shall expire one year from the date of
issuance and must be renewed annually by the alarm user. The Alarm
Administrator shall notify the alarm user of the need to renew their
registration thirty (30) days prior to the expiration of the registration. It
is the responsibility of the alarm user to submit the updated information and
renewal fees prior to the registration expiration date. Failure to renew shall
be classified as use of a non-registered alarm system and subject the alarm
site to a suspension and late charge.
      (2)   Registration fees shall be collected annually based on a one-year
registration period. The amount of the registration and renewal fees required
are established by resolution of the City Council.
   (g)   Late charge. Alarm users who fail to make payment for an alarm
registration prior to the registration's expiration date will be assessed a
late charge as established by resolution of the City Council.
   (h)   Refunds. No refund of a registration fee or registration renewal fee
will be made.
   (i)   Upon receipt of a completed alarm registration application form and
the alarm registration fee, the Alarm Administrator shall issue a registration
number or alarm registration renewal to the applicant unless:
      (1)   The applicant has failed to pay any fee or fine assessed under this
chapter; or
      (2)   An alarm registration for the alarm site has been suspended, and
the condition causing the suspension has not been corrected; or
      (3)   The alarm installation company and/or the monitoring company listed
on the registration application are not in possession of a current valid State
of California Department of Consumer Affairs alarm company operators license;
or
      (4)   It is determined that a false statement of a material fact was made
by an applicant for the purpose of obtaining an alarm registration.
   (j)   Exceptions.
      (1)   Government entities, including but not necessarily limited to the
city, county, state, federal and school districts, must obtain alarm
registrations for all alarm systems on property under their control within the
boundaries of Ontario, but are exempt from payment of alarm registration and
renewal fees.
      (2)   All registration-fee-exempted alarm sites are required to obtain
and maintain a valid alarm registration for a police response and are subjected
to all other fees, fines and suspension enforcements, except when this action
is prohibited by statute or through a court ruling.
(§1, Ord. 3151, eff. February 20, 2020)
Sec. 4-9.050. Registration application; contents.
   An application for an alarm registration must be in a format provided by the
Police Department. The information required on such forms shall be determined
by the Alarm Administrator. Registration applicants acknowledge that the police
response may be influenced by factors including, but not limited to, the
availability of officers, priority of calls, traffic conditions, weather
conditions, emergency conditions, prior alarm history, administrative actions
and staffing levels.
(§ 1, Ord. 3151, eff. February 20, 2020)
Sec. 4-9.060. Transfer of registration prohibited.
   (a)   An alarm registration cannot be transferred to another person or alarm
site. An alarm user shall inform the Alarm Administrator and their alarm
company of any change to the information listed on the alarm registration
application within ten (10) business days after such change.
   (b)   Exceptions may be made in the sole discretion of the Alarm
Administrator when the transfer proposed is among members of the family of the
original registration holder or successors in interest to the property for
which the alarm registration has been issued.
(§ 1, Ord. 3151, eff. February 20, 2020)
Sec. 4-9.070. Duties of alarm users.
   (a)   An alarm user shall:
      (1)   Maintain the alarm site and the alarm system in a manner that will
minimize or eliminate false alarms;
      (2)   Make every reasonable effort to arrive at the alarm system's
location within thirty (30) minutes after being requested by the monitoring
company or Police Department in order to:
         (i)   Deactivate an alarm system;
         (ii)   Provide access to the alarm site; and/or
         (iii)   Provide alternative security for the alarm site.
      (3)   Provide his, her, or its monitoring company with the updated names
and telephone numbers of at least two individuals who are able and have agreed
to:
         (i)   Receive notification of an alarm system activation at any time;
         (ii)   Respond to the alarm site at any time; and
         (iii)   Provide access to the alarm site and deactivate the alarm
system, if necessary.
      (4)   Not activate an alarm system for any reason other than an
occurrence of an event that the alarm system was intended to report.
      (5)   Notify his, her, or its monitoring company of any suspension of
police response (as provided for under this chapter) and request that the
monitoring company not make a burglar alarm dispatch request.
   (b)   No person shall operate or cause to be operated any automatic voice
dialer which, when activated, uses a telephone device or attachment to
automatically dial a telephone line leading into the Police Department or the
City and then transmit any pre-recorded message or signal.
   (c)   An alarm user shall keep a set of written operating instructions for
each alarm system at each alarm site.
(§ 1, Ord. 3151, eff. February 20, 2020)
Sec. 4-9.080. Audible alarms; restrictions, abatement of malfunctioning alarm.
   (a)   No alarm system shall emit a sound resembling an emergency vehicle
siren or civil defense warning. The Chief of Police shall make the final
determination regarding any question of an audible alarm within this section.
   (b)   After February 20, 2020, no one shall install, modify or repair an
alarm system in the City of Ontario that has a siren, bell or other signal that
is audible from any property adjacent to the alarm site that sounds for longer
than fifteen (15) consecutive minutes after the alarm is activated, or that
repeats the fifteen (15) minute audible cycle more than two consecutive times
during a single armed period.
   (c)   In the event that an audible alarm is activated and fails to reset
itself or continues to activate for more than sixty (60) minutes and the
responsible person listed on the alarm registration or other responsible person
cannot or will not respond and silence the alarm, and the continued activation
of the alarm is creating a disturbance, the Police Department may cause the
alarm to be silenced in a manner determined appropriate for the circumstances.
The alarm user shall be held responsible for the actual costs involved to abate
the malfunctioning alarm up to a maximum amount as established by resolution of
the City Council. The City, its employees or agents shall not be responsible or
liable for damage resulting from such disconnection.
(§ 1, Ord. 3151, eff. February 20, 2020)
Sec. 4-9.090. Registration and duties of alarm installation companies and
monitoring companies.
   (a)   Registration.
      (1)   No alarm company operator or alarm agent, as defined by the
Business and Professions Code, shall install, maintain, or repair any alarm
system within the City unless the alarm company operator or alarm agent has,
prior to performing such work, obtained a City business license.
      (2)   Each alarm installation company and alarm monitoring company must
designate one individual as the Alarm Response Manager (ARM) for the company.
The individual designated as the ARM must be knowledgeable of the provisions of
this chapter, as well as have the knowledge and authority to deal with false
alarm issues and respond to requests from the Alarm Administrator. The name,
contact number, and email address of the ARM shall be provided to the Alarm
Administrator. Failure to comply within thirty (30) days after being notified
in writing from the Alarm Administrator may result in the suspension of Police
Department response to alarm dispatch requests from the non-complying alarm
installation company or monitoring company.
      (3)   Each alarm installation company shall provide the name, address and
phone number of any monitoring company it is using to monitor its alarm sites
within the City, and monitoring companies shall do the same for alarm
installation companies that use their monitoring services within the City.
   (c)   Alarm installation companies shall:
      (1)   Upon the installation or activation of an alarm system, the alarm
installation company shall distribute to the alarm user information
summarizing:
         (i)   The applicable law relating to false alarms, including the
registration fee and the potential for fines and suspension of an alarm
registration;
         (ii)   How to prevent false alarms; and
         (iii)   How to operate the alarm system.
      (2)   After February 20, 2020, alarm installation companies shall not
program alarm systems so that they are capable of sending One Plus Duress
Alarms. Monitoring companies may continue to report One Plus Duress Alarms
received from alarm systems programmed with One Plus Duress Alarms installed
prior to February 20, 2020.
      (3)   After February 20, 2020, alarm installation companies shall not
install, modify or repair "single action" devices for the activation of holdup,
robbery or panic alarms. New devices shall require two actions or an activation
time delay to provide more positive assurance that the user intends to activate
the device.
      (4)   Shall not use an automatic voice dialer for any alarm system which,
when activated, uses a telephone device or attachment to automatically dial a
telephone line leading into the Police Department or the City and then transmit
any pre-recorded message or signal.
      (5)   Ensure that alarm users of alarm systems equipped with a duress,
robbery, holdup or panic alarm has been provided adequate training as to the
proper use of the alarm system's operation and function.
      (6)   All alarm systems shall be supplied with an uninterrupted power
supply in such a manner that the failure or interruption of the normal electric
utility service for a period of up to four (4) hours will not activate the
alarm system.
      (7)   All audible alarm systems shall include a device which will limit
the duration of the audible alarm to a period of not more than fifteen (15)
minutes per activation.
   (c)   A monitoring company shall:
      (1)   Report alarm signals by using telephone numbers or procedures
designated by the Alarm Administrator or other approved communication
processes.
      (2)   Employ enhanced call confirmation procedures on all burglar alarm
dispatch requests. The Ontario Police Department may refuse to accept an alarm
dispatch request from a monitoring company that has failed to comply with the
procedures required by enhanced call confirmation. This subsection becomes
effective ninety (90) days after February 20, 2020.
      (3)   Communicate alarm dispatch requests to the Police Department in a
manner and form determined by the Alarm Administrator.
      (4)   Communicate cancellations to the Police Department in a manner and
form determined by the Alarm Administrator.
      (5)   Communicate all available zone activations information (north,
south, front, back, door, window etc.) about the location of an alarm signal(s)
as part of an alarm dispatch request.
      (6)   Communicate the type of alarm activation (silent or audible,
interior or perimeter), if available, on any alarm dispatch request.
      (7)   Notify communications (dispatch) of any alarm site that it knows,
or reasonably should know has guard dog(s), pets or is fitted with a
protective-reactive alarm system. During any alarm at such a site, a
responsible party must be contacted and confirm that he or she will respond to
the alarm site to disarm the device or take control of the guard dog(s).
      (8)   After an alarm dispatch request, promptly advise the Police
Department if the monitoring company knows that the alarm user or a responsible
Party is on the way to the alarm site;
      (9)   Maintain, for a period of at least one (1) year after the date of
an alarm dispatch request, all records relating to the alarm dispatch request.
Records must include the name, address and telephone number of the alarm user,
each alarm system zone activated, the time of alarm dispatch request and
evidence of all attempts to verify. The Alarm Administrator may request copies
of such records for any individual alarm user. If the request is made within
sixty (60) days after an alarm dispatch request, the monitoring company shall
furnish requested records within three (3) business days after receiving the
request. If the records are requested between sixty (60) days and one (1) year
after an alarm dispatch request, the monitoring company shall furnish the
requested records within thirty (30) days after receiving the request.
      (10)   Upon request, immediately provide the Police Department with the
names and phone numbers of the alarm user's emergency contacts at the time of
each alarm dispatch request.
   (d)   Conversion of alarm users. An alarm installation company or monitoring
company that converts the servicing of any alarm system account from another
company shall notify the Alarm Administrator of such conversion and shall make
a reasonable effort to provide to the Alarm Administrator, within sixty (60)
days from the date of conversion, an alarm user list of the converted accounts,
in a format acceptable to the Alarm Administrator.
(§ 1, Ord. 3151, eff. February 20, 2020)
Sec. 4-9.100. Duties and authority of the Alarm Administrator.
   (a)   The Alarm Administrator shall:
      (1)   Designate the manner and form of alarm dispatch requests and the
telephone numbers and/or communication process that are to be used for such
requests; and
      (2)   Establish a procedure to accept cancellation of alarm dispatch
requests.
   (b)   The Alarm Administrator shall establish a procedure to acquire and
record information on alarm dispatch requests.
   (c)   The Alarm Administrator shall establish and implement a procedure to
notify the alarm user of a false alarm. The notice shall include the following:
      (1)   The date and time of an officer's response to the false alarm; and
      (2)   Any false alarm fine incurred.
   (d)   The Alarm Administrator may require that a conference be held with an
alarm user and the alarm installation company or monitoring company responsible
for repairing or monitoring of the alarm system to review the circumstances of
each false alarm. The conference may be held in person or through a conference
telephone call, at the Alarm Administrator's discretion. Failure to participate
may result in suspension of the alarm registration, as indicated by the facts
of the case.
   (e)   The Alarm Administrator may establish an alarm user awareness class.
The Alarm Administrator may request the assistance of associations, alarm
companies and law enforcement agencies in developing and implementing the
class. The class shall inform alarm users of the alarm ordinance, problems
created by false alarms and teach alarm users how to avoid creating false
alarms.
   (f)   If a false robbery, holdup or panic alarm has occurred and the alarm
was triggered using a single action, non-recessed device, the Alarm
Administrator may consider a waiver or partial waiver of the false alarm fine,
if action is taken by the alarm user to remove or replace the single action,
non-recessed device.
   (g)   The Alarm Administrator shall make a copy of the ordinance codified in
this chapter and/or an ordinance summary sheet available to each alarm user.
   (h)   The Alarm Administrator may use electronic means to communicate with
alarm users, alarm installation companies and monitoring companies when
applicable or when requested by the recipient and at the Alarm Administrators
discretion.
(§ 1, Ord. 3151, eff. February 20, 2020)
Sec. 4-9.110. False alarm fines; fees; late charges.
   (a)   The Alarm Administrator may assess the alarm user a fine for a false
alarm occurring at that alarm user's alarm site. The amount of said fines for
the listed categories shall be established by City Council and may be
subsequently amended by resolution of the City Council.
      (1)   Burglar false alarm fines.
      (2)   Robbery false alarm fines.
      (3)   Panic false alarm fines.
   (b)   If a false alarm fine is not paid within thirty (30) days after the
invoice is mailed, a late charge as established by resolution of the City
Council shall be imposed.
   (c)   Fines for false alarms from non-registered alarm systems. For person
(s) operating a non-registered alarm system incurring a false alarm, fines
shall be imposed as established by resolution of the City Council.
   (d)   Any monitoring company after five (5) business days of receiving
notice from the Alarm Administrator that an alarm user's registration status is
that of non-registered shall not make a burglar alarm dispatch request from
that alarm user.
   (e)   If cancellation of a police response occurs prior to the officer's
arrival at the alarm site, the response is not considered a false alarm and no
false alarm fine will be assessed.
   (f)   The alarm installation company shall be assessed a fine in an amount
established by resolution of the City Council if the officer responding to a
false alarm determines that an on-site employee of the alarm installation
company directly caused the false alarm. Such false alarms are not included in
the total number of false alarms for the alarm user, nor is the alarm user to
be held liable for any false alarm fine resulting from such alarm activation.
   (g)   A fine in an amount established by resolution of the City Council
shall be imposed against any monitoring company that fails to verify alarm
system signals as required in §
4-9.090(c)(2) of this chapter.
   (h)   Notice of the right of appeal under this chapter will be included with
notice of any fine.
   (i)   All registration fees, renewal registration fees or fines assessed
under this section are due within thirty (30) days of written notice unless
otherwise noted. A late charge in an amount established by resolution of the
City Council shall be imposed for each individual fee or fine due that is not
paid within thirty (30) days.
   (j)   The Alarm Administrator may waive the false alarm fine for the first
chargeable false alarm during the alarm user's one-year registration period,
pending the successful completion of the online alarm user awareness class
available through the Alarm Administrator. In order to have the fine waived,
the alarm user must have successfully completed the class within thirty (30)
days of the fine notice. Alarm users without online access may request the
online school and test be mailed to them. Reasonable additional time to
complete the alarm user awareness class shall be allowed for mail delivery.
(§ 1, Ord. 3151, eff. February 20, 2020)
Sec. 4-9.120. Notice to alarm users of false alarms and suspension of a police
response.
   (a)   The Alarm Administrator shall notify the alarm user in writing or by
other electronic means after each false alarm. The notice shall include the
amount of the fine for the false alarm, the fact that police response to
further alarms may be suspended after the fourth false alarm during the alarm
user's one-year alarm registration period, (excluding duress, robbery, holdup
and panic alarms), and that the alarm user has the right to appeal.
   (b)   The Alarm Administrator shall notify the alarm user in writing thirty
(30) days beforehand that a Police Department response to further alarms is to
be suspended. The right of appeal under this chapter shall be included with the
notice. The notice of suspension shall also include the amount of any fees and/
or fines due and a description of the reinstatement process.
(§ 1, Ord. 3515, eff. February 20, 2020)
Sec. 4-9.130. Alarm registration suspension, fees, fines, violation to make
alarm dispatch request for suspended alarm site.
   (a)   The Alarm Administrator shall notify the Police Department of each
alarm user whose alarm registration qualifies for suspension under this
section. The Alarm Administrator may suspend an alarm registration if it is
determined that:
      (1)   There is a false statement of a material fact in the registration
application; or
      (2)   The alarm user has had four or more false burglar alarms within the
one-year registration period, except that the Alarm Administrator may waive a
suspension of a registration upon receipt of documented work orders showing
reasonable attempts to repair the alarm system prior to the notice of
suspension.
      (3)   The alarm user fails or refuses to pay an alarm registration or
alarm registration renewal fee, false alarm fine, late charge, or any other
fee, fine, or charge assessed under this section.
   (b)   It is a violation of this section for a person to operate a burglar
alarm system during the period in which the alarm registration is suspended. It
is a violation of this chapter for a monitoring company to make an alarm
dispatch request to a burglar alarm site after the monitoring company's Alarm
Response Manager (ARM) has been notified by electronic mail by the Alarm
Administrator that the registration for that alarm site has been suspended. A
grace period of five (5) business days after the ARM's notification shall be
granted for the monitoring company to comply. The alarm monitoring company
shall be assessed a fine in an amount established by resolution of the City
Council for requesting a burglar alarm dispatch request on a suspended alarm
site.
   (c)   False alarm fines under suspension status. In addition to the fines
set forth in §
4-9.110(a), a supplemental fine is hereby imposed upon any person operating a
suspended burglar alarm system. The amount of said fines shall be established
by resolution of the City Council.
   (d)   It shall be the responsibility of the alarm user to notify their
respective alarm monitoring company of their suspension status. An alarm user
shall be held financially accountable for all false alarm fines incurred.
   (e)   Unless there is a separate indication that there is a crime in
progress, the Police Department may or may not dispatch an officer to an alarm
site for which an alarm registration is suspended.
(§ 1, Ord. 3151, eff. February 20, 2020)
Sec. 4-9.140. Appeals of determinations regarding alarm registrations, fees and
fines.
   (a)   If the Alarm Administrator assesses a fee or fine, suspends an alarm
registration or denies the issuance, renewal or reinstatement of an alarm
registration, the Alarm Administrator shall send notice of the action and a
statement of the right to appeal to the affected applicant, alarm user, alarm
installation company or alarm monitoring company.
   (b)   The applicant, alarm user, alarm installation company or alarm
monitoring company may appeal any action described in subsection (a) above to
the Police Chief (or his or her designee) by setting forth in writing the
reasons for the appeal and delivering the appeal to the Chief of Police (or
designee) within twenty (20) days after receipt of notice of the action.
Failure to deliver the appeal within that time period is a waiver of the right
to appeal.
   (c)   The procedure for an appeal to the Chief of Police (or designee) is as
follows:
      (1)   The applicant, alarm user, alarm installation company or monitoring
company may file a written request for appeal by paying an appeal fee and
setting forth the reasons for the appeal. The appeal must be entitled "Appeal
from Alarm Administrator's Action." The appeal fee shall be in an amount
established by resolution of the City Council and will be returned to the
appealing party if the appeal is successful.
      (2)   The Chief of Police (or designee) shall conduct a hearing on the
appeal within thirty (30) days after the Police Department's receipt of the
request for appeal and appeal fee and shall consider the evidence submitted by
the appealing party and the Alarm Administrator. The Chief of Police (or
designee) must base the decision on the preponderance of evidence presented at
the hearing and must render a decision within fifteen (15) days after the date
of the hearing. The decision shall affirm or reverse the decision or action
taken by the Alarm Administrator.
      (3)   Filing of an appeal stays any action by the Alarm Administrator to
suspend an alarm registration or require the payment of a fee or fine until the
appeal process has been exhausted. This provision applies only to the action of
the Alarm Administrator that is the subject of the appeal. This provision does
not operate as a bar to enforcement action on violations of this section that
occur thereafter.
   (d)   The Alarm Administrator or the Chief of Police, or their respective
designees, may adjust the count of false alarms or assessed fees based on:
      (1)   Evidence that a false alarm was caused by action of a
communications services provider (i.e., telephone, cellular, cable company);
      (2)   Evidence that a false alarm was caused by a power outage of more
than four (4) hours or severe weather such as a tornado, earthquake, or
excessive winds (35 m.p.h. or above as measured by the Ontario International
Airport weather monitoring station);
      (3)   Evidence that an alarm dispatch request was not a false alarm; or
      (4)   The occurrence of multiple alarms within a twenty-four (24) hour
period, which may be considered as one false alarm if the alarm user has taken
corrective action, unless the false alarms are directly caused by the alarm
user.
   (e)   The Alarm Administrator may waive all or part of a false alarm fine
due to extenuating circumstances or to encourage corrective action with
supervisor approval.
(§ 1, Ord. 3151, eff. February 20, 2020)
Sec. 4-9.150. Reinstatement of suspended alarm registrations.
   (a)   On the suspension of an alarm registration, a person whose alarm
registration has been suspended may obtain reinstatement of the registration by
the Alarm Administrator if the person:
      (1)   Pays a reinstatement fee as established by resolution of the City
Council;
      (2)   Pays, or otherwise resolves, all outstanding fees, fines, and other
charges;
      (3)   Submits a written notice from an alarm installation company stating
that the alarm system has been inspected and repaired (if necessary) by the
alarm installation company;
      (4)   The alarm user successfully completes an alarm user awareness class
and test.
   (b)   The Police Department shall reinstate its response to an alarm site as
soon as is practicable after receiving notice of reinstatement from the Alarm
Administrator. The alarm user and monitoring company shall take notice that the
alarm site has been officially reinstated only after receiving notice from the
Alarm Administrator of that fact. It shall be the responsibility of the alarm
user to verify that his, her, or its registration status and future police
response has been properly restored.
(§ 1, Ord. 3151, eff. February 20, 2020)
Sec. 4-9.160. Suspension of police response to dispatch requests from certain
alarm installation companies and monitoring companies.
   (a)   The Chief of Police or command staff designee may suspend police
response to an alarm dispatch request from an alarm installation company or
monitoring company if it is determined that:
      (1)   There is a violation of this chapter by the alarm installation
company or monitoring company and the condition causing the violation has not
been corrected and/or;
      (2)   The alarm installation company or monitoring company has failed to
pay any fee, fine, or other charge assessed under this section, more than sixty
(60) days after the fee, fine, or other charge is due.
   (b)   The Police Department may not respond to any alarm dispatch request
where the alarm installation company or monitoring company who
installed or monitors that alarm has failed to comply with California licensing
requirements or failed to maintain a valid copy of the State of California
Department of Consumer Affairs alarm company operators license.
   (c)   A suspension of police response made pursuant to this section is
subject to the appeal process provided for within this chapter. In addition,
the Alarm Administrator has the ability to accept a workable solution from the
affected party prior to an appeal. The affected party has sixty (60) days after
the written notice of suspension before Police response is suspended to its
alarm customers.
   (d)   The Alarm Administrator shall notify all known alarm users subscribing
to an alarm installation company or an alarm monitoring company that the Police
Department has suspended response to the company's alarm dispatch requests.
   (e)   The City shall assess the alarm installation company or monitoring
company a reinstatement fee in an amount established by resolution of the City
Council. In addition, if the Alarm Administrator has incurred costs in
notifying alarm users by mail of the suspension of their alarm installation
company or monitoring company, reimbursement to the City of those costs shall
be a condition of reinstatement.
(§ 1, Ord. 3151, eff. February 20, 2020)
Sec. 4-9.170. Police Department response.
   (a)   Subject to the suspension provisions in §
4-9.130 above and the discretion discussed in §
4-9.190 below, the Police Department at its discretion will respond to all "in
progress" robbery, panic or burglar alarms as promptly as possible, taking into
account pending calls for service and any policy establishing priority of
dispatched calls following notification of the receipt of the alarm from the
monitoring company. Police supervisors may, in their discretion, cancel a
police response to any or all alarms based on weather or other factors
affecting police service needs.
   (b)   The Chief of Police or his or her designee may re-prioritize
assignment of burglar alarms and response time at any time during a 24-hour
period as may be necessary due to the service needs of the community.
(§ 1, Ord. 3151, eff. February 20, 2020)
Sec. 4-9.180. Confidentiality of alarm information.
   All information contained in documents gathered through alarm registrations,
the submission of customer lists, the alarm appeal process and records relating
to alarm dispatch requests must be held in confidence by all employees of the
Alarm Administrator, the City of Ontario and any third-party alarm
administrator. Such information is proprietary and is hereby declared
confidential and not a public record. Absent special circumstances, such
information must not be released to the public or any person other than a law
enforcement agency, third party administrator or the applicable alarm user,
alarm installation company or alarm monitoring company except pursuant to court
order. Per California Government Code 6254(f).
(§ 1, Ord. 3151, eff. February 20, 2020)
Sec. 4-9.190. Scope of police duty; immunities preserved.
   The issuance of an alarm registration does not create a contract between the
Police Department and/or the City of Ontario and any alarm user, alarm
installation company or monitoring company, nor does it create a duty or
obligation, either expressed or implied, of the Police Department to respond to
any alarm. Any and all liability and consequential damage resulting from the
failure of the Police Department to respond to an alarm dispatch request is
hereby disclaimed and full governmental immunity as provided by law is
retained. By applying for an alarm registration, the alarm user acknowledges
that the Police Department response is influenced by the availability of
officers, priority of calls, traffic conditions, weather conditions, emergency
conditions, staffing levels, prior response history and administrative actions.
(§ 1, Ord. 3151, eff. February 20, 2020)
CHAPTER 10: HIGH-RISE BUILDING REGULATIONS (REPEALED)*
*Chapter 10 of Title 4, incorporating §§ 4-10.01 through 4-10.19, established
by § 1, Ord. 2188, eff. October 7, 1982 was repealed by § 1 of Ord. 2766, eff.
December 19, 2002.
CHAPTER 11: SECURITY STANDARDS FOR BUILDINGS
   
4-11.01   Scope
   
4-11.02   Enforcement
   
4-11.03   Violations and penalties
   
4-11.04   Alternate materials and methods of construction
   
4-11.05   Keying requirements
   
4-11.06   Windows/sliding glass doors
   
4-11.07   Garage type doors: Rolling overhead, solid overhead, swing, sliding
or accordion
   
4-11.08   Special residential building provisions
   
4-11.09   Special commercial/industrial building provisions
   
4-11.10   Special hotel/motel building provisions
   
4-11.11   Construction site security provisions
   
4-11.12   Alarm systems
   
4-11.13   Occupancy clearance
Sec. 4-11.01. Scope.
   (a)   The provisions of this chapter shall apply to all activities for which
a building permit is required by the ordinances of this City.
   (b)   Existing multiple-family dwelling units which, on the effective date
of the ordinance codified in this chapter, are rented or leased, but thereafter
are privately-owned family units, including condominiums, shall comply with the
special residential building provisions of this chapter.
   (c)   Any existing structure which converts from its original occupancy
group as designated in the Uniform Building Code shall comply with the
provisions of this chapter.
   (d)   Any building which requires special type releasing, latching, or
locking devices under the provisions of the Uniform Building Code or California
Code of Regulation, Title 19 shall be exempt from the provisions of this
chapter relating to locking devices of interior and/or exterior doors.
(§ 1, Ord. 2482, eff. October 4, 1990)
Sec. 4-11.02. Enforcement.
   The Chief of Police or authorized representatives are hereby empowered and
directed to administer and enforce the provisions of this chapter. Plans and
specifications for any proposed construction must, however, be approved by the
Building Official or authorized representatives, in accordance with the
provisions of this chapter. No certificate of occupancy is to be approved
unless the applicant has satisfied the enforcing authority that all provisions
of this chapter have been met.
   Enforcement of this chapter will be the responsibility of the Police
Department. This includes plan checks and inspections, reference meeting the
requirements of this chapter.
(§ 1, Ord. 2482, eff. October 4, 1990)
Sec. 4-11.03. Violations and penalties.
   It shall be unlawful for any persons, firm or corporation to erect,
construct, enlarge, alter, move, improve, convert, or equip, use, occupy or
maintain any building or structure in the City, or cause same to be done,
contrary to or in violation of any of the provisions of this chapter.
   Any person, firm, or corporation violating any of the provisions of this
chapter is guilty of a misdemeanor and each offense is punishable by a fine of
not more than One Thousand Dollars ($1,000.00), or by confinement in jail for
not more than six (6) months, or by both fine and confinement in jail.
Sec. 4-11.04. Alternate materials and methods of construction.
   The provisions of this chapter are not intended to prevent the use of any
material or method of construction not specifically prescribed by this chapter;
provided, any such alternate has been approved by the enforcing authority, nor
is it the intention of this chapter to exclude any sound method of structural
design or analysis not specifically provided for in this chapter. Materials,
methods of construction, or structural deign limitations provided for in this
chapter are to be used unless an exception is granted by the enforcing
authority.
   The enforcing authority may approve any such alternate; provided, they find
the proposed design, material, and method of work to be for the purpose
intended at least equivalent to that prescribed in this chapter in quality,
strength, effectiveness, burglary resistance, durability and safety.
(§ 1, Ord. 2482, eff. October 4, 1990)
Sec. 4-11.05. Keying requirements.
   Upon occupancy by the owner or proprietor, each single unit in the same
residential project or commercial building development, constructed under the
same development plan, shall have locks which are interchange free from locks
used in all other separate dwellings, proprietorships or similar distinct
occupancies within such residential project or commercial building development.
(§ 1, Ord. 2482, eff. October 4, 1990)
Sec. 4-11.06. Windows/sliding glass doors.
   (a)   Sliding glass doors will be of the inside sliding door type. All
sliding glass doors shall have secondary locking devices and anti-lift devices.
Secondary locking devices may be waived if the doors successfully meet tests
prescribed by the Police Department.
   (b)   Louvered windows shall not be used when a portion of the window is
less than twelve (12) feet vertically or six (6) feet horizontally from an
accessible surface or any adjoining roof, balcony landing, stair, tread,
platform or similar structure.
   (c)   All sliding glass windows shall have secondary locking devices and
anti-lift devices. Secondary locking devices may be waived if the windows
successfully meet tests prescribed by the Police Department.
   (d)   Doors swinging out shall have nonremovable hinge pins.
(§ 1, Ord. 2482, eff. October 4, 1990)
Sec. 4-11.07. Garage type doors: Rolling overhead, solid overhead, swing,
sliding or accordion.
   (a)   Doors utilizing a cylinder lock shall have a minimum five (5) pin
tumbler operation with the locking bar or bolt extending into the receiving
guide a minimum of one (1) inch.
   (b)   Doors that exceed sixteen (16) feet in width, but do not exceed
nineteen (19) feet in width, shall have one of the following locking devices:
      (1)   Two (2) lock receiving points, one on each side of the door;
      (2)   A single bolt may be used if placed in the center of the door with
the locking point located either at the floor or door frame header.
   (c)   Except in a residential building, door secured by electrical operation
shall have a keyed switch to open the door when in a closed position, or shall
have a signal locking device to open said door.
(§ 1, Ord. 2482, eff. October 4, 1990)
Sec. 4-11.08. Special residential building provisions.
   (a)   Except for vehicular access doors, all exterior swinging doors of any
residential building and attached garages, including the door leading from the
garage area into the dwelling unit, shall be equipped as follows:
      (1)   All wood doors shall be of solid core construction with a minimum
thickness of one and three-fourths (1¾) inches, or with panels not less than
nine sixteenths (9/16) inch thick;
      (2)   A single or double door shall be equipped with a single cylinder
deadbolt lock. The bolt shall have a minimum projection of one (1) inch and be
constructed so as to repel cutting tool attack. The deadbolt shall have an
embedment of at least three-fourths (¾) inch into the strike receiving the
projected bolt. The cylinder shall have a cylinder guard and shall be connected
to the inner portion of the lock by connecting screws of at least one-fourth
(¼) inch in diameter. A dual locking mechanism constructed so that both
deadbolt and latch can be retracted by a single action of the inside door knob,
or lever, may be substituted; provided, it meets all other specifications for
locking devices;
      (3)   When not required for exiting purposes, the inactive leaf of double
doors shall be equipped with metal flush bolts having a minimum embedment of
five-eighths ( 5/8 ) inch into the head and threshold of the door frame;
      (4)   Glazing in exterior doors or within twelve (12) inches of any
locking mechanism shall be of fully tempered glass or rated burglary resistance
glazing;
      (5)   Except where clear vision panels are installed, all front exterior
doors shall be equipped with a wide angle (180 degree) door viewer, not to be
mounted more than fifty eight (58) inches from the bottom of the door;
      (6)   Fully tempered glass or rated burglary resistance glazing shall be
used if a window is within forty (40) inches of any locking mechanism;
      (7)   Garage doors without automatic openers installed will have two
exterior slide locks, one on each side of the door. Garage doors with automatic
garage door openers require one slide lock;
      (8)   Doorjambs shall be installed with solid backing in such a manner
that no voids exist between the strike side of the jamb and the frame opening
for a vertical distance of six (6) inches each side of the strike plates;
      (9)   Jambs for all doors shall be constructed or protected so as to
prevent violation of the strike plates;
      (10)   The strike plate for deadbolts on all wood framed doors shall be
constructed of minimum sixteen (16) U.S. gauge steel, bronze, or brass and
secured to the jamb by a minimum of two (2) screws, which must penetrate at
least two (2) inches into solid backing beyond the surface to which the strike
is attached;
      (11)   Hinges for out-swinging doors shall be equipped with nonremovable
hinge pins or a mechanical interlock to preclude removal of the door from the
exterior by removing the hinge pins.
   (b)   Street numbers and other identifying data shall be displayed as
follows:
      (1)   Street address numbering shall adhere to standards set forth in
this Code. All residential dwellings shall display street numbers in a
prominent location on the street side of the residence in such a position that
the number is easily visible to approaching emergency vehicles. The numerals
shall be no less than four (4) inches in height and shall be of contrasting
color to the background to which they are attached and of reflective material.
Multi-family residences shall also have rear addressing per Fire Department
requirements;
      (2)   There shall be positioned at each entrance of a multiple building,
multi-family apartment complex an illuminated diagrammatic representation of
the complex which shows the location of the viewer and the unit designations
within the complex. In addition, each individual unit within the complex shall
display a prominent identification number, not less than four (4) inches in
height, which is easily visible to approaching vehicular and/or pedestrian
traffic;
      (3)   Rooftop address numbers shall be installed on all new construction
or development of apartments, condominiums, or any other multiple- building
unit in the city for which an alarm permit or other discretionary permit is
requested. The rooftop numbers shall be a minimum of three (3) feet in length
and one (1) foot in width and shall be painted in reflective white paint on a
flat black painted background, away from any rooftop obstacles. Such rooftop
numbers shall be screened from public view and visible only from aircraft.
   Those buildings with multiple apartments, condominiums, or other types of
multi-units shall also have the apartment, condominium or unit number or
letters painted, to the same specifications set forth above, on the roof over
the primary entrance to that particular unit as described in that graphic shown
in §
4-11.09(j)(2) below.
      (4)   Addressing of multi-family complexes shall meet with the approval
of the Police Department.
   (c)   Lighting in residential dwellings shall be as follows:
      (1)   Areas outside apartments, duplexes and condominiums are to be
lighted by photo cells to come on at sunset and go off at sunrise. This is to
include walkways, doorways, and other areas used by the public. Lighting to be
minimum maintained .5 footcandle power in all common areas;
      (2)   Open parking lots and carports shall be provided with a maintained
minimum of one (1) footcandle of light on the parking surface during the hours
of darkness. Lighting devices shall be protected by weather and vandalism
resistant covers;
      (3)   Single-family housing will have lighting at all entrances;
      (4)   The developer shall have approved certified exterior lighting plans
showing luminaire throw patterns and cut sheets of the luminaires to be used
prior to building permits being issued. The lighting plans should include the
areas covered by any carports to prevent any delay in the approval of the
plans.
   (d)   Residential fencing will comply with the following conditions:
      (1)   If locking gates are installed, the Police and Fire Departments
will be provided access by the Knox submaster system;
      (2)   Security shrubbery shall be installed next to all fences and walls
that adjoin all common and public access areas and shall have an automatic
sprinkler system installed;
      (3)   Barbed wire, electrified, or similar type security fencing shall
not be installed in residential zones.
   (e)   Apartments, condominiums, or any other multiple-building with a common
attic will have a resident controlled locking device installed to each scuttle-
hole or access-way. The locking device shall be of the type to prevent entrance
to any one residence from another and will not lock behind a resident, trapping
them in the attic.
(§ 1, Ord. 2482, eff. October 4, 1990, as amended by § 1, Ord. 2658, eff. April
16, 1998)
Sec. 4-11.09. Special commercial/industrial building provisions.
   (a)   Swinging exterior glass doors, wood or metal doors with glass panels,
solid wood or metal doors shall be constructed or protected as follows;
      (1)   Wood doors shall be of solid core construction with a minimum
thickness of one and three-fourths (1¾) inches. Wood pane doors with panels
less than one (1) inch thick shall be covered on the inside with a minimum
sixteen (16) U.S. gauge sheet steel, or its equivalent, which is to be attached
with screws on minimum six (6) inch centers. Hollow steel doors shall be of a
minimum sixteen (16) U.S. gauge and have sufficient reinforcement to maintain
the designed thickness of the door when any locking device is installed; such
reinforcement being able to restrict collapsing of the door around any locking
device;
      (2)   Except where double cylinder deadbolts are utilized, any glazing in
exterior doors or within forty eight (48) inches of any door looking mechanism
shall be constructed or protected as follows:
         (i)   Fully tempered glass or rated burglary resistance glazing;
         (ii)   Iron or steel grills of at least one-eighth ( 1/8 ) inch
material with a minimum two (2) inch mesh secured on the inside of the glazing
may be utilized; or
         (iii)   The glazing shall be covered with iron bars of at least one-
half (½) inch round or one (1) inch by one-fourth (¼) inch flat steel material,
spaced not more than five (5) inches apart, secured on the inside of the
glazing;
         (iv)   Subsections (ii) and (iii) of this section shall not be
implemented so as to interfere with the operation of opening windows if such
windows are required to be opened by the Building Code.
   (b)   All swinging exterior wood and steel doors shall be equipped as
follows:
      (1)   A single or double door shall be equipped with a double cylinder
deadbolt. The bolt shall have minimum projection of one (1) inch and be
constructed so as to repel cutting tool attack. The deadbolt shall have a
embedment of at least three- fourths (¾) inch into the strike receiving the
projected bolt. The cylinder shall have a cylinder guard, a minimum of five (5)
pin tumblers, and shall be connected to the inner portion of the lock by
connecting screws a least one-fourth (¼) inch in diameter. The provisions of
this subsection do not apply where:
         (i)   Panic hardware is required; or
         (ii)   An equivalent device is approved by the enforcing authority;
      (2)   Double doors shall be equipped as follows:
         (i)   When not required for exiting purposes, the inactive leaf of a
double door shall be equipped with metal flush bolts having a minimum embedment
of five-eighths ( 5/8 ) inch into the head and threshold of the door frame;
         (ii)   Double doors shall have an astragal constructed of steel a
minimum of.125 inches thick which will cover the opening between the door. The
astragal shall be a minimum of two (2) inches wide, and extend a minimum of one
(1) inch beyond the edge of the door to which it is attached. The astragal
shall be attached to the outside of the active door by means of welding or with
nonremovable bolts spaced apart on not more than ten (10) inch centers.
   (c)   Aluminum frame swinging doors shall be equipped as follows:
      (1)   The jamb on all aluminum frame swinging doors shall be so
constructed or protected to withstand one thousand six hundred (1,600) pounds
of pressure in both a vertical distance of three (3) inches and a horizontal
distance of one (1) inch each side of the strike, so as to prevent violations
of the strike;
      (2)   Except when panic hardware is required, a single or double door
shall be equipped with a double cylinder deadbolt with a bolt projection
exceeding one (1) inch, or a hook shaped or expanding dog bolt that engages the
strike sufficiently to prevent spreading. The deadbolt lock shall have a
minimum of five (5) pin tumblers and a cylinder guard.
   (d)   Panic hardware, whenever required by the Uniform Building Code or
California Code of Regulation, Title 19, shall be installed as follows:
      (1)   Panic hardware shall contain a minimum of two (2) locking points on
each door; or
      (2)   On single doors, panic hardware may have one (1) locking point
which is not to be located at either the top or bottom of the door frame. The
door shall have an astragal constructed of steel 0.125 inches thick which shall
be attached with nonremovable bolts to the outside of the door. The astragal
shall extend a minimum of six (6) inches vertically above and below the latch
of the panic hardware. The astragal shall be a minimum of two (2) inches wide
and extend a minimum of one (1) inch beyond the edge of the door to which it is
attached;
      (3)   Double doors containing panic hardware shall have an astragal
attached to the doors at their meeting point which will close the opening
between them, but not interfere with the operation of either door.
   (e)   Horizontal sliding doors shall be of the inside slider type and
equipped with a metal guide track at top and bottom and a cylinder lock and/or
padlock with a hardened steel shackle which locks at both heel and toe, and a
minimum five (5) pin tumbler operation with a nonremovable key when in an
unlocked position. The bottom track shall be so designed that the door cannot
be lifted from the track when the door is in a locked position.
   (f)   In office buildings (multiple occupancy), all entrance doors to
individual office suites shall meet the construction and locking requirements
for exterior doors.
   (g)   Windows shall be deemed accessible if less than twelve (12) feet above
ground. Accessible windows and all exterior transoms having a pane exceeding
ninety six (96) square inches in an area with the smallest dimension exceeding
six (6) inches and not visible from a public or private vehicular access- way
shall be protected in the following manner:
      (1)   Fully tempered glass or burglary resistant glazing; or
      (2)   The following window barriers may be used but shall be secured with
nonremovable bolts:
         (i)   Inside or outside iron bars of at least one-half (½) inch round
or one (1) inch by one- quarter (¼) inch flat steel material, spaced not more
than five (5) inches apart and securely fastened; or
         (ii)   Inside or outside iron or steel grills of at least one-eighth
( 1/8 ) inch material with not more than a two (2) inch mesh and securely
fastened;
      (3)   If a side or rear window is of the type that can be opened, it
shall, where applicable, be secured on the inside with either a slide bar,
bolt, crossbar, auxiliary locking device, or padlock with hardened steel
shackle, a minimum four (4) pin tumbler operation;
      (4)   The protective bars or grills shall not interfere with the
operation of opening windows if such windows are required to be opened by the
Uniform Building Code.
   (h)   Roof openings shall be equipped as follows:
      (1)   All skylights on the roof of any building or premises used for
business purposes shall be provided with:
         (i)   Rated burglary resistant glazing;
         (ii)   Iron bars of at least one-half (½) inch round or one (1) inch
by one-fourth (¼) inch flat steel material under the skylight and securely
fastened; or
         (iii)   A steel grill of at least one-eighth ( 1/8 ) inch material
with a maximum two (2) inch mesh under the skylight and securely fastened.
Smoke and heat vents must have a minimum of one (1) inch mesh per Fire
Department requirements;
      (2)   All hatchway openings on the roof of any building or premises used
for business purposes shall be secured as follows:
         (i)   If the hatchway is of wooden material, it shall be covered on
the inside with at least sixteen (16) U.S. gauge sheet metal, or its
equivalent, attached with screws;
         (ii)   The hatchway shall be secured from the inside with a slide bar
or slide bolts;
         (iii)   Outside hinges on all hatchway openings shall be provided with
nonremovable pins when using pin-type hinges;
      (3)   All air duct or air vent openings exceeding ninety six (96) square
inches on the roof or exterior walls of any building or premises used for
business purposes shall be secured by covering the same with either of the
following:
         (i)   Iron bars of at least one-half (½) inch round or one (1) inch by
one-fourth (¼) inch flat steel materials spaced no more than five (5) inches
apart and securely fastened; or
         (ii)   Iron or steel grills of at least one-eighth ( 1/8 ) inch
material with a maximum two (2) inch mesh and securely fastened;
         (iii)   If the barrier is on the outside, it shall be secured with
bolts which are nonremovable from the exterior;
         (iv)   The above (i) and (ii) must not interfere with venting
requirements creating a potentially hazardous condition to health and safety or
conflict with the provisions of the Uniform Building Code or California Code of
Regulations, Title 19.
   (i)   Permanently affixed ladders leading to roofs shall be fully enclosed
with sheet metal to a height of ten (10) feet. This covering shall be locked
against the ladder with a case hardened hasp, secured with nonremovable screws
or bolts. Hinges on the cover will be provided with nonremovable pins when
using pin-type hinges. If a padlock is used, it shall have a hardened steel
shackle, locking at both heel and toe, and a minimum five (5) pin tumbler
operation with nonremovable key when in an unlocked position.
   (j)   The following standards shall apply to lighting, address
identification and parking areas:
      (1)   Street address numbers shall adhere to standards set forth in §
9-1.3280 of the Zoning Ordinance. Numbers and the backgrounds shall be of
contrasting color and shall be reflective for nighttime visibility;
      (2)   Rooftop address numbers shall be installed on all new construction
or development of commercial/industrial buildings for which an alarm permit or
other discretionary permit is requested. The rooftop numbers shall be a minimum
of three (3) feet in length and one (1) foot in width and shall be painted on
the rooftops in reflective white paint on a flat black painted background, away
from any rooftop obstacles. The rooftop numbers shall be placed on the rooftops
in a parallel direction to the displayed streetside numbers. Such rooftop
numbers shall be screened from public view and visible only from aircraft.
   The rooftops of those buildings with multiple suites shall also have the
suite number or letters painted, to the same specifications set forth above, on
the rooftop over the primary entrance to that suite as follows:
 
  Address
A B C     D
 
This requirement to include suite identification shall not apply where in the
opinion of the Chief of Police it is not feasible to do. In determining where
suite identification is feasible, the Chief shall consider the size of the
building, space on the rooftop and location of suites.
      (3)   Rear addressing, including street name, shall be installed on any
multiple building development. Address numbering shall adhere to standards set
forth in §
9-1.3280 of the Zoning Ordinance;
      (4)   All parking, common, and storage areas must have maintained one (1)
footcandle power. These areas are to be lighted from sunset to sunrise by photo
censored cell;
      (5)   Lighting in exterior areas shall be in vandalism resistant
fixtures;
      (6)   The developer shall submit certified exterior lighting plans
showing luminaire throw pattern and cut sheets of luminaires to be used prior
to building permits being issued;
      (7)   Interior night lighting shall be constructed and maintained in
those areas that are visible from the street (ground floor level only).
   (k)   Elevators.
      (1)   Passenger elevators, the interiors of which are not completely
visible when the car door is open, shall have mirrors so placed as to make
visible the whole of the elevator interior to prospective passengers outside
the elevator; mirrors shall be framed and mounted to minimize the possibility
of their accidentally falling or shattering;
      (2)   Elevator emergency stop button shall be so installed and connected
as to activate the elevator alarm.
   (l)   Security fencing.
      (1)   If security fencing is installed, the Police Department will be
provided access by the Knox submaster system. If gates are not electrically
operated, a “KNOX” padlock may be substituted for electrically operated
override systems;
      (2)   If wrought iron fencing is used, it shall be six (6) feet high,
open ended, and pickets shall be four (4) inches on center. If block wall
fencing is used, it shall be six (6) feet high with security shrubbery and
anti-graffiti measures (i.e., vines and the like) will be used;
      (3)   If barbed wire or similar material is used, it shall be at least
six (6) feet above the ground.
   (m)   Helicopter pad. Any building that is required by City Fire Ordinance
to maintain a helicopter pad must allow access to Ontario Police Department
helicopters as needed.
   (n)   Public Safety 800 MHZ Radio Amplification System.
      (1)   Except as otherwise provided in this section, no person shall
construct or develop any commercial or industrial building or structure or any
part thereof or cause the same to be done which fails to support adequate radio
coverage for City emergency service workers, including, but not limited to,
firefighters and police officers. For purposes of this section, adequate radio
coverage shall include all of the following:
         (i)   the frequency range which must be supported shall be 806MHZ to
824 MHZ and 850 MHZ to 869 MHZ, and the frequency range which must be rejected
shall be 824 MHZ to 849 MHZ and 859 MHZ to 894 MHZ;
         (ii)   a minimum signal strength of one (1) microvolt available at the
City of Ontario Communications Systems when transmitted from eighty five
percent (85%) of the area of each floor of the building;
         (iii)   the frequency range which must be supported shall be 806 MHZ
to 824 MHZ and 850 MHZ to 869 MHZ, and the frequency range which must be
rejected shall be 824 MHZ to 849 MHZ and 869 MHZ to 894 MHZ;
         (iv)   a ninety percent (90%) reliability factor.
      (2)   Testing procedures.
         (i)   Initial tests will be performed by the City of Ontario employees
in accordance with this section. A Certificate of Occupancy shall not be issued
for any structure if the building fails to comply with this section.
         (ii)   Annual tests will be conducted by the Ontario Fire Department
in conjunction with inspection procedures.
         (iii)   In addition to the initial and annual tests, City Police and
Fire Personnel, after obtaining consent from the owner or his representative,
or absent such consent, after obtaining other lawful authority, shall have the
right to enter onto the property to conduct field testing to be certain the
required level of radio coverage is present.
         (iv)   If at any time during normal operation within the structure by
emergency personnel, it is discovered there exists a problem with radio
transmission or reception, a test shall be initiated to determine compliance
with established signal strength and coverage. Failure to comply with this
process shall result in revocation of license to conduct said business.
      (3)   Correction of radio coverage deficiency. Should a property fail the
testing by the City, the deficiency shall be corrected as follows:
         (i)   The property owner or other person responsible for the property
shall have thirty (30) days to correct the radio deficiency.
         (ii)   Failure to correct the deficiency within thirty (30) days shall
result in suspension of license to conduct said business(s) on the property
until the deficiency is corrected.
      (4)   Amplification systems allowed. Buildings and structures which
cannot support the required level of radio coverage shall be equipped with any
of the following in order to achieve the required adequate radio coverage:
         (i)   a radiating cable system; or
         (ii)   an internal multiple antenna system with FCC type-accepted
bidirectional 800 MHZ amplifiers.
   If any part of the installed system or systems contains an electrically
powered component, the system shall be capable of operating on an independent
battery and/or generator system for a period of at least twelve (12) hours
without external power input. The battery system shall automatically charge in
the presence of an external power input.
   Any person who constructs or develops a commercial or industrial building or
structure shall provide two (2) inch raceways in the walls into which the cable
could be laid. Such raceways shall include an opening in the roof which allows
for placement of an exterior antenna and access to each floor.
      (5)   Exemptions. This section shall not apply to the following buildings
provided they do not make use of any metal construction or any underground
storage or parking areas:
         (i)   buildings permitted in R1 and R2 zones;
         (ii)   any building constructed of wood frame;
         (iii)   any building thirty (30) feet high or less.
   For purposes of this section, parking structures are included in the
definition of “all parts of a building” but elevators may be excluded.
(§ 1, Ord. 2482, eff. October 4, 1990, as amended by § 2, Ord. 2658, eff. April
16, 1998, § 1, Ord. 2666, eff. July 2, 1998, Ord. 2731, eff. April 5, 2001)
Sec. 4-11.10. Special hotel/motel building provisions.
   (a)   Security hardware.
      (1)   One (1) inch single cylinder deadbolts will be installed on all
entrance doors, in addition to the locking handset. If windows are within forty
(40) inches of any locking device, tempered glass must be used;
      (2)   Double locking deadbolts and self closing doors will be installed
on all guest room doors with public access;
      (3)   Double lock instructions and other approved security and emergency
information will be posted on all guest room doors;
      (4)   A one hundred eighty (180) degree door viewer will be installed on
all guest room doors with public access.
   (b)   Numbering.
      (1)   Street address numbering shall adhere to standards set forth in §
9-1.3280 of the Zoning Ordinance. Numbers and the background shall be of
contrasting color and reflective for nighttime visibility.
      (2)   Developer shall install rooftop numbering and street names parallel
to the street that the address is assigned. The numbers and letters shall be a
minimum of three (3) feet in length and one (1) foot in width and white in
color.
      (3)   Addresses for individual units should be clearly marked and well
lit. Room directories shall be placed around the perimeter of the development
(placement, size and lighting will be approved by Building, Police, Fire and
Planning Departments).
(§ 1, Ord. 2482, eff. October 4, 1990)
Sec. 4-11.11. Construction site security provisions.
   All new construction, on a site exceeding one (1) acre in area, shall comply
with the following security measures until the utilities have been released by
the City of Ontario.
   (a)   Perimeter lighting shall be installed at a minimum of one hundred
fifty (150) foot intervals and at a height not less than fifteen (15) feet from
the ground. The light source used shall have a minimum light output of two
thousand (2,000) lumens, be protected by a vandalism resistant cover, and be
lighted during the hours of darkness.
   (b)   Additional lighting shall be required if the construction site exceeds
four (4) acres in area.
   (c)   In addition to perimeter lighting described in (a) above, one of the
following shall be used:
      (1)   Fencing, not less than six (6) feet in height, which is designed to
preclude human intrusion, shall be installed along the perimeter boundaries of
the construction site; or
      (2)   A uniformed security guard, licensed according to the California
Business and Profession Code Chapter 11.5 (commencing with Cal. Bus. & Prof.
Code § 7580), shall be utilized to continually patrol the construction site
during the hours when construction work has ceased.
(§ 1, Ord. 2482, eff. October 4, 1990)
Sec. 4-11.12. Alarm systems.
   (a)   Burglar alarm systems are recommended for all businesses and a robbery
alarm should be considered for certain retail businesses.
   (b)   If an alarm is installed in any type of building (residential,
commercial or industrial), and alarm permit must be obtained from the Ontario
Police Department. Subscribers should acquaint themselves with
Title 4, Chapter 9 of this code.
   (c)   If an alarm is installed in any commercial or industrial building, a
blue flashing light shall be installed on the rooftop. This light shall be
screened from public view but visible from the air. Such a blue flashing light
is recommended for residential, but is optional.
   The blue flashing light shall meet the specifications approved by the Police
Department.
(§ 1, Ord. 2482, eff. October 4, 1990)
Sec. 4-11.13. Occupancy clearance.
   (a)   Utilities shall not be released for any building subject to this
chapter until a final occupancy clearance inspection is completed and approved
by a member of the Ontario Police Department.
   (b)   No building shall be open for public use or occupied for business or
residential use until the occupancy clearance inspection is completed and
approved.
(§ 1, Ord. 2482, eff. October 4, 1990)
CHAPTER 12: COST RECOVERY FOR POLICE SERVICES AT LARGE PARTIES ON PRIVATE
PROPERTY
   
4-12.01   Purpose
   
4-12.02   Definitions
   
4-12.03   Police services at large parties requiring a police response
   
4-12.04   Police services fee
   
4-12.05   Police services fee deemed a debt to City: Suits for collection
   
4-12.06   Civil penalties for loud or unruly parties, gatherings or other
similar events; Findings and purpose
   
4-12.07   Loud or unruly gatherings; Public nuisance
   
4-12.08   Notice of loud or unruly gatherings; Certified mail
   
4-12.09   Persons liable for response to a gathering constituting a public
nuisance
   
4-12.10   Schedule of civil and/or criminal penalties
   
4-12.11   Collection of delinquent costs for a City response
Sec. 4-12.01. Purpose.
   The purpose of this chapter is to allow for reimbursement to the City of
police expenses related to responses to large parties on private property which
have been determined to be a threat to the public peace, health, safety or
general welfare.
(§ 1, Ord. 2496, eff. March 21, 1991, as amended by § 1, Ord. 2889, eff. March
6, 2008, and § 1, Ord. 2940, eff. October 5, 2011)
Sec. 4-12.02. Definitions.
   For the purposes of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply:
   (a)   “Large party” means a party, gathering or event on private property
where a group of five (5) or more persons have assembled or are assembled for a
social occasion or for a social activity.
   (b)   “Person responsible” means the person responsible for a large party.
Such person shall be deemed to be, in order of priority:
      (1)   The owners of the premises where the large party takes place, if
the premises are owner-occupied private property;
      (2)   The tenants of the premises where the large party takes place, if
the premises are tenant-occupied private property;
      (3)   Persons who organized the large party.
   If the person responsible for the large party is a minor, then the parents
or guardians of that minor will be jointly and severally liable for the police
services fee.
   (c)   “Special security assignment” means the assignment of police officers
and services during a second or subsequent call to a large party after the
distribution of a written warning that the large party violates the law.
(§ 1, Ord. 2496, eff. March 21, 1991, as amended by § 1, Ord. 2889, eff. March
6, 2008 , and § 1, Ord. 2940, eff. October 5, 2011 )
Sec. 4-12.03. Police services at large parties requiring a police response.
   (a)   When a large party occurs on private property and a police officer at
the scene determines that there is a threat to the public peace, health, safety
or general welfare as a result of conduct such as one (1) or more of the
following: excessive noise (as defined by the Ontario Municipal Code),
excessive traffic, obstruction of public streets or crowds who have spilled
over into public streets, public drunkenness, the service of alcohol to minors,
fights, disturbances of the peace, vandalism, and litter, the persons
responsible for the large party will be held liable for the police services fee
for any special security assignment.
   (b)   Nothing contained in this chapter shall in any way affect the ability
of the police to issue citations or to make arrests for violations of state or
local laws.
(§ 1, Ord. 2496, eff. March 21, 1991, as amended by § 1, Ord. 2889, eff. March
6, 2008, and § 1, Ord. 2940, eff. October 5, 2011)
Sec. 4-12.04. Police services fee.
   (a)   The police services fee shall include:
      (1)   Personnel cost at the rate of Seventy Five Dollars ($75.00) per
hour per police officer;
      (2)   Actual cost of any medical treatment required by a police officer
for injuries sustained during a special security assignment; and
      (3)   The cost of repairing or replacing any City equipment or property
damaged or destroyed during a special security assignment.
   (b)   Except as provided in subsection (c) of this section, the police
services fee shall not exceed Five Hundred Dollars ($500.00) for any special
security assignment.
   (c)   The City reserves the right to seek a police services fee in excess of
Five Hundred Dollars ($500.00) against any responsible person who, by his or
her own actions, causes injury to a police officer or damage to or destruction
of any City equipment or property. Nothing contained in this chapter shall in
any way preclude the City from seeking damages against any person to the extent
otherwise permitted by law.
(§ 1, Ord. 2496, eff. March 21, 1991, as amended by § 1, Ord. 2889, eff. March
6, 2008, and § 1, Ord. 2940, eff. October 5, 2011)
Sec. 4-12.05. Police services fee deemed a debt to City: Suits for collection.
   The amount of any police services fee imposed by the provisions of this
chapter shall be deemed a debt to the City. An action may be commenced in the
name of the City in any court of competent jurisdiction for the amount of any
police services fee which is not paid within thirty (30) days after being
billed to the person responsible for payment thereof. In any such action, the
City shall be entitled to recover, in addition to the police services fee and
any interest accruing thereon, costs of suit, including the City's reasonable
attorneys' fees.
(§ 1, Ord. 2496, eff. March 21, 1991, as amended by § 1, Ord. 2889, eff. March
6, 2008, and § 1, Ord. 2940, eff. October 5, 2011)
Sec. 4-12.06 Civil penalties for loud or unruly parties, gatherings or other
similar events; Findings and purpose.
   (a)   Due to inadequate supervision, some large gatherings of people, such
as parties, frequently become loud and unruly to the point that they constitute
a threat to the peace, health, safety, or general welfare of the public as a
result of conduct such as one (1) or more of the following: excessive noise,
excessive traffic, obstruction of public streets or crowds who have spilled
over into public streets, public drunkenness, the service of alcohol to minors,
fights, disturbances of the peace, vandalism, and litter.
   (b)   The City is required to respond to such unruly gatherings, or a
particular premises, in order to restore and maintain the peace and protect
public safety. Such gatherings are a burden on scarce City resources and can
result in police responses to regular and emergency calls being delayed and
police protection to the rest of the City being reduced.
   (c)   In order to discourage the occurrence of repeated loud and unruly
gatherings, the persons responsible for the public nuisance created by these
gatherings should be fined.
(§ 1, Ord. 2889, eff. March 6, 2008, as amended by § 1, Ord. 2940, eff. October
5, 2011)
Sec. 4-12.07. Loud or unruly gatherings; Public nuisance.
   It shall be unlawful and a public nuisance to conduct a gathering of five
(5) or more persons on any private property in a manner which constitutes a
substantial disturbance of the quiet enjoyment of private or public property of
a neighborhood, as a result of conduct constituting a violation of law.
Illustrative of such unlawful conduct is excessive noise or traffic,
obstruction of public streets by crowds or vehicles, public drunkenness, the
service of alcohol to minors, fights, disturbances of the peace, vandalism, and
litter. The following are the specific violations of permitting any noise
disturbance that is:
   (a)   Plainly audible across property boundaries;
   (b)   Plainly audible through partitions common to two residents within a
building;
   (c)   Plainly audible at a distance of 50 feet in any direction from the
source of music or sound between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 10:00 p.m.; or
   (d)   Plainly audible at a distance of 25 feet in any direction from the
source of music or sound between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m.
   A gathering constituting a public nuisance may be abated by the City by all
reasonable means including, but not limited to, an order requiring the
gathering to be disbanded and citation and/or arrest of any law violators under
any applicable local laws and state statutes such as: Ontario Municipal Code
(“OMC”) sections governing excessive noise, Cal. Penal Code §§ 415 and 416
(Breach of the Peace); Cal. Penal Code §§ 374 et seq. (Litter); Cal. Penal Code
§ 647(f) (Public Intoxication/Obstruction of Public Way); Cal. Business &
Professions Code § 25658 (Selling Alcohol to Minors), Cal. Vehicle Code § 23224
(Possession of alcoholic beverage in vehicle, persons under 21); Cal. Penal
Code §§ 12020 et seq. (Unlawful Carrying and Possession of Concealed Weapons).
(§ 1, Ord. 2889, eff. March 6, 2008, as amended by § 1, Ord. 2940, eff. October
5, 2011)
Sec. 4-12.08 Notice of loud or unruly gatherings; Certified mail.
   (a)   Notice of violation will be served via the actual citation written by
the Police Officer on scene and/or a formal written "Notice of Violation"
issued on scene and/or through certified mail. The formal "Notice of Violation"
will record the date and time of the police intervention and include a formal
written advisal that subsequent responses will cause the violating party to
incur additional fines and/or result in a formal arrest, within a one hundred
eighty (180) day period. The violations shall result in the joint and several
liability of any guests causing the public nuisance, persons who are residents
or in control of the property at which the public nuisance occurred, persons
who sponsored the gathering constituting the public nuisance, and owners of the
premises. All persons listed who are present can receive a violation.
   (b)   Mailing of Notice to Property Owner. Notice of the police intervention
shall also be mailed to any property owner at the address shown on the City’s
property tax assessment records. The notice shall advise the property owner
that the current violation and any subsequent gathering resulting in a public
nuisance within one hundred eighty (180) days on the same premises
necessitating City intervention shall result in liability of the property owner
for all penalties associated with such intervention.” The Ontario Police
Department will issue and mail the Notice of Violation to the Property Owner;
the notice will be sent certified mail.
(§1, Ord. 2889, eff. March 6, 2008, as amended by § 1, Ord. 2940, eff. October
5, 2011)
Sec. 4-12.09 Persons liable for response to a gathering constituting a public
nuisance.
   If the City is required to intervene at a gathering constituting a public
nuisance on the same premises once and/or on multiple responses in any one
hundred eighty (180) day period, including a second intervention during the
same day or night as the first intervention, the following persons shall be
jointly and severally liable for civil penalties as set forth in §
4-12.10, in addition to any other applicable penalties or liability under the
Ontario Municipal Code or other provision of law.
   (a)   The person or persons who own the premises where the gathering
constituting a public nuisance took place if any of the following are the case:
Said owner resides on or adjacent to the premises; said owner was present when
the citation and/or formal "Notice of Violation" was issued; or the formal
"Notice of Violation" was mailed to said owner and ten (10) days have elapsed
since the date of said mailing. For purposes of this subsection, where a
gathering takes place within the confines of a single unit in a building owned
by a housing cooperative, the owner of the property shall be deemed to be the
owner of the single unit and not the members of the housing cooperative in
general. Where the gathering took place in the common area of a building owned
by a housing cooperative, only the members of the cooperative owning units in
the building where the gathering took place shall be deemed the owners of the
property for purposes of this subsection. Other members of the housing
cooperative may still be liable if they fall within the categories of person
made liable by subsections (b), (c), or (d), below.
   (b)   The person or persons residing on or otherwise in control of the
property where such gathering took place.
   (c)   All persons attending such gathering who engaged in any activity
resulting in the public nuisance.
   (d)   The person or persons who organized or sponsored such gathering.
   (e)   Nothing in this section shall be construed to impose liability on the
resident or owners of the premises or sponsor of the gathering, for the conduct
of persons who are present without the express or implied consent of the
resident or sponsor, as long as the resident and sponsor have taken all steps
reasonably necessary to exclude such uninvited participants from the premises.
Where an invited guest engages in conduct which the sponsor or resident could
not reasonably foresee and the conduct is an isolated instance of a guest at
the event violating the law which the sponsor is unable to reasonably control
without the intervention of the police, the unlawful conduct of the individual
guest shall not be attributable to the sponsor, owner, or resident for the
purposes of determining whether the event constitutes a public nuisance under
this section.
(§ 1, Ord. 2889, eff. March 6, 2008, as amended by § 1, Ord. 2940, eff. October
5, 2011)
Sec. 4-12.10 Schedule of civil and/or criminal penalties.
   (a)   Any person who violates any provision of this chapter once within a
one hundred and eighty (180) day period shall be guilty of an infraction. Any
person who violates any provision of this chapter more than once within a one
hundred eighty (180) day period shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. Each day a
violation is committed or permitted to continue shall constitute a separate
offense and shall be punishable as such. Penalties shall not exceed the
following amounts.
      (1)   For the first violation within a one hundred eighty (180) day
period, the minimum mandatory fine shall be two hundred fifty dollars ($250).
      (2)   For any further violations within a one hundred eighty (180) day
period, the minimum mandatory fine shall be no less than two hundred fifty
dollars ($250), no more than one thousand dollars ($1,000), and/or imprisonment
in the County jail for a period not exceeding six (6) months.
   (b)   All infractions can include cost recovery for law enforcement at the
discretion of the court.
   (c)   Persons found to be in violation of OMC 4-12 will be issued an
infraction citation thereby ordered to appear at court on a specified date and
time.
(§1, Ord. 2889, eff. March 6, 2008, as amended by § 1, Ord. 2940, eff. October
5, 2011)
Sec. 4-12.11 Collection of delinquent costs for a City response.
   The amount of any civil penalty imposed by the provisions of this chapter
shall be deemed a debt to the City. An action may be commenced in the name of
the City in any court of competent jurisdiction for the amount of any police
services fee which is not paid within thirty (30) days after being billed to
the person responsible for payment thereof. In any such action, the City shall
be entitled to recover, in addition to the police services fee and any interest
accruing thereon, costs of suit, including the City’s reasonable attorneys’
fees. The City may also assess a lien for said debt against the premises where
the nuisance activity occurred pursuant to the applicable procedures for lien
assessment set forth in the Ontario Municipal Code or other provision of law.
(§ 1, Ord. 2889, eff. March 6, 2008, as amended by § 1, Ord. 2940, eff. October
5, 2011)
CHAPTER 13: OFF-STREET PARKING PROHIBITIONS AND RESTRICTIONS
   
4-13.01   Definitions
   
4-13.02   Parking on Undeveloped or Unpaved Areas of Nonresidential Lots
   
4-13.03   Parking on Undeveloped or Unpaved Areas of Residential Lots
   
4-13.04   Commercial Vehicle Parking Restrictions
   
4-13.05   Right of Entry
   
4-13.06   Violations
Sec. 4-13.01. Definitions.
   For the purpose of this chapter, unless otherwise apparent from the context,
certain words and phrases used herein are defined as follows:
   (a)   "Driveway" shall mean the necessary hard-surfaced area, improved by
means of asphalt, concrete, laid brick or block pavers, or other similar
material providing all-weather access, excluding loose materials, such as
gravel, stone or slag, which is needed for vehicular ingress and egress to a
garage, carport or other off-street parking designed pursuant to City of
Ontario Development Code Division 6.03 (Off-street Parking and Loading).
   (b)   "Landscaped Area" shall mean the unpaved portion of a site containing
planted areas and plant materials, including trees, shrubs, lawns, and ground
covers, together with such decorative elements as walkways, benches, patios,
terraces, water features, and the like, suitable for ornamenting a site or
structure, or use on the site. Landscaping may also include non-plant
decorative material as an intended complementary aspect of a landscape design,
such as:
      (1)   Public art installed pursuant to City of Ontario Development Code
Division 6.07 (Public Art);
      (2)   Decorative fountains, reflecting pools, and ponds;
      (3)   Decorative rock, stone, bark, mulch, and other similar decorative
materials installed for the purpose of reducing the need for the watering of
plant material; and
      (4)   Trellises, porticos, arbors, and other similar garden structures.
   (c)   "Pavement" shall mean an area improved by the laying or covering with
a material, such as asphalt, concrete, laid brick or block pavers, or other
similar material so as to form a substantially flat, hard and level all-weather
surface. The terms "pavement" and "paving" may be used interchangeably.
   (d)   "Owner" shall mean any person in possession of a property, or any
person(s) shown as owner(s) on the last equalized property tax assessment
rolls, or in the case of a vehicle, any person(s) shown as the last registered
owner(s) and/or legal owner(s), in accordance with the records of the
Department of Motor Vehicles of the registering state.
(§ 1, Ord. 3083, eff. December 21, 2017)
Sec. 4-13.02. Parking on Undeveloped or Unpaved Areas of Nonresidential Lots.
   It is unlawful to park or store any vehicle or equipment on any undeveloped
lot, or unpaved area of lot, within any nonresidential zoning district, or any
nonresidential land use district of a specific plan or planned unit
development, or any other property zoned or used for nonresidential purposes.
(§ 1, Ord. 3083, eff. December 21, 2017)
Sec. 4-13.03. Parking on Undeveloped or Unpaved Areas of Residential Lots.
   (a)   It is unlawful for any person to park any vehicle, including but not
limited to automobiles, trucks, motor homes, campers, or store any trailer,
camper shell, boat or other similar equipment upon any lawn or landscaped area,
or other unpaved surface located within any front or street side yard area of a
lot lying within any residential zoning district, or any residential land use
district of a specific plan or planned unit development, or any other property
zoned or used for residential purposes.
   (b)   It is unlawful for any property owner to permit the parking of any
vehicle, including, but not limited to, automobiles, trucks, motor homes, or
campers, or permit the storage of any trailer, camper shell, boat, or other
similar equipment upon any lawn or landscaped area, or other unpaved surface
located within any front or street side yard area of a lot lying within any
residential zoning district, or any residential land use district of a specific
plan or planned unit development, or any other property zoned or used for
residential purposes.
   (c)   It is unlawful for any person to use, or permit the use of, any lawn
or landscaped area, or other unpaved area of a lot for the purpose of vehicular
access to an area used for the parking or storage of any automobile, truck,
motor home, camper, trailer, camper shell, boat, or other similar vehicle or
equipment, when the access falls within any front or street side yard area of a
lot lying within any residential zoning district, or any residential land use
district of a specific plan or planned unit development, or any other property
zoned or used for residential purposes. An exception to this subsection may be
granted by the Planning Director in those cases where the access is so
infrequent as to cause no discernible effect on the landscaping within any
front or street side yard area.
   (d)   This section shall not be so construed as to permit the paving or hard
surfacing of front or street side yard areas without first complying with all
applicable City codes and regulations. All additional paving or hard surfacing
must have Planning Department approval with regard to location and amount of
paved area.
   (e)   This section shall not be so construed as to prohibit the parking of
vehicles on lawns or other unpaved surfaces for the purposes of washing, making
emergency repairs, or on-site construction when the parking does not exceed a
total of 3 hours duration within any consecutive 24-hour period.
(§ 1, Ord. 3083, eff. December 21, 2017)
Sec. 4-13.04. Commercial Vehicle Parking Restrictions.
   (a)   Commercial Vehicle Parking in Residential Zoning Districts. It is
unlawful for the driver, owner, or operator of any commercial vehicle that
exceeds a gross vehicle weight rating (GVWR) of more than 10,000 pounds
(11,500-pound GVWR for pickup trucks), or any motor truck, truck tractor or
trailer, or any other commercial equipment regardless of weight, to park or
cause to be parked, or store or cause to be stored, any such vehicle or
equipment upon any lot located within any residential zoning district, or any
residential land use district of a specific plan or planned unit development,
or any other property zoned or used for residential purposes.
   (b)   Commercial Vehicle Parking Outside of Designated Loading Areas in
Commercial Zoning Districts. It is unlawful for the driver, owner, or operator
of any commercial vehicle to park or cause to be parked, or store or cause to
be stored, upon any publicly or privately owned automobile parking lot located
within any commercial zoning district, or any commercial land use district of a
specific plan or planned unit development, or any other property zoned or used
for commercial purposes, any motor truck having a GVWR of more than 10,000
pounds, truck tractor or trailer of having a GVWR of more than 10,000 pounds,
or any combination thereof, or any motor truck, truck tractor or trailer, or
any combination thereof, of a size larger than 8 feet in height and/or 24 feet
in length, excepting the following:
      (1)   The parking of said vehicles within designated loading spaces and
areas approved by the City, which are screened from public view pursuant to
City of Ontario Development Code Division 6.02 (Walls, Fences, and
Obstructions); and
      (2)   The loading and unloading of goods, or to provide immediate
emergency services or make emergency repairs, or for on-site construction, for
a period not to exceed 3 hours duration within any consecutive 24-hour period.
(§ 1, Ord. 3083, eff. December 21, 2017)
Sec. 4-13.05. Right of Entry.
   A peace officer or code enforcement personnel authorized to enforce parking
laws and regulations shall have the right to enter onto private property to
enforce the provisions of this Chapter and to issue a parking citation in
accordance with CVC Section 40202.
(§ 1, Ord. 3083, eff. December 21, 2017)
Sec. 4-13.06. Violations.
   Any person or entity violating any provision, or failing to comply with any
regulation, of this Chapter, shall be subject to fines and civil penalties set
forth and amended by resolution of the City Council.
(§ 1, Ord. 3083, eff. December 21, 2017)
CHAPTER 14: NEWSRACKS*
* Sections 4-14.01 through 4-14.13, established by Ord. 2558, eff. December 16,
1993, as amended by Ord. 2770, eff. January 22, 2003, repealed and reenacted by
§§ 1 and 2, Ord. 2774, eff. June 5, 2003.
   
4-14.01   Short title
   
4-14.02   Intent and purpose
   
4-14.03   Definitions
   
4-14.04   Prohibited on public streets
   
4-14.05   Dangerous condition or obstruction
   
4-14.06   Permit required
   
4-14.07   Time for issuance of permits
   
4-14.08   Priority for permits
   
4-14.09   Permit renewal
   
4-14.10   Installation and newsrack standards
   
4-14.11   Maintenance standards
   
4-14.12   Hold harmless agreement
   
4-14.13   Insurance required
   
4-14.14   Newsracks in violation of this chapter
   
4-14.15   Summary removal of newsracks
   
4-14.16   Removal of newsracks for public purpose
   
4-14.17   Harmful matter
   
4-14.18   Appeals procedure
   
4-14.19   Business license
   
4-14.20   Violation – Misdemeanor
   
4-14.21   Violation – Penalties
   
4-14.22   Remedies not exclusive
   
4-14.23   Fees
Sec. 4-14.01. Short title.
   This chapter shall be known as "the Ontario newsrack ordinance."
(§ 2, Ord. 2774, eff. June 5, 2003)
Sec. 4-14.02. Intent and purpose.
   The City Council of the City of Ontario hereby finds and declares:
   (a)   The City of Ontario has significant interests in:
      (1)   Promoting vehicular traffic and pedestrian safety and convenience;
      (2)   Preventing damage to public sidewalks, structures, and landscaping;
      (3)   Preventing visual clutter; and
      (4)   Protecting the aesthetic character of an area.
   (b)   The City of Ontario has a substantial interest in promoting the public
health, safety, welfare and convenience of its citizens, businesses and
visitors by ensuring that public streets, sidewalks and rights-of-way in the
City are not unreasonably obstructed by newsracks and that newsracks are
properly maintained.
   (c)   In recent years, the proliferation of newsracks on the streets and
sidewalks of the City, in particular excessive, poorly maintained or abandoned
newsracks, have contributed to the congestion of the City sidewalks, impeded
the flow of pedestrian traffic, interfered with the use of streets, sidewalks
and public rights-of-way, presented hazards to persons and property and
resulted in substantial visual blight.
   (d)   The City of Ontario has a substantial interest in preserving and
protecting the unique visual and aesthetic qualities of the City. To that end,
and consistent with the City's General Plan the City desires to take steps to
reduce the visual blight, pedestrian inconvenience and hazards associated with
an unlimited number and design of newsracks, poorly maintained newsracks and
the unrestricted placement of newsracks on streets, sidewalks and rights-of-way
in the City.
   (e)   After extended inquiry by the City Council and City staff, it has
become clear that the most effective way to reduce the visual clutter and
hazards associated with excessive numbers of newsracks and unregulated design
or appearance of such newsracks is to prohibit the unlimited placement of
private newsracks in the City and instead, institute a program to provide City-
approved fixed pedestal newsrack of a consistent design, placement and color.
   (f)   Thus, the purpose of this chapter is to promote the public health,
safety and welfare and the aesthetic qualities of the City by controlling the
size, shape, construction and appearance of newsracks in the City, as a
reasonable time, manner and place regulation, so as to:
      (1)   Provide for pedestrian and driving safety and convenience;
      (2)    Ensure that there is no unreasonable interference with the flow of
vehicular and pedestrian traffic, including ingress and egress from any City
residence, place of business or public facility, or any legally parked or
stopped vehicles;
      (3)   Ensure compliance with Americans with Disabilities Act and improve
passage for persons with disabilities by reducing impediments to passage caused
by poorly-located newsracks;
      (4)   Provide reasonable access for the safe and efficient use and
maintenance of sidewalks, poles, posts, traffic signs or signals, hydrants,
mailboxes, delivery areas, loading zones, transit shelters, curb and
handicapped ramps and other street furniture;
      (5)   Reduce visual blight and clutter and litter problems associated
with poorly maintained or improperly located or abandoned newsracks;
      (6)   Advance the economic interests of the City merchants and other
information providers, including those involved in the publication and
distribution of newspapers and periodicals through newsracks;
      (7)   Protect the unique architectural, historical and aesthetic
attributes of the City;
      (8)   Reduce exposure of the City to personal injury or property damage
claims and litigation;
      (9)   Provide for public and property safety during emergency conditions;
and
      (10)   Maintain and protect the values of surrounding properties.
   (g)   In adopting this chapter, the City Council is mindful that newsrack
regulations implicate rights protected by the First Amendment of the United
States Constitution and Article I, Section 2 of the California Constitution. To
that end, the City Council hereby adopts these regulations and directs that
their enforcement be conducted in a manner consistent with the constitutional
rights of citizens and regulated parties.
   (h)   Given the limited space available within the City's rights of way, the
City of Ontario has a substantial interest in devising a systematic approach to
newsrack removal and placement in the City to ensure a fair and equitable
distribution of newspapers and periodicals. The City Council declares that this
objective and the other aforementioned objectives are best achieved by adopting
this chapter and creating regulations to allow fixed pedestal newsrack of a
consistent design, placement and color and also by enhancing aesthetic
character of public areas through uniformity in appearance.
   (i)   The City Council further declares that allowing only newsracks of a
consistent design, placement and color in the City directly promotes the City's
interests in promoting public safety, reducing visual blight and clutter,
protecting the unique aesthetic and historical attributes of the City and
advancing the economic interests of the City merchants and other information
providers.
(§ 2, Ord. 2774, eff. June 5, 2003)
Sec. 4-14.03. Definitions.
   For the purpose of this chapter, certain words and phrases are defined in
this section, unless it is apparent from the context that a different meaning
is intended:
   (a)   "Approved newsrack base" means a "pole type pedestal constructed of
metal material with a single flange at the bottom to be bolted into the
sidewalk. One pedestal may support a tray that may include from one (1) to
three (3) newsracks. All pedestals shall be sixteen (16) inches in height.
   (b)   "Block" means one side of a public street between two (2) consecutive
intersecting public streets.
   (c)   "Business day" shall mean Monday through Friday, inclusive, of every
week excepting holidays for which the City of Ontario is closed to official
business.
   (d)   "Director" means the Code Enforcement Director and his or her
representative(s) designated in writing. The director is hereby designated as
the administrative enforcement official for this chapter and may issue an order
to correct, a notice of relocation, or a notice of removal pursuant to this
chapter.
   (e)   "Equivalent" means any newsrack or pedestal that is of the same size,
dimensions and style of the model(s) of newsracks permitted by §
4-14.10(b) or pedestals permitted by §
4-14.03(a), and meeting all other standards required by this chapter.
   (f)   "Harmful matter" has the meaning set forth in Cal. Penal Code § 313,
or in any successor provision.
   (g)   "High density newsrack area" means a block in which it is likely that
there will be more applications for newsracks than there will be permits issued
for newsracks under the standards set forth in this chapter.
   (h)   "Local circulation" means the total circulation of the specific
publication for which a permit is sought in the most recently published,
independently audited circulation report for the city, by zip code or by
community area, whichever reflects more accurately the corporate boundaries of
the city and using a weighted daily average that includes daily, Sunday and
weekend editions.
   (i)   "Newsrack" means any self-service or coin- operated box, container,
storage unit or other dispenser installed, used or maintained for the display
and sale of newspapers or periodicals.
   (j)   “Off-premises advertisement" means any sign or placard advertising a
business located more than twenty (20) feet away from the sign or placard.
   (k)   "Parkway" means that area between the sidewalk and the curb of any
public street, and where there is no sidewalk, that area between the edge of
the public street and the property line adjacent thereto. Parkway shall also
include any area within a public roadway that is not open to vehicular travel.
   (l)   "Permit" means a permit issued pursuant to this chapter allowing the
placement of a newsrack within a specifically designated portion of a public
sidewalk or parkway.
   (m)   "Person" means any individual, firm, company, corporation or other
organization.
   (n)   "Public sidewalk" means any surface dedicated to the use of
pedestrians by license, easement, operation of law or by grant to the city.
   (o)   "Public street" means all of that area dedicated to public use for
public street and sidewalk purposes and includes, but is not limited to,
roadways, parkways, alleys and sidewalks.
   (p)   "Roadway" means that portion of a public street improved, designed or
ordinarily used for vehicular travel.
   (q)   "Shared permit" means a permit issued to a person as a primary
applicant providing for the sharing of one or more newsracks between or among
specified publications as long as all of the standards of this chapter are
otherwise met. The primary applicant shall be considered the permittee for all
purposes under this chapter except as otherwise expressly set forth herein.
(§ 2, Ord. 2774, eff. June 5, 2003)
Sec. 4-14.04. Prohibited on public streets.
   No person shall install, use or maintain any newsrack or other related
structure that projects onto, into or over any part of the roadway of any
public street or that rests, wholly or in part, upon, along or over any portion
of the roadway of any public street.
(§ 2, Ord. 2774, eff. June 5, 2003)
Sec. 4-14.05. Dangerous condition or obstruction.
   No person shall install, use or maintain any newsrack that in whole or in
part rests upon, in or over any public sidewalk or parkway, when such
installation, use or maintenance endangers the safety of persons or property,
or when such site or location is used for public utility purposes, public
transportation purposes or other governmental use, or when such newsrack
unreasonably interferes with or impedes the flow of pedestrian or vehicular
traffic, including any legally parked or stopped vehicle, the ingress into or
egress from any residence or place of business, the use of poles, posts,
traffic signs or signals, hydrants, mailboxes, permitted sidewalk dining,
permitted street furniture or other objects or uses permitted at or near said
location.
(§ 2, Ord. 2774, eff. June 5, 2003)
Sec. 4-14.06. Permit required.
   (a)   No person shall install or maintain any newsrack that in whole or in
part rests upon, in or over any public sidewalk or parkway without first
obtaining a permit from the Business License Department under this chapter.
   (b)   Applications for permits for newsracks shall be made to the Business
License Department and shall contain the following as to each newsrack:
      (1)   The name, address, telephone number (and facsimile or electronic
mail address, if available) of the owner of the newsrack;
      (2)   The name, address, telephone number (and facsimile or electronic
mail address, if available) of the responsible person whom the City may notify
or contact at any time concerning the newsrack;
      (3)   The exact proposed location of the newsrack by block, specific
street address (county assessor's parcel number, if no such address exists),
and a scaled map (with distances shown) that clearly identifies the precise
location of the proposed newsrack, including all improvements, structures and
items that are necessary to determine site distances as set forth in this
chapter;
      (4)   A color photograph and model number of the type of newsrack being
used;
      (5)   The name of the publication to be contained in each newsrack;
      (6)   A hold harmless agreement pursuant to §
4-14.12;
      (7)   A certificate of insurance pursuant to §
4-14.13;
      (8)   Agreement to conform to the requirements of this chapter;
      (9)   Any required fees, as established by ordinance or resolution of the
City Council; and
      (10)   In the case of a shared permit, all of the information set forth
above must be supplied for all publications sharing the newsrack. In addition,
the primary applicant shall assume responsibility and authority for complying
with all of the standards of this chapter for the shared permit, and all
publications sharing the newsrack must assent to the assumption of
responsibility and authority by the primary applicant.
   (c)   Except for permits issued pursuant to the initial implementation plan,
newsrack permit applications shall be filed between October 1 and November 30
for a permit to be issued for the subsequent calendar year and in order to
utilize the priority established pursuant to §
4-14.08(d); provided however, that permits may be applied for throughout the
remainder of the year without obtaining the priority established pursuant to §
4-14.08(d). Each permit shall be valid for a term of no more than one (1) year,
commencing on the earlier of the issuance of the permit, or if application is
made during the month of October or November, on January 1 of the following
year, and terminating automatically on the next occurring December 31.
   (d)   The Engineering Department and the Code Enforcement Department shall
be provided a copy of each completed newsrack application within three (3)
business days following the Business License Department's receipt of such
application. Those Departments shall review all completed applications for
newsrack permits requested under this chapter for consistency with this
chapter. The Engineering Department and Code Enforcement Department shall each
provide their respective comments concerning the application to the Business
License Director within fifteen (15) business days after each Department has
received an application from the Business License Department.
   (e)   Permits will not be granted for geographic locations that are then
unavailable due to construction activity at the requested location.
   (f)   The issuance or granting of a newsrack permit shall not be construed
to be a permit for, or an approval of, any violation of any of the provisions
of this code or of any ordinance of the City. Permits presuming to give
authority to violate or cancel the provisions of this Code or other ordinances
of the City shall not be valid.
   (g)   The issuance of a permit based on plans and other data shall not
prevent the director from thereafter requiring the correction of errors in said
plans or data or from preventing operations being carried on when in violation
of this Code or of any other ordinance of the City.
   (h)   Any newsrack permit issued on the basis of incorrect information or a
fraudulent representation shall be void.
(§ 2, Ord. 2774, eff. June 5, 2003)
Sec. 4-14.07. Time for issuance of permits.
   (a)   A permit shall be granted, denied or granted conditionally by the
Business License Director within twenty (20) business days after a completed
application is filed. The Business License Director shall provide written
notice to the applicant of its decision at the address provided by the
applicant pursuant to §
4-14.06(b)(2), providing the specific cause for the denial. Bases for denial or
conditional granting shall be limited to those set forth in this chapter.
   (b)   An initial implementation program shall take place starting on the
effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter and ending ninety (90)
calendar days thereafter. All applications for newsrack permits received during
the initial implementation program shall be deemed filed as of the last
calendar day of the initial implementation program, so that there will be no
priority given for location based upon the time the application was submitted,
and shall be granted in no later than the time frames set forth in paragraph
(a) of this section.
(§ 2, Ord. 2774, eff. June 5, 2003)
Sec. 4-14.08. Priority for permits.
   (a)   In addition to any other requirements of this chapter, no more than
twelve (12) newsracks may be located on any particular block in accordance with
the standards set forth in §
4-14.10.
   (b)   If a permit application for a specific geographic location is received
and said geographic location complies with the standards set forth in §
4-14.10, and all other requirements of this chapter are met, said application
shall be approved on a first come, first served basis, except that all
applications accepted during the initial implementation program, described in §
4-14.07(a) of this chapter, shall be deemed pending as of the same date and
time. If there is more than one application for a specific geographic location
pending, then the priority for granting the applications shall be as set forth
in paragraph (d) of this section.
   (c)   If permit applications in excess of the number of potential locations
that are then available are pending or if, during the time from October 1 to
November 30, a permit application is made that would, if that permit were
issued, create a number of newsracks in excess of the number of potential
locations that are then available, then the priority for granting applications
shall be as set forth in paragraph (d) of this section. Such priority shall not
be granted with respect to any permit applied for during the remainder of the
calendar year.
   (d)   No applicant may be granted priority for a newsrack location for a
publication at a location for which that specific publication has already been
granted a permit or is part of a shared permit. Priority shall be given as
follows:
      (1)   First, to newsracks used for the sale or distribution of daily
publications, those published and distributed on five or more calendar days in
a calendar week. Among daily publications, priority will be granted according
to highest local circulation.
      (2)    Second, to newsracks used for the sale or distribution of weekly
publications, those published and distributed on at least one but less than
five calendar days in a calendar week.
      (3)   Third, to newsrack used for the sale or distribution of all other
publications not described in divisions (1) or (2) of this subsection. Among
these publications, priority shall next be given based on frequency of
publication, with the higher priority given to publications for which new
editions or issues were published most frequently in the full calendar month
preceding the date of application.
      (4)   Within groups of applicants with the same frequency of publication
and within groups of applicants not entitled to priority, permits shall be
granted to the maximum allowable in a block by the drawing of lots as follows:
the director shall assign the location at random by placing the name of all
applicants for the remaining locations into a container from which the names
shall be drawn, one at a time, by the director, until the remaining number of
locations is filled.
      (5)   The priority for granting a shared permit shall be based upon the
frequency of publication of the primary applicant for the shared permit.
      (6)   Any permit that cannot be granted on the unavailability of a
location as set forth in this chapter shall instead be approved for a location
on that block that complies with the requirements of this chapter that is in
closest proximity to the requested location.
   (e)   It shall be a condition of any permit granted according to a priority
set forth in this section to maintain editions in the newsrack according to the
frequency for which the priority was given.
(§ 2, Ord. 2774, eff. June 5, 2003)
Sec. 4-14.09. Permit renewal.
   If a permittee is in compliance with this chapter, a permit will be
automatically renewed for each successive calendar year by timely payment of
the renewal fee established by ordinance or resolution of City Council, and the
filing of a complete city renewal application at any time from October 1 to
November 30.
(§ 2, Ord. 2774, eff. June 5, 2003)
Sec. 4-14.10. Installation and newsrack standards.
   A permit issued for the installation of any newsrack in or over any public
sidewalk or parkway shall comply with the following installation standards:
   (a)   All newsracks shall comply with the American with Disabilities Act,
and no newsrack shall exceed forty-eight (48) inches in height, including the
base and exclusive of the coin mechanism, thirty (30) inches in width, or two
(2) feet in thickness. The top of the coin mechanism shall not be more than six
(6) inches above the top of the newsrack.
   (b)   Only the following models of newsracks or an equivalent newsrack may
be permitted: K-Jack M 100; K-Jack 100 Flattop; National Newsvend M10; National
Newsvend M280.
   (c)   Newsracks shall have gloss black pedestals, gloss "woodgrain" brown
sides and door and gloss brown coin box. Notwithstanding the foregoing
sentence, newsracks may have up to four side portions of the newsrack that
contains the newspaper or periodical made of plexiglass or other transparent,
non-shattering material; provided however, that all other standards, including,
without limitation, the limit on lettering contained in §
4-14.11(d) shall remain applicable.
   (d)   Newsracks shall only be placed adjacent to a curb or adjacent to the
wall of a building. Newsracks placed adjacent to the curb shall be placed no
fewer than eighteen (18) inches and no more than twenty-four (24) inches from
the back edge of the curb. For purposes of this subdivision, the "back" edge of
curb shall be the point where the top of the curb meets the sidewalk or the
landscaped parkway. Newsracks placed adjacent to the wall of a building shall
be placed parallel to such wall and not more than six (6) inches from the wall.
No newsrack shall be placed or maintained on the sidewalk or parkway opposite a
newsstand or another newsrack.
   (e)   Except as set forth here in, no newsrack shall be chained, bolted or
otherwise attached to any property not owned by the owner of the newsrack, to
any street furniture or to any other permanently fixed object (including,
without limitation, any other newsrack that it is not sharing a pedestal with)
other than the sidewalk. Each newsrack shall be installed on an approved
newsrack base, shall be securely attached to the sidewalk with hardware and in
a fashion approved by the Engineering Director in the exercise of safe
engineering practices.
   (f)   Newsracks shall be placed next to each other in groups of no more than
six (6) newsracks, whether placed on single pedestal or a multiple pedestal
mounts.
   (g)   Without limiting the provisions of §
4-14.05, and except as explicitly indicated herein, no newsrack shall be
placed, installed, used or maintained:
      (1)   Within twenty five (25) feet of any marked crosswalk;
      (2)   Within fifteen (15) feet of the curb return of any unmarked
crosswalk;
      (3)   Within five (5) feet of any fire hydrant, utility pole, traffic
signal controller, traffic signals, or other emergency facility;
      (4)   Within three (3) feet of any utility meter, traffic control sign
post, manhole, service box, parking meter, street light pole or other utility;
      (5)   Within ten (10) feet of any driveway or alley approach;
      (6)   Within five (5) feet ahead of, and twenty-five (25) feet to the
rear of any sign marking a designated bus stop;
      (7)   Within six (6) feet of any bus bench or bus shelter;
      (8)   At any location where the clear space for the passageway of
pedestrians, other than between groups of newsracks, is reduced to fewer than
five (5) feet;
      (9)   Within three (3) feet of any permitted sidewalk dining area or area
improved with lawn, flowers, shrubs or trees or within three (3) feet of any
display window of any building abutting the sidewalk or parkway or in such
manner as to impede or interfere with the reasonable use of such window for
display purposes unless an engineering study in a high density newsrack area
concludes that a minor variance is consistent with the purposes of this
chapter;
      (10)   Within the boundary of a valet parking zone or any loading/
unloading zone;
      (11)   At any location where street furniture may not generally be
installed because of potential harm to subterranean structures;
      (12)   Within any zone designated as residential within the City;
      (13)   More than ten (10) inches from another newsrack occupying the same
pedestal; or
      (14)   Adjacent to any area where the City Traffic Engineer has
previously determined that the parking or stopping of a vehicle would
constitute a traffic hazard or would endanger life or property when such area
is indicated by appropriate signs or by red paint upon the curb surface.
   (h)   No more than six (6) newsracks may be located on any public street
within a space of two hundred (200) feet in any direction of the same public
street and no more than twelve (12) newsracks shall be allowed on any one
block.
   (i)   No group of newsracks shall extend more than sixteen (16) feet along
any curb, wall or public street.
   (j)   Newspapers or publications may only be attached or placed for display
on one side of any newsrack, including, without limitation, any newsrack
permitted to have more than one side containing plexiglass or other non-
shattering transparent material.
(§ 2, Ord. 2774, eff. June 5, 2003)
Sec. 4-14.11. Maintenance standards.
   Every person issued a permit for a newsrack under this chapter shall observe
and comply with the following standards, and any person failing to observe
these standards shall be liable for civil, criminal and administrative
remedies, and administrative penalty citations as set forth in this code for
each calendar day or portion thereof that such newsrack remains in violation:
   (a)   Each newsrack shall be maintained and serviced so that it is free of:
      (1)   General dirt and grease;
      (2)   Chipped, faded, peeling, and cracked paint, or on all visible
painted areas;
      (3)   Rust and corrosion on all visible unpainted metal areas;
      (4)   Cracks, dents, blemishes, and discoloration in the clear plastic
parts, if any, through which publications are viewed;
      (5)   Tears, peeling, or fading in the paper or cardboard parts and
inserts;
      (6)   Broken and misshapen structural parts; and
      (7)   Graffiti.
   (b)   Each newsrack, including any coin-return mechanism, shall be
mechanically operable.
   (c)   Newsracks shall contain current editions of the publication for which
the permit was issued and new editions placed in the newsrack at no less than
the frequency for which any priority was given for a permit in that location.
   (d)   No newsrack shall be used for advertising signs or publicity purposes
whatsoever other than the following:
      (1)   A single, one line, identification of the name of the newspaper or
periodical located within the newsrack shall be permitted for each newsrack.
Such identification shall be limited to any one side of the newsrack.
Identification lettering shall not exceed two (2) inches in height, shall be
printed in white color and shall be centered at four (4) inches from the top of
the newsrack.
      (2)   A single, removable promotional placard shall be permitted for each
newsrack so long as the placard does not contain an off-premises advertisement
and is not facing the roadway. Permitted placards must be changed no less often
than once every fourteen (14) calendar days. The same placard may not be used
more than once in any consecutive three (3) month period.
   (e)   No newsrack shall remain empty for a period of fifteen (15)
consecutive calendar days or longer.
   (f)   No newsrack may contain a publication other than the one for which the
permit was issued. The primary applicant for a shared permit may add or remove
publications from a shared permit or permit renewal by making application to
the Business License Department and providing the information set forth in §
4-14.06(b).
   (g)   Each newsrack will have and maintain on it the name, address,
telephone number (and facsimile or electronic mail address, if available) of
the person identified in §
4-14.06(b)(2), as well as the permit number affixed to the newsrack in a place
and in a manner required by the director. It shall be unlawful for any person,
other than a public officer engaged in official business, to remove or deface
any such identifying information. Upon the removal of any newsrack or newsrack
base for which a permittee has been issued a permit, that permittee shall
notify the director of such removal, in writing, within fifteen (15) days of
such removal.
   (h)   When use of a newsrack is permanently discontinued, the newsrack shall
be removed and the location restored to its previous condition, including, but
not limited to, repair of any portion of the sidewalk or parkway damaged by the
newsrack or its removal and removal of any protruding bolts or other fasteners,
according to specifications provided by the Engineering Director, in the
exercise of safe engineering practices.
   (i)   Except as set forth herein, permits shall not be sold or transferred
other than as a part of the sale of all of the assets of the permittee. Any
other attempted sale or transfer shall be unlawful and shall void the permit.
(§ 2, Ord. 2774, eff. June 5, 2003)
Sec. 4-14.12. Hold harmless agreement.
   A condition for issuance of a permit pursuant to this chapter is that every
permittee, and person on a shared permit, agrees to defend, indemnify and hold
harmless the city, its officials, officers, agents and employees, from any loss
or liability or damage, including expenses and costs, for bodily or personal
injury, and for property damage sustained by any person as a result of the
installation, use or maintenance of the applicant's newsrack within the city,
and the permit application shall include an indemnification provision
consistent with this section and approved by the city attorney.
(§ 2, Ord. 2774, eff. June 5, 2003)
Sec. 4-14.13. Insurance required.
   A condition for issuance of a permit pursuant to this chapter is that every
permittee, and person on a shared permit, agrees to maintain a policy of public
liability insurance, naming the city, its officials, officers, agents and
employees as an additional insured, in an amount not less than Fifty Thousand
Dollars ($50,000.00) combined single limit for any injury to persons and/or
damage to property by reason of installation, use and maintenance of such
newsrack on public property. The policy shall provide that the insurance
coverage shall not be cancelled or reduced by the insurance carrier without the
city having been given thirty (30) business days prior written notice thereof
by such carrier. The permittee shall provide and keep in force that policy of
public liability insurance during such time as it continues to operate any
newsrack under the terms of the ordinance codified in this chapter. If the
insurance is canceled at any time during the term of the permit, it shall be
grounds for revocation of the permit. The application for a permit and all
renewal applications shall require an endorsement signed by an authorized
officer of such insurer as applicant's proof of such a policy of public
liability insurance.
(§ 2, Ord. 2774, eff. June 5, 2003)
Sec. 4-14.14. Newsracks in violation of this chapter.
   Upon determination by the director that a newsrack for which a person has
been issued a permit has been installed, used or maintained in violation of the
provisions of this chapter, including, without limitation, failure to observe
any term or condition of the permit or not meeting any condition related to
priority for the location of any permit, the director may issue an order to
correct, identifying the violation(s) and directing their correction or the
removal of the offending newsrack. If, within ten (10) business days following
the service of the order to correct, all of the violations listed in the order
to correct are not corrected or the newsrack is not removed in accordance with
this chapter, the City may cause the correction or removal of the violating
newsrack. The City shall not enforce a order to correct while any
administrative appeal of that order to correct or a judicial action challenging
the order to correct is pending.
(§ 2, Ord. 2774, eff. June 5, 2003)
Sec. 4-14.15. Summary removal of newsracks.
   (a)   In the event the director determines that the condition or placement
of a newsrack constitutes a dangerous condition or obstruction, as defined in §
4-14.05, and immediate removal is mandated by public need in that it poses a
danger to pedestrians or if the director determines that a newsrack has been
placed on a public sidewalk or parkway without permit or has been placed in any
part of the roadway or has been placed in violation of §
4-14.10 of this chapter, the director may cause the newsrack to be removed and
stored summarily and without a pre- removal heating provided the following
procedures are followed. The director shall provide the person identified in §
4-14.06(b)(2), or if there is no such person identifiable then to such person
as may reasonably be identified as the newsrack owner, or the publisher of the
newspaper or publisher if any such newspaper or publication is located within
the newsrack, with the opportunity for a poststorage hearing to determine the
validity of the storage.
   (b)   A notice of the storage shall be mailed or personally delivered to the
person identified in division (a) of this section within forty-eight (48)
hours, excluding weekends and holidays, and shall include all of the following
information:
      (1)   The name, address, and telephone number of the City;
      (2)   The location of the place of storage and description of the
newsrack and publication, if any, which shall include, if known to the
director, the color, manufacturer, or model number of the newsrack;
      (3)   The authority and purpose for the removal of the newsrack; and
      (4)   A statement that, in order to receive their poststorage hearing,
the person identified in subdivision (a) of this section must request the
hearing in person, writing, or by telephone within ten (10) days of the date
appearing on the notice.
   (c)   The poststorage hearing shall be conducted within forty-eight (48)
hours of the City's receipt of the appellant's request, excluding weekends and
holidays. The City may authorize its own officer or employee or other heating
body to conduct the heating if the heating officer is not the same person who
directed the storage of the newsrack. Within forty- eight (48) hours of the
hearing, the heating entity shall provide a written notice to the appellant
providing the specific cause for the decision. Bases for denial shall be
limited to those set forth in this chapter.
   (d)   Failure of either the person identified in division (a) of this
section to request or to attend a scheduled heating shall satisfy the
poststorage heating requirement.
   (e)   The City shall be responsible for the costs incurred for removal and
storage if it is determined in the poststorage heating that reasonable grounds
for the removal or storage, as applicable, are not established.
   (f)   The person identified in division (a) of this section shall be
responsible for the costs incurred for removal and storage if it is determined
in the poststorage hearing that reasonable ground for the removal or storage,
as applicable, are not established or if that person fails to request a hearing
in accordance with this section.
   (g)   Upon the expiration of the time period for a person to appeal pursuant
to division (c) of this section, and if a hearing is conducted, upon the
expiration of the time period for a person to appeal the hearing entity's
determination pursuant to §
4-14.18(b), the City may dispose of such newsrack and, as applicable, newspaper
(s) or publication(s) as unclaimed property.
(§ 2, Ord. 2774, eff. June 5, 2003)
Sec. 4-14.16. Removal of newsracks for public purpose.
   When the director determines that it is necessary to remove a newsrack for
the construction or installation of public improvements, a notice to relocate
may be issued for the purpose of suspending or terminating the newsrack permit.
The person who holds the permit for the newsrack shall be entitled, on
permittee's election, to either a pro-rata refund of fees paid during the
previous calendar year or to a new permit, without any additional application
fee, in the original location or as close to the original location as the
standards set forth in this chapter allow.
(§ 2, Ord. 2774, eff. June 5, 2003)
Sec. 4-14.17. Harmful matter.
   Harmful matter shall not be exhibited, displayed, sold or offered for sale
in any newsrack located in a public place without adult supervision, other than
a public place from which minors are excluded. A newsrack shall be considered
to be "supervised by an adult" when either of the following measures are taken
to restrict access to harmful matter by persons under eighteen (18) years of
age: (1) the person receiving the harmful matter is required to use an
authorized access or identification card to the newsrack and the owner of the
newsrack has taken reasonable measures to assure that the card is issued only
to persons eighteen (18) years old or older and has established a procedure to
immediately cancel the card of any person after receiving notice that the card
has been lost, stolen or used by persons under eighteen (18) years of age, or
that the card is no longer desired; or (2) the owner of the newsrack requires
the person using the newsrack to retrieve the harmful matter to use a token and
takes reasonable measures to ascertain that only those people who are eighteen
(18) years of age or older obtain tokens for the newsrack. Persons wishing to
use newsracks for the display of harmful matter shall be responsible for paying
all administrative and other costs for retrofitting the newsrack and other
associated hardware to comply with this section.
(§ 2, Ord. 2774, eff. June 5, 2003)
Sec. 4-14.18. Appeals procedure.
   (a)   Any person or entity aggrieved by a finding, determination, notice,
action or failure to act taken under the provisions of this chapter may appeal
such finding, determination, notice, action or failure. An appeal must be
perfected within three (3) business days after receipt of notice of any
protested finding, determination, notice, action or failure to act by filing
with the director a letter of appeal briefly stating therein the basis for such
appeal.
   (b)   A hearing before the Planning Commission shall be held on a date no
more than fifteen (15) business days after receipt of the letter of appeal, or
at the next regular meeting of the Planning Commission, whichever occurs first,
unless appellant requests a longer time period. Appellant shall be given at
least five (5) business days notice of the time and place of the heating. The
Planning Commission shall give the appellant, and any other interested party, a
reasonable opportunity to be heard, in order to show cause why the finding,
determination, notice, action or failure to act should not be upheld. In all
such cases, the burden of proof shall be upon the appellant to show that there
was no substantial evidence to support the matter appealed. At the conclusion
of the hearing, the Planning Commission shall make a final and conclusive
determination, setting forth, in detail, the Planning Commission's findings and
conclusions.
   (c)   Notwithstanding any provision in this Code to the contrary, the
Planning Commission's decision shall not be appealable and the decision of the
Planning Commission shall be final for purposes of Cal. Code of Civil Procedure
§ 1094.6 upon the date the decision is mailed by first-class mail, postage
prepaid, including a copy of the affidavit or certificate of mailing, to the
appellant.
   (d)   Pursuant to Cal. Code of Civil Procedure § 1094.8, subdivision (c),
the City hereby designates actions relating to newsrack permits provided for in
this chapter as eligible for expedited judicial review pursuant to Code of
Civil Procedure § 1094.8.
   (e)   All notices required by this chapter to be given by the City to
persons with an interest in any newsrack or publication located therein shall
be given by first class mail, return receipt requested to the person and at the
address provided in §
4-14.06(b)(2). Service of notices pursuant to this chapter shall be deemed
effective upon the earlier of the following: (1) deposit of written notice,
properly stamped and addressed into the custody of the United States postal
service; or (2) actual receipt by the recipient.
(§ 2, Ord. 2774, eff. June 5, 2003)
Sec. 4-14.19. Business license.
   A permit issued under this chapter shall not substitute for any business
license otherwise required under this code.
(§ 2, Ord. 2774, eff. June 5, 2003)
Sec. 4-14.20. Violation – Misdemeanor.
   It is unlawful for any person to violate any provision or to fail to comply
with any of the requirements of this chapter. Any person violating any of the
provisions or failing to comply with any of the mandatory requirements of this
chapter is guilty of a misdemeanor.
(§ 2, Ord. 2774, eff. June 5, 2003)
Sec. 4-14.21. Violation – Penalties.
   (a)   Any person convicted of a misdemeanor under the provisions of this
chapter, unless provision is otherwise herein made, shall be punishable by a
fine of not more than One Thousand Dollars ($1,000.00) or by imprisonment for a
period of not more than six (6) months or by both such fine and imprisonment.
   (b)   Any person found liable for a civil penalty for any violation of this
chapter shall be required to pay a civil penalty provided on the schedule of
penalties, late payment penalties, administrative fees and other related fees,
costs and charges as shall be established by ordinance or resolution of the
City Council.
(§ 2, Ord. 2774, eff. June 5, 2003)
Sec. 4-14.22. Remedies not exclusive.
   Remedies under this chapter are in addition to and do not supersede or limit
any and all other remedies, civil or criminal. The remedies provided for herein
shall be cumulative and not exclusive.
(§ 2, Ord. 2774, eff. June 5, 2003)
Sec. 4-14.23. Fees.
   Based on the study prepared by City staff and reviewed and considered by the
City Council concurrently with the adoption of this chapter, the City Council
hereby finds and determines that the following fees do not exceed the
reasonable cost of providing the following applicable services for which the
fees shall hereafter be charged:
 
Application processing and inspection fee $65.00
Renewal application fee:                  $28.00
Removal fee                               $30.00
 
Such fees, as well as any others deemed necessary by the City Council, may be
adopted, amended or revised by ordinance or resolution of the City Council.
(§ 2, Ord. 2774, eff. June 5, 2003)
CHAPTER 15: REGULATIONS RELATING TO SOLICITATION OF EMPLOYMENT ON PUBLIC
STREETS AND CERTAIN PARKING AREAS
   
4-15.01   Intent and purpose
   
4-15.02   Definitions
   
4-15.03   Reserved
   
4-15.04   Prohibition of solicitation in unauthorized locations within
commercial and industrial parking areas
   
4-15.05   Penalties.
Sec. 4-15.01. Intent and purpose.
   The purpose of this chapter is to regulate the conduct of persons engaging
in the solicitation of employment and/or business from pedestrians and
occupants of vehicles in public rights-of-way and private parking areas. These
regulations are not intended to restrict the right of free speech or restrict
alternative channels of communications, but rather are intended to ensure
vehicle and pedestrian safety and promote the free flow of traffic along City
streets.
(§ 1, Ord. 2723, eff. October 5, 2000)
Sec. 4-15.02. Definitions.
   For the purposes of this chapter, the following meanings shall apply:
   (a)   “Business” shall mean and include any type of product, good, service,
performance or activity which is provided or performed, or offered to be
provided or performed, in exchange for money, labor, goods or any other form of
consideration.
   (b)   “Employment” shall mean and include services, industry or labor
performed by a person for wages or other compensation or under any contract for
hire, written, oral, express or implied.
   (c)   “Occupant” shall mean a person who occupies a vehicle.
   (d)   “Solicit” shall mean and include any request, offer, enticement or
action which announces the availability for or of employment, the sale of
goods, or a request for money or other property; or any request, offer,
enticement or action which seeks to purchase or secure goods or employment, or
to make a contribution of money or other property. As defined herein
solicitation shall be deemed complete when made, whether or not an actual
employment relationship is created, a transaction is completed, or an exchange
of money takes place.
   (e)   “Vehicle” shall mean a vehicle as defined in Cal. Veh. Code § 670, as
that section may be amended from time to time.
(§ 1, Ord. 2587, eff. March 9, 1995, as amended by § 1, Ord. 2723, eff. October
5, 2000)
Sec. 4-15.03. Reserved.
Sec. 4-15.04. Prohibition of solicitation in unauthorized locations within
commercial and industrial parking areas.
   (a)   No person shall solicit employment, business or contributions of money
or other property from a location within a commercial or industrial parking
area other than an area within or served by such parking area which is
authorized by the property owner or the property owner's authorized
representative for such solicitations. This section shall not apply to
solicitations to perform employment or business for the owner or lawful tenants
of the subject premises.
   (b)   For purposes of this section, “commercial or industrial parking area”
shall mean privately owned property which is designed or used, in whole or in
part, for the parking of vehicles and which adjoins one (1) or more commercial
or industrial establishments. The term “industrial parking area” includes, but
is not limited to, parking areas within property zoned for industrial purposes.
   (c)   This section shall only apply to commercial and industrial parking
areas where the following occurs:
      (1)   The owner or person in lawful possession of the commercial or
industrial parking area has established a written policy which provides area(s)
for the lawful solicitation of employment, business or contributions of money
or other property, in locations which are accessible to the public and do not
interfere with normal business operations of the commercial and/or industrial
premises;
      (2)   A copy of the policy is submitted to the Chief of Police to be
maintained in the City Police Department files; and
      (3)   The owner or person in lawful possession of the commercial or
industrial parking area has caused such notice to be posted in a conspicuous
place at each entrance to such commercial or industrial parking area not less
than eighteen by twenty-four (18 x 24) inches in size with lettering not less
than one (1) inch in height and not to exceed, in total area, six (6) square
feet. The notice shall be in substantially the following form: “It is a
misdemeanor to engage in the solicitation of employment, business or
contributions of money or other property in areas of this parking lot which are
not approved for such activity by the property owner.”
(§ 1, Ord. 2587, eff. March 9, 1995, as amended by § 1, Ord. 2723, eff. October
5, 2000)
Sec. 4-15.05. Penalties.
   Violation of §
4-15.04 of this chapter is hereby deemed to be a misdemeanor and punishable
according to the provisions of
Chapter 2 of Title 1 of this Municipal Code.
(§ 1, Ord. 2723, eff. October 5, 2000, as amended by § 4, Ord. 2954, eff. July
19, 2012)
CHAPTER 16: PAY TELEPHONES ON PRIVATE PROPERTY
   
4-16.01   Pay telephones: Prohibited locations
   
4-16.02   Pay telephones: Location requirements
   
4-16.03   Pay telephones: Public nuisance
   
4-16.04   Abatement generally
   
4-16.05   Replacement prohibited
   
4-16.06   Notice of pay telephone vendor
   
4-16.07   List of abated locations
Sec. 4-16.01. Pay telephones: Prohibited locations.
   (a)   No pay telephone shall be installed, located, or maintained on
unimproved private property. Any existing pay telephone which is located or
maintained on unimproved private property shall be removed within ninety (90)
days after the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter.
Notwithstanding the foregoing, any existing pay telephone which is the subject
of a written contract authorizing its installation which was entered into prior
to the enactment of the ordinance codified in this chapter and which contains
provisions for termination shall be removed by the first date after enactment
of the ordinance codified in this chapter on which permissive termination of
the written contract by either party could take effect, if either party elected
to terminate, or within ninety (90) days after the effective date of the
ordinance codified in this chapter, whichever occurs later.
   (b)   Any telephone installed on improved private property the use or
improvements of which are subsequently discontinued or abandoned for a period
of ninety (90) days or more shall be removed or rendered inoperative at the end
of said ninety (90) days.
   (c)   Any pay telephone which is installed, located, maintained, or operated
in violation of this section is hereby declared to be a public nuisance.
(§ 1, Ord. 2615, eff. June 20, 1996)
Sec. 4-16.02. Pay telephones: Location requirements.
   New pay telephones on private property shall be located either within a
building or where they may be seen from within a building or near well lit
walkways and/or driveways. Outdoor pay telephones shall be located as close as
possible to the building entrance. Outdoor pay telephones shall be lit to the
satisfaction of the Police Department. No obstacles such as utility poles,
trees or landscaping should obstruct a clear view of an outdoor pay telephone
from the public street. Notwithstanding the foregoing, in no event shall an
outdoor pay telephone be located closer than five (5) feet from any public
right-of-way.
(§ 1, Ord. 2615, eff. June 20, 1996)
Sec. 4-16.03. Pay telephones: Public nuisance.
   Any pay telephone which is used as an instrumentality for or contributes
substantially by its presence to any of the following conditions is hereby
declared to be a public nuisance:
   (a)   Selling or giving away any controlled substances (as defined in
Division 10 of the California Health and Safety Code, commencing with Cal.
Health & Safety Code § 11000); soliciting, agreeing to engage in any act of
prostitution, or other criminal activity;
   (b)   Consumption of alcoholic beverages on nearby outdoor public or private
property except where outdoor consumption of alcoholic beverages is
specifically authorized pursuant to a license issued by the Department of
Alcoholic Beverage Control;
   (c)   Loitering on nearby public or private property. As used in this
section, “loitering” shall mean standing, sitting, lying or remaining on any
property under such circumstances that a reasonable person would conclude that
the person who remains on the property does not have a purpose connected with
the usual and ordinary use to which such property is put, does not have bona
fide intent to exercise a constitutional right, and is causing public
inconvenience or annoyance;
   (d)   Excessive noise.
(§ 1, Ord. 2615, eff. June 20, 1996)
Sec. 4-16.04. Abatement generally.
   (a)   Whenever the Chief of Police, or his designate, determines that any
pay telephone on private property constitutes a public nuisance, the Chief of
Police, or his designate, may commence proceedings to abate the nuisance.
Except as otherwise provided in this chapter, abatement proceedings shall be
conducted in the manner prescribed by §§
5-22.04 through
5-22.08 of this Code.
   (b)   No proceeding to abate a public nuisance as defined in §
4-16.03 shall be commenced unless the Chief of Police, or his designate, first
has made a reasonable effort to work with the property owner where the pay
telephone is located or the pay telephone vendor to eliminate the conditions
described in §§
4-16.01 and
4-16.03 by voluntary measures such as:
      (1)   Blocking incoming calls;
      (2)   Adding lighting;
      (3)   Changing the telephone's location on the parcel;
      (4)   Making the telephone inoperative;
      (5)   Temporarily removing the telephone;
      (6)   Changing the type of enclosure of the telephone; or
      (7)   Removing all or one of the telephones.
(§ 1, Ord. 2615, eff. June 20, 1996)
Sec. 4-16.05. Replacement prohibited.
   If the public nuisance to be abated is one defined in §
4-16.03, abatement shall consist of removal of the pay telephone, and no pay
telephone shall be installed on the same parcel, or on any contiguous parcel
owned by the same property owner, for a period of one (1) year from the date of
removal.
(§ 1, Ord. 2615, eff. June 20, 1996)
Sec. 4-16.06. Notice of pay telephone vendor.
   Any notice of violation shall also be sent to any vendor of the pay
telephone, if known.
(§ 1, Ord. 2615, eff. June 20, 1996)
Sec. 4-16.07. List of abated locations.
   The Chief of Police, or his designate, shall maintain and make available
upon request a list of locations where installation of pay telephones is
prohibited pursuant to §
4-16.05.
(§ 1, Ord. 2615, eff. June 20, 1996)
CHAPTER 17: PAY TELEPHONES ON PUBLIC RIGHT-OF-WAY
   
4-17.01   Permit: Issuance authority
   
4-17.02   Permit location determination standards
   
4-17.03   Fees
   
4-17.04   Indemnification
   
4-17.05   Maintenance
   
4-17.06   Revocation of permit: Removal of telephone
   
4-17.07   Denial of application: Appeal
   
4-17.08   Appeal: Public hearing
Sec. 4-17.01. Permit: Issuance authority.
   The City Manager, or his authorized representative, is authorized to issue
permits from time to time to the serving telephone company for the installation
and maintenance of pay telephones on the public sidewalks and public rights-of-
way of the City. The number and location of such pay telephones and the design
of the telephone booths shall be subject to the approval of the City Manager so
as to best serve the public interest.
(§ 1, Ord. 2615, eff. June 20, 1996)
Sec. 4-17.02. Permit location determination standards.
   The City Manager, in determining the location of the pay telephones to be
installed on public sidewalks or public rights-of-way, shall consider, among
other things, the need of the public for the telephones in the location sought,
the obstruction of pedestrian or other traffic in the area, and the effect upon
the public health or safety for the installation of the telephone at said
location.
(§ 1, Ord. 2615, eff. June 20, 1996)
Sec. 4-17.03. Fees.
   The permit shall require that the City receive an amount equal to fifteen
percent (15%) of the gross receipts in lawful currency of the United States
(exclusive of Federal Communications Excise Taxes and any mutilated coins) from
the coin receptacles of the pay telephones installed under authority of this
chapter, which amount shall be payable to the City semiannually, on the first
day of March and the first day of October of each year and every year.
(§ 1, Ord. 2615, eff. June 20, 1996)
Sec. 4-17.04. Indemnification.
   The permittee shall defend, indemnify and save the City harmless from any
and all losses, claims or judgements for damages or injury to any person or
property arising from the installation, maintenance or use of the pay
telephones.
(§ 1, Ord. 2615, eff. June 20, 1996)
Sec. 4-17.05. Maintenance.
   The permittee shall maintain the pay telephones and any associated booths in
good repair and safe and sightly condition at the permittee's expense and to
the satisfaction of the City Manager. All necessary electrical and telephone
connections, cables, wires and associated appurtenances shall be installed
underground in appropriate conduits and in accordance with applicable codes;
provided, however, that upon application by the serving telephone company, the
City Manager may authorize aboveground facilities to serve the pay telephones
and any associated booths.
(§ 1, Ord. 2615, eff. June 20, 1996)
Sec. 4-17.06. Revocation of permit: Removal of telephone.
   The permit shall be revocable on thirty (30) days' prior written notice to
the permittee from the City Manager, in which event the permittee shall, at its
own expense, remove the pay telephone or telephones installed pursuant to the
permit, and shall restore the sidewalk or public right-of-way as nearly as
practicable to its condition prior to such installation. Reasons for revocation
may include, among others, a finding that the telephone or telephones
constitute a public nuisance as defined in §
4-16.03 of this title.
(§ 1, Ord. 2615, eff. June 20, 1996)
Sec. 4-17.07. Denial of application: Appeal.
   In the event the permittee's application, or any portion thereof, is denied,
the permittee, within thirty (30) days after written notice from the City
Manager of the denial, shall have the right to appeal to the City Council. The
permittee shall file written objections to the decision of the City Manager
with the City Clerk, specifying the grounds for the appeal specifying the
reasons why said application or any part thereof should be granted.
(§ 1, Ord. 2615, eff. June 20, 1996)
Sec. 4-17.08. Appeal: Public hearing.
   The City Council shall set the matter for public hearing within forty five
(45) days of the date that the appeal is received by the City Clerk. The
decision of the City Council on said appeal shall be final.
(§ 1, Ord. 2615, eff. June 20, 1996)
CHAPTER 18: ICE CREAM TRUCK OPERATING REGULATIONS
   
4-18.01   Conditions of permit
   
4-18.02   Place of operation
   
4-18.03   Hours of operation
   
4-18.04   Noise restrictions
   
4-18.05   Congestion restrictions
   
4-18.06   Food restrictions
   
4-18.07   Restrictions on riders
   
4-18.08   Vehicle inspection; certification
   
4-18.09   Identification
Sec. 4-18.01. Conditions of permit.
   (a)   Each health permit issued by the County Health Department, as required
by
Chapter 5 of Title 6 of this Code, to an ice cream truck business shall be
subject to the terms and conditions set out in this chapter, as well as any
other conditions specifically set forth in the permit.
   (b)   The provisions of this chapter shall constitute operating regulations.
It shall be unlawful for any person to violate these provisions.
(§ 1, Ord. 2711, eff. May 18, 2000)
Sec. 4-18.02. Place of operation.
   (a)   Sales from ice cream trucks shall be limited to streets that have
thirty-five (35) miles per hour speed limit or less.
   (b)   The restrictions set forth in
Chapter 6 of this Title, and
Chapter 5 of Title 6 of this Code, that apply to persons who vend and/or peddle
from vehicles, shall apply to ice cream truck business operators and employees
under this chapter.
   (c)   No sale shall be made while an ice cream truck is parked within
seventy-five (75) feet of any intersection with any public street or streets as
measured along the traveled way.
   (d)   The standard warning flashers shall be in operation immediately upon
the truck stopping to vend and shall cease operating as the truck begins to
move after vending.
   (e)   Pursuant to Cal. Veh. Code § 22455(b) and §
4-6.1012 of this Code, no sale shall be made while an ice cream truck is parked
less than seven hundred (700) feet from the closest boundary of a public
school.
(§ 1, Ord. 2711, eff. May 18, 2000)
Sec. 4-18.03. Hours of operation.
   Sales from ice cream trucks shall be limited to the hours of 10:00 a.m. to
one-half hour after sunset.
(§ 1, Ord. 2711, eff. May 18, 2000)
Sec. 4-18.04. Noise restrictions.
   (a)   No person shall use, play, or employ any sound, outcry, amplifier,
loudspeaker, or any other instrument or device for the production of sound from
an ice cream truck when the ice cream truck is stationary.
   (b)   No person shall use, play or employ any sound, outcry, amplifier,
loudspeaker, or any other instrument or device for the production of sound from
an ice cream truck after 7:00 p.m. or one-half hour after sunset, whichever
occurs first.
   (c)   No person shall use, play, or employ any sound, outcry, amplifier,
loudspeaker, or any other instrument or device for the production of sound
employed on an ice cream truck in such a manner as to create a disturbance of
the peace.
(§ 1, Ord. 2711, eff. May 18, 2000)
Sec. 4-18.05. Congestion restrictions.
   No person shall stop to vend from an ice cream truck within two hundred feet
of another ice cream truck that has already stopped to vend.
(§ 1, Ord. 2711, eff. May 18, 2000)
Sec. 4-18.06. Food restrictions.
   A person may sell or offer for sale only prepackaged food items from an ice
cream truck and may not offer for sale any other items.
(§ 1, Ord. 2711, eff. May 18, 2000)
Sec. 4-18.07. Restrictions on riders.
   (a)   No one other than one driver and one additional person shall be
allowed to ride on an ice cream truck that is in operation.
   (b)   The driver and the additional person may be:
      (1)   Employees of the business operator; or
      (2)   The business operator; or
      (3)   A trainee.
   (c)   In no event shall more than two persons ride on the truck at any time
while the truck is in operation.
(§ 1, Ord. 2711, eff. May 18, 2000)
Sec. 4-18.08. Vehicle inspection; certification.
   (a)   All ice cream trucks operated by the business operator shall comply
with the permitting requirements set forth in
Chapter 5 of Title 6 of this Code.
   (b)   Additionally, all ice cream trucks operated shall be inspected and
certified by a certified Automotive Service Excellence (ASE) mechanic. The ASE
mechanic shall issue a certificate only after a determination that the
requirements of subdivision (e) of this section have been complied with.
   (c)   The business operator shall maintain each ice cream truck in such
condition that:
      (1)   All doors, windows, hood and trunk shall open and close securely;
      (2)   The inside of the ice cream truck shall be clean and free of litter
and trash;
      (3)   There is a trash receptacle that shall be made accessible to the
public when sales occur in which patrons can place package wrappers and trash;
      (4)   The exterior of the ice cream truck shall be clean and in good
repair, and shall not have any peelings, dents, rust, scratches or missing
components which are discernable at a distance of five (5) feet or more from
the truck; and
      (5)   Advertising decals and price lists shall be placed only on the
vending side of the ice cream truck and shall use a maximum area of twenty-four
(24) square feet.
   (d)   The business operator shall have and maintain in clean operating
condition on each ice cream truck the following safety equipment:
      (1)   Signs painted or mounted on the front and back of each truck using
black four-inch (4”) tall letters on a yellow background with a black one- inch
(1”) border around each sign. The sign on the front and back of each vehicle
shall read “CHILDREN CROSSING” and be eight-inches high by forty-eight inches
(8” x 48”) wide. An additional sign or signs shall be painted or mounted on the
rear of each truck above the first sign and shall read “WARNING” in English and
Spanish using the same size letter and paint requirements.
      (2)   Standard warning flashers.
      (3)   Any other safety equipment required by the California Vehicle Code.
   (e)   All ice cream trucks must be in proper working condition. All brakes,
lights and flashers must meet minimum safety requirements as determined by the
certified Automotive Service Excellence (ASE) mechanic.
   (f)   The Police Department's Traffic Division shall determine whether the
business operator has complied with the requirements of subdivisions (a), (b),
(c), (d), (e), (f), and (g) of this section, and shall affix an inspection
sticker on each certified truck, identifying the truck as having successfully
passed vehicle inspection.
   (g)   It shall be unlawful for a business operator to operate an ice cream
truck that does not have a current, valid inspection sticker issued by the
Police Department's Traffic Division.
(§ 1, Ord. 2711, eff. May 18, 2000, as amended by § 1, Ord. 2735, eff. May 31,
2001)
Sec. 4-18.09. Identification.
   Each business operator shall maintain an identification number, provided by
the Ontario Police Department's Traffic Division painted on the sides and back
of each ice cream truck. The number shall be of such color, size and placement
so that the identification number may easily read at a distance of ten feet
(10').
(§ 1, Ord. 2711, eff. May 18, 2000)
CHAPTER 19: ROTATIONAL TOWING SERVICES
   
4-19.01   Definitions
   
4-19.02   Purpose
   
4-19.03   Towing carrier permit
   
4-19.04   Permit terms and conditions
   
4-19.05   Selection of towing carriers
   
4-19.06   Towing carrier's obligations; minimum requirements for facilities
   
4-19.07   Towing carrier's obligations; minimum requirements for equipment
   
4-19.08   Towing carrier's obligations; minimum requirements for personnel
   
4-19.09   Towing carrier's miscellaneous obligations
   
4-19.10   Towing rotation list
   
4-19.11   License requirements
   
4-19.12   Executions of agreements
   
4-19.13   Tow rates
   
4-19.14   Payment of administrative fees to the City
   
4-19.15   Revocation and suspension of towing carrier permits
   
4-19.16   Transfer or assignment of permit
   
4-19.17   Penalties
   
4-19.18   Authority for City to maintain own towing operations and towing
facilities
Sec. 4-19.01 Definitions.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   (a)   "Automobile dismantler's vehicle" shall mean a tow vehicle that is
registered by an automobile dismantler licensed pursuant to California Vehicle
Code, § 11500 et seq., and which is used exclusively to tow vehicles owned by
the automobile dismantler in the course of the automobile dismantling business.
   (b)   "Business license" shall mean a license issued by the City's License
Official.
   (c)   "City" shall mean the City of Ontario.
   (d)   "City Manager" shall mean the City Manager of the City of Ontario or
his or her designee.
   (e)   "Non-consensual towing service" shall mean towing services provided to
the City's Police Department in situations where vehicle owners are unable to
consent to having their vehicle towed, such as in cases of severe accident,
where a vehicle is being towed for being illegally parked on public property or
towed as a result of a police order.
   (f)   "Chief of Police" shall mean the Chief of Police of the City of
Ontario or his or her designee.
   (g)   "Police Department" shall mean the Ontario Police Department.
   (h)   "Rotation list" shall mean the City's list of eligible towing carriers
to be used by the Police Department when assistance is needed to remove
abandoned, disabled or impounded vehicles.
   (i)   "Tow vehicle" shall mean a motor vehicle which has been altered or
designed or equipped for and exclusively used in the business of towing
vehicles by means of a crane, tow bar, tow line, dolly or a roll-back carrier
or is otherwise used to render emergency assistance to disabled and other
vehicles.
   (j)   "Towing carrier" or "towing provider" shall mean a towing company and
the owner(s) and/or managing employee(s) of a towing company.
   (k)   "Tow vehicle driver" shall mean the driver of an authorized tow
vehicle used for towing another motor vehicle.
(§ 1, Ord. 2803, eff. September 16, 2004, § 2, Ord. 3008, eff. January 15,
2015)
Sec. 4-19.02 Purpose.
   (a)   The purpose of this chapter is to establish towing regulations to
govern the provision of non-consensual towing services to the City's Police
Department, consistent with state and federal laws, as well as the public
health, safety and welfare. A further purpose is to ensure that the best
possible towing services are selected to participate in the City's rotational
tow program to assist the Police Department in conducting efficient police
investigations and provide the citizens of Ontario with prompt, safe and
comprehensive towing services.
   (b)   These regulations are not intended to govern situations where towing
has been requested by vehicle owners or private property owners, except as may
be permitted by law. Instead, these regulations, and the towing services
agreements entered into in conjunction with this chapter, are intended to
provide a fair and objective method of selecting towing carriers from among
qualified firms to ensure that towing carriers and drivers selected provide the
Police Department and the public with prompt, safe and comprehensive towing
services using the latest in towing technology and vehicle towing and storage
safety.
(§ 1, Ord. 2803, eff. September 16, 2004, § 2, Ord. 3008, eff. January 15,
2015)
Sec. 4-19.03 Towing carrier permit.
   The City Council may at its discretion, by adoption of a resolution or
ordinance, grant a non-exclusive permit to a towing carrier to provide towing
services to the City under and pursuant to the provisions of this chapter.
(§ 1, Ord. 2803, eff. September 16, 2004, § 2, Ord. 3008, eff. January 15,
2015)
Sec. 4-19.04 Permit terms and conditions.
   (a)   All permits granted to towing carriers pursuant to this chapter shall
be non exclusive and shall be for a term to be specified by the City Council in
the resolution granting a permit hereunder and in the towing services agreement
between the City and the towing carrier.
   (b)   No provisions of this chapter shall be deemed to require restricting
the number of permits to one or any particular number, and no provision of this
chapter shall be deemed to require the City Council to grant any permit if the
City Council determines that the grant of any such permit is not in the best
interest of the City or the public.
   (c)   All towing carrier permits shall be subject to the terms and
conditions specified in this chapter, as well as any terms or conditions
specified in the towing services agreement.
   (d)   In granting any towing carrier permit, the City Council may prescribe
such other terms and conditions, not in conflict with this chapter, as are
determined by the City Council to be in the best interest of the City or the
public.
(§ 1, Ord. 2803, eff. September 16, 2004, § 2, Ord. 3008, eff. January 15,
2015)
Sec. 4-19.05 Selection of towing carriers.
   (a)   Within ninety (90) calendar days of the date an existing towing
carrier permit is due to expire, or whenever the Chief of Police determines
that a new towing carrier is needed to provide tow services to the City, the
Chief of Police shall request that the Purchasing Division prepare and
distribute a notice inviting requests for qualifications for a towing carrier
permit. The Purchasing Division shall identify the most qualified towing
carrier, provided that the City receives at least one qualified applicant, in
accordance with the objective performance criteria set forth in this chapter
and as may be promulgated in writing by the Chief of Police. In determining the
required number of towing carriers, the Chief of Police may consider, but is
not limited to, the following factors:
      (1)   The operational needs of the City or its Police Department;
      (2)   The population growth in the City;
      (3)   The additional land area annexed into the City;
      (4)   The number of currently authorized towing carriers and their
average response times;
      (5)   The administrative burdens imposed by the number of towing carriers
to be included on the rotation list; and
      (6)   Any other relevant factors to be determined by the Chief of Police.
   (b)   The name of any qualified applicant(s), if there is one, shall be
forwarded to the Chief of Police who shall conduct a background investigation
of the operator and his or her employees. In addition, the Chief of Police will
verify all information included in the proposal submitted to the City. Upon
successful completion of the background investigation, the Chief of Police
shall recommend in writing to the City Manager that the City issue, or refuse
to issue, a towing carrier permit to the applicant(s) identified by the
Purchasing Division. The City Council shall then determine whether it is in the
City's best interests to issue a towing carrier permit to the identified
applicant(s). If the City Council determines that it is in the City's best
interests to issue a towing carrier permit, it may do so by resolution in
accordance with this chapter.
(§ 1, Ord. 2803, eff. September 16, 2004, § 2, Ord. 3008, eff. January 15,
2015)
Sec. 4-19.06 Towing carrier’s obligations; minimum requirements for facilities.
   To be eligible to provide towing services to the City and its Police
Department, the towing carrier must meet the following minimum requirements
with respect to its facilities:
   (a)   Location of storage facility. The proposed towing storage lot shall be
located within the City of Ontario city limits, or within five (5) miles
thereof upon approval as described in subsection (e) below, to ensure adequate
response times and limit the City's costs and administrative burdens of having
Police Department personnel conduct investigations at distant storage lots.
   (b)   Storage facility requirements. Adequate security measures for the
protection of vehicles and property shall be provided for all storage
facilities. The Chief of Police or his or her designee shall be the sole judge
of what constitutes "adequate" security measures and may grant additional
consideration for state of the art security measures, including, but not
limited to, security cameras and motion sensors. At a minimum, all storage
facilities shall comply with the following requirements:
      (1)   All storage facilities shall be enclosed by a wall or fence at
least six (6) feet in height. Alternatively, storage facilities may consist of
enclosed buildings.
      (2)   Storage lot that can hold a minimum of one hundred fifty (150)
vehicles.
      (3)   The storage facility and lot shall be configured in such a way that
no vehicles shall be left parked or stored on the public streets at any time.
The business must provide off-street parking for its equipment and be able to
accommodate at least two (2) additional vehicles for customer parking. In
addition to the two (2) customer parking spaces, at least one (1) additional
customer parking space shall be provided for handicapped parking purposes. Said
handicapped parking space shall be van accessible. Storage vehicles should be
secured away from customer parking and the office area. The towing carrier's
office located in the City must have a sign posted including the company name,
address, phone number and hours of operation, to be clearly visible from the
roadway.
      (4)   The proposed storage facility shall contain an enclosed building or
enclosed storage facility that holds a minimum of two (2) vehicles, to be used
exclusively in situations where the Police Department orders an impound because
probable cause exists to believe that the vehicle was involved in the
commission of a crime or for other reasons that require evidentiary analysis of
the vehicle (the "designated impound space").
         (i)   The designated impound space shall be completely protected from
the elements, including wind, heat, adverse weather and other forms of
contamination (i.e., dust).
         (ii)   The designated impound space must be able to be secured and
unauthorized entry must be prevented. At a minimum, there should be a door or
gate that can be locked and secured from employees and visitors.
         (iii)   The designated impound space must be at least thirty (30) feet
by forty (40) feet.
         (iv)   The designated impound space must be lit with a minimum of two
50-watt, overhead lamps, or similar lamps that provide equal or greater light.
         (v)   The designated impound space area must be accessible to Police
Department personnel twenty-four (24) hours a day, seven (7) days a week.
         (vi)   The designated impound space must be reasonably clean and clear
of dirt, animal waste, oil, and the like.
         (vii)   The designated impound space must be protected by an alarm
system to prevent unauthorized entry. The alarm system shall be monitored by an
off-site monitoring company. The alarm code for the alarm system shall be
provided to Police Department personnel at all times and shall be changed by
the towing carrier only upon receiving authorization from the Chief of Police
or at his or her direction. The towing carrier shall not provide the alarm code
to any person unless authorized to do so by the Chief of Police.
   (c)   All proposed storage facilities must be approved for security by the
Traffic Division Sergeant or designated representative, and available for
inspection upon request. Any breach of security in a building or fence must be
repaired within twenty-four (24) hours.
   (d)   All necessary vehicle storage facilities needed to meet the minimum
requirements of this section shall be constructed prior to the submittal of a
response to the request for qualifications issued by the Purchasing Division.
Proposed facilities shall not be awarded credit. All necessary approvals for
such storage facilities shall comply with the applicable provisions of the
Ontario Municipal Code, or appropriate county and/or City codes. Compliance
with this subsection shall not be deemed to create any duty for the City to
award a permit to the towing carrier.
   (e)    In the event that City-sponsored or City-initiated economic
development activity results in the displacement of an existing tow yard within
the City, the tow operator whose location has been displaced may apply to the
City in writing for relief from the in-City locational requirement. A committee
consisting of the City Manager, the Chief of Police and the Executive Director
of the Public Works Agency, or their designees, shall consider the application
and decide within 30 days whether to allow extra-territorial siting. The
decision of the committee shall be final and non-appealable.
(§ 1, Ord. 2803, eff. September 16, 2004, § 2, Ord. 3008, eff. January 15,
2015, § 1, Ord. 3202, eff. February 17, 2022)
Sec. 4-19.07 Towing carrier’s obligations; minimum requirements for equipment.
   (a)   The towing carrier shall have operative and available at all times tow
trucks and/or tow vehicles that meet the following requirements:
      (1)   One (1) - Class "A" (or equivalent) tow vehicle;
      (2)   Five (5) - Class "B" tow vehicles;
      (3)   Three (3) - (or have available) Class "C" tow vehicles; and
      (4)   One (1) - (or have available) Class "D" tow vehicle.
   (b)   Tow vehicles must be equipped as tow trucks in compliance with the
provisions of the California Vehicle Code, including, but not limited to, §§
615, 21711, 24605, 25100, 25253, 27700, and 27907. Tow vehicles must also pass
the annual CHP inspection, or its equivalent.
   (c)   All tow vehicles must have adequate equipment for the towing of
vehicles. Basic equipment shall include but not be limited to: fire
extinguisher(s); broom; shovel; reflective triangles; flares; two (2) trash can
(s).
   (d)   All tow vehicles must have a cable winch of sufficient size and a
cable capacity of not less than fifty (50) feet to retrieve vehicles which have
gone over embankments or off traveled portions of roadways into inaccessible
locations.
   (e)   The towing carrier shall have at least one (1) vehicle designed to
carry motorcycles, by a flatbed truck, trailer or other means, which will not
cause additional damage to the motorcycle.
   (f)   The towing carrier must have equipment for and have personnel
proficient in unlocking locked vehicles when requested to do so by the Police
Department.
   (g)   Throughout the term of the towing services agreement with the City,
the towing carrier shall maintain in good condition the real property and
improvements thereon, and all vehicles, facilities, equipment and material used
in the performance of the services required by this chapter or the towing
services.
(§ 1, Ord. 2803, eff. September 16, 2004, § 2, Ord. 3008, eff. January 15,
2015)
Sec. 4-19.08 Towing carrier’s obligations; minimum requirements for personnel.
   (a)   Towing carriers shall provide the name, date of birth, and valid
California Driver License number of all drivers employed by the towing carrier
to the Police Department's Traffic Division. The Traffic Division Sergeant or
his or her designated representative shall also be notified of any new drivers
within five (5) days of their date of hire.
   (b)   Tow driver qualifications/requirements:
      (1)   Drivers employed by towing carriers shall be at least eighteen (18)
years old, possess the required class driver license in to operate any or all
tow vehicles specified under §
4-19.07, and sufficiently capable and trained to ensure safe and proper
discharge of their towing service responsibilities. All drivers shall meet all
requirements specified in §§ 2430.5 and 12520 of the California Vehicle Code.
      (2)   Drivers and/or towing carriers shall provide the Traffic Division
Sergeant with information of any driving citations received by the tow driver
(s) in the immediate prior three (3) years and all information regarding any
criminal convictions.
      (3)   Drivers shall be presentable and shall wear uniform-type pants and
shirts.
      (4)   The Chief of Police is also hereby empowered to require that a
towing carrier's drivers:
         (i)   Be fingerprinted; and
         (ii)   Undergo background checks by the California Department of Motor
Vehicles and any other agency deemed appropriate to determine the safety
practices of the drivers.
      (5)   Towing carriers shall not utilize any driver:
         (i)   Who is subject to epilepsy, fainting or loss of consciousness by
reason of chronic medical condition;
         (ii)   Whose driving record indicates five (5) violations of traffic
laws involving moving vehicles within two (2) years preceding the date of
application;
         (iii)   Who has furnished false information on this application or
omitted to furnish all information requested on said application forms;
         (iv)   Who has been convicted of driving while under the influence of
intoxicating liquor or narcotic drugs, or both, within three (3) years of the
date of application; or
         (v)   Who has been convicted of a felony, any crime involving moral
turpitude, or any crime(s) specified in the towing services agreement within
two (2) years preceding the date of application.
      (6)   Notwithstanding compliance with the foregoing provisions, the City
may prohibit certain drivers from providing towing services to the City or its
Police Department in its sole discretion. Such directives shall be in writing
to the towing carrier.
(§ 1, Ord. 2803, eff. September 16, 2004, § 2, Ord. 3008, eff. January 15,
2015)
Sec. 4-19.09 Towing carrier’s miscellaneous obligations.
   As a condition to issuance of a permit by the City, the towing carrier must
also agree to:
   (a)   Ownership of equipment and facilities. Towing carriers shall
demonstrate and furnish proof of possession of the towing equipment and storage
yard facilities necessary to perform the obligations set forth in this chapter
and the towing services agreement, as well as title to, or lease agreements
for, the right to use the land and improvements necessary to perform the
obligations set forth therein. The proposed storage facility and improvements
thereon shall meet the zoning and building requirements of the city or county
in which it is located, as well as all requirements of this chapter and the
towing services agreement;
   (b)   Maintain in full force and effect the insurance requirements as
specified in its towing services agreement;
   (c)   Charge towing fees in compliance with §
4-19.13. Each towing carrier shall maintain a sign listing the rates and
charges of all towing and storage services offered. Such sign has to be
conspicuously placed in the office or other places where customer financial
transactions take place;
   (d)   Furnish each owner of an automobile impounded by towing carrier with a
fully itemized billing;
   (e)   Submit at any reasonable time to a Police Department inspection all
drivers, vehicles, equipment and yards. For those towing carriers that cannot
produce an annual California Highway Patrol certification, the Police
Department also reserves the right to require that all towing vehicles be
inspected by an automotive professional certified by the State of California
Bureau of Automotive Repair, and selected by the Police Department. All vehicle
inspection fees shall be borne solely by the towing carrier and shall be due
and payable upon presentation of the vehicle for inspection. A yearly
inspection of all vehicles is required and the towing carrier shall not
interfere in any way with any such inspections. The Towing Carrier is
responsible for arranging the annual vehicle inspection with the Police
Department. Any towing vehicle that fails an inspection shall not be used to
provide towing service in the City until it is repaired and passes re-
inspection. All towing vehicles shall be operated and maintained in compliance
with applicable state and federal laws and regulations;
   (f)   Any and all equipment used and maintained by the towing carrier must
be available for inspection by the Police Department upon request. All
equipment, vehicles, and facilities to be used under the towing services
agreement shall be subject to inspection by the Police Department or other
designated inspection entities authorized by the Police Department;
   (g)   Towing carriers shall install and maintain during the period of
providing towing services to the City and the Police Department, radio
transmission and reception contact with each tow vehicle and driver;
   (h)   Comply with California Vehicle Code, § 10652 concerning the reporting
of the storage of vehicles in excess of thirty (30) days and California Vehicle
Code, § 10652.5 concerning vehicle storage fees;
   (i)   Tow and store vehicles that will be used as, or contain, evidence of
crimes for the Ontario Police Department without charge;
   (j)   The towing carrier may not perform said function as described in §
4-19.09(i) if criminal charges are pending against the towing carrier or one of
its owners or principals. The towing carrier's inability to perform this
function constitutes a material breach of its towing services agreement and
shall provide the basis for either suspension or revocation of its towing
services agreement;
   (k)   Indemnify and defend the City, its elected and appointed officers,
employees, agents and volunteers against, and will hold and save them, and each
of them, harmless from any and all actions, claims, damages to persons or
property, penalties, obligations or liabilities that may be asserted or claimed
by any person, firm, entity, corporation, political subdivision or other
organization arising out of or in connection with any of the towing service
operations or activities by the towing carrier, its officers, agents, or
employees, whether or not there is concurrent passive or active negligence on
the part of the City, its officers, agents or employees, but excluding such
actions, claims, damages to persons or property, penalties, obligations, or
liabilities arising from the sole negligence or willful misconduct of the City,
its elected or appointed officers, employees, agents or volunteers who are
directly responsible to the City and in connection therewith:
      (1)   Will defend any action or actions filed in connection with any of
said claims, damages, penalties, obligations or liabilities and will pay all
costs and expenses, including attorney's fees, incurred in connection
therewith;
      (2)   Will promptly pay any judgment rendered against the towing carrier
or the City, its elected and appointed officers, employees, agents and
volunteers covering such claims, damages, penalties, obligations and
liabilities arising out of or in connection with such towing service
operations, or activities of the towing carrier hereunder; and the towing
carrier agrees to save and hold the City harmless therefrom;
      (3)   In the event the City, its elected and appointed officers,
employees, agents and volunteers is made a party to any action or proceeding
filed or prosecuted against the towing carrier for such damages or other claims
arising out of or in connection with the towing service operations or
activities of the towing carrier hereunder, the towing carrier agrees to pay to
the City any and all costs and expenses incurred by City, its elected and
appointed officers, employees, agents and volunteers in such actions or
proceedings, together with reasonable attorneys' fees of the attorneys selected
by the City to defend the City, its elected and appointed officers, employees,
agents and volunteers in such actions; and
      (4)   Disputes between the towing carrier and the City arising from the
provision of towing services to the City pursuant to the towing services
agreement are excluded from the duty to indemnify, defend and hold harmless.
   (l)   Develop and maintain written policies and procedures to restrict
access and to preclude evidence contamination by employees and other
individuals in the designated impound space. Such policies shall be submitted
with the permit application, within thirty (30) days after award of the
contract for existing towing carriers, and any time the written policies are
modified. "Evidence contamination" is defined as the removal or touching of any
items, papers, vehicle parts, and the like, of a stored vehicle that is
impounded by the Police Department for investigation purposes;
   (m)   Vehicles that have been impounded by order of the Police Department
shall not be released, lien sold, or sold without authorization from the Police
Department;
   (n)   No employee of a towing carrier or the provider's storage facility
shall perform any work upon any Police Department impounded or stored vehicle
without first obtaining written permission from the owner of the vehicle and no
work or repair may be commenced without an official written release by the
Police Department;
   (o)   The Ontario Police Department shall have the right to designate when a
vehicle is to be placed into the designated impound space and may place a seal
on each door of the vehicle or door(s) of the designated impound space;
   (p)   Vehicles placed into the designated impound space shall not be removed
from such protection until approved by the Police Department;
   (q)   Post a tag on the windshield of all cars ordered impounded by the
Police Department. As an alternative to posting a tag on the windshield of the
car, a towing carrier may affix temporary markings on the car windshield;
   (r)   Not release any vehicle in its possession until all state and City
requirements are satisfied, the written authorization for release is provided
by the Ontario Police Department and all appropriate release charges are
collected; and
   (s)   Not release personal property contained within towed vehicles unless
written authorization of the Ontario Police Department is first obtained. When
personal property is released the written authorization shall be kept with the
vehicle storage paperwork. There shall be no charge for the release of personal
property during normal business hours. Towing carriers may charge an after
hours release fee for property released after normal business hours. Minimum
normal business hours shall be from 8:00 a.m. to 5:00 p.m., five (5) days a
week (Monday through Friday), excluding holidays.
(§ 1, Ord. 2803, eff. September 16, 2004, § 2, Ord. 3008, eff. January 15,
2015)
Sec. 4-19.10 Towing rotation list.
   (a)   Towing carriers selected to provide towing services to the City, if
more than one is selected, shall abide by the towing rotation system
established by the Chief of Police. The Chief of Police shall develop a list of
towing carriers selected to provide towing services to the City. The towing
carrier at the top of the list shall be on call to provide towing service to
the City in accordance with the rotation system established by the Chief of
Police. Once a towing carrier completes its designated on-call service, the
towing carrier's name shall be moved to the bottom of the list and the towing
carrier then at the top of the list shall begin its designated on-call service.
The towing carrier further must agree to be available and timely respond to any
inquiries made by the Police Department concerning the impacts of any proposed
towing rotation system changes. Should a towing carrier refuse or be unable to
respond to a call for service, the City may request services from any other
available towing carrier selected to provide towing services to the City.
   (b)   The City may request services from a towing carrier who is not on-call
in situations wherein the City Manager, Chief of Police or the Police
Department Watch Commander deems a situation to exist such that additional
towing services are necessary to adequately meet the needs of the City or its
Police Department. The towing rotation list may be amended from time to time by
the Chief of Police.
(§ 1, Ord. 2803, eff. September 16, 2004, § 2, Ord. 3008, eff. January 15,
2015)
Sec. 4-19.11 License requirements.
   No person shall engage in the business of providing towing services to the
City or its Police Department without first obtaining a City business license,
complying with the provisions of this chapter and entering into a towing
services agreement with the City.
(§ 1, Ord. 2803, eff. September 16, 2004, § 2, Ord. 3008, eff. January 15,
2015)
Sec. 4-19.12 Execution of agreements.
   All permits granted by the City Council pursuant to this chapter shall be
contingent upon entering into a written agreement between the towing carrier
and the City. The towing services agreement shall be entered into between the
towing carrier and City within thirty (30) days of the effective date of any
City Council action awarding a permit. The towing services agreement shall be
in a form approved by the City Attorney. Each towing services agreement shall
provide that the terms and conditions of each permit as set forth in this
chapter shall be incorporated by reference into the agreement. The term of the
written agreement shall be for a period five (5). A towing services agreement
may be extended, at the sole and absolute discretion of City Council, for a
period, or periods, not to exceed ninety (90) days. All terms and conditions
contained in any towing services agreement entered into between the towing
carrier and the City prior to adoption of this chapter shall continue in full
force and effect according to their terms.
(§ 1, Ord. 2803, eff. September 16, 2004, § 2, Ord. 3008, eff. January 15,
2015)
Sec. 4-19.13 Tow rates.
   The tow rates set forth in this section shall be specified in the City Fee
Schedule, which may only be revised by a duly-adopted resolution of the City
Council. For purposes of this subsection, “rates” and “fees” include any type
or class of fee and includes late charges.
(§ 1, Ord. 2803, eff. September 16, 2004, § 2, Ord. 3008, eff. January 15,
2015, § 2, Ord. 3157, eff. April 2, 2020)
Sec. 4-19.14 Payment of administrative fees to the City.
   (a)   The towing carrier shall pay an administrative fee per vehicle towed
to the City in connection with the award of this permit, and according to the
terms of the towing services agreement, in an amount specified in the City Fee
Schedule. These administrative fees shall be paid on a monthly basis to the
City’s Financial Services Agency on or before the 15th day following the end of
each month. The towing carrier shall not be responsible for payment of an
administrative fee to the City for the towing of vehicles in certain specified
circumstances as more fully set forth in its towing services agreement.
   (b)   The administrative fee shall be adjusted by resolution of the City
Council to reflect the City and the Police Department’s current costs for
operating the towing program and such adjustment shall be applicable to the
towing carrier upon ten (10) days’ written notice of the adoption of such
resolution.
   (c)   Late charges on delinquent accounts shall be subject to penalties
outlined in §
1-2.07, or as it may hereinafter be amended.
   (d)   The City shall retain the right to impose alternative forms of taxes
and/or fees, to the extent permitted by law, in the event that the fees
provided for in the towing services agreements are no longer assessable due to
a subsequent change in federal, state or local law.
   (e)   The towing carrier must make available to the Police Department, the
City or their designated representative(s), upon three (3) days’ written
notice, its accounting records and books for inspection and audit. The Police
Department, the City or their designated representative(s) agree to maintain
the confidentiality of such accounting records and books. The towing carrier
shall submit monthly documentation detailing its operations on behalf of the
City in a format that is acceptable to the Traffic Division of the Department.
Such documentation shall include the following information: the date, time,
location, case number (if any), vehicle description (including make, model and
vehicle license number) and a brief description of the circumstances
surrounding the tow (traffic collision, Department impound, and the like).
Towing carriers shall maintain these records for a period of three (3) years.
If the results of the audit show an administrative fee underpayment of greater
than two percent (2%), the towing carrier will pay the cost of the audit plus
fifty percent (50%) of the total error as a penalty in addition to any amount
owed as shown by the audit. If the results of the audit show an underpayment of
less than two percent (2%) or an overpayment, the City shall pay its own costs
associated with the audit. Any underpayment and resulting penalty shall accrue
interest at the rate of ten percent (10%) per annum, compounded daily from the
date the underpayment should have been paid pursuant to subsection (a) above.
   (f)   In the event the results of the audit are disputed, the City may, at
its sole discretion, elect to arbitrate the dispute. In the event the City
elects to arbitrate, the City and the towing carrier shall each select an
independent auditor at their own cost. The two (2) auditors shall agree upon
the results of the audit. If the two (2) independent auditors cannot agree upon
the results of the audit, a third auditor will be selected by the two (2)
independent auditors to make a final determination. The determination of the
third independent auditor shall be final.
   (g)   By accepting any towing carrier permit granted pursuant to this
chapter, the towing carrier irrevocably waives the defenses of any statute of
limitation, laches, waiver or other equitable doctrine of similar import or
effect in any action brought by the City to recover any fees, interest or
penalties due under this section.
(§ 1, Ord. 2803, eff. September 16, 2004, § 2, Ord. 3008, eff. January 15,
2015, § 3, Ord. 3157, eff. April 2, 2020)
Sec. 4-19.15 Revocation and suspension of towing carrier permits.
   (a)   The Chief of Police may suspend temporarily, and the City Council or
City Manager may suspend or revoke any towing carrier permit granted pursuant
to this chapter, or any towing services agreement entered into pursuant to this
chapter, and to rescind all rights and privileges associated with them at any
time if:
      (1)   The towing carrier defaults in the performance of its obligations
under this chapter or its towing services agreement and fails to cure such
default after receipt of written notice of the default from the City or its
Police Department and a reasonable opportunity to cure the default in
accordance with subsection (c)(1) below;
      (2)   If the towing carrier fails to provide or maintain in full force
and effect the insurance coverage as required in this chapter and as set forth
in its towing services agreement;
      (3)   If the towing carrier violates any order or ruling of any
regulatory body having jurisdiction over the towing carrier relative to the
towing carrier's tow truck business, unless such order or ruling is being
contested by the towing carrier by appropriate proceedings conducted in good
faith;
      (4)   If the towing carrier practices any fraud or deceit upon the City
or upon persons to whom it provides tow truck service as determined by a court
of law; or
      (5)   If the towing carrier becomes insolvent, unable or unwilling to pay
its debts and obligations, or is adjudged to be bankrupt. The City's revocation
of the towing carrier's permit shall in no way affect any right of the City to
pursue any remedy under the towing services agreement or any other provision of
law.
   (b)   (1)   Notwithstanding the City Manager or City Council's right to
suspend or revoke a permit and related towing services agreement, the Chief of
Police shall have the right to suspend, for a period not to exceed thirty (30)
days, any towing carrier permit granted pursuant to this chapter, and any
towing services agreement entered into pursuant to this chapter, and to rescind
all rights and privileges associated with them during the suspension period, if
the towing carrier violates any provision of this chapter, any material
provision of the towing services agreement or any state or federal law. The
Chief of Police may exercise this authority up to three (3) times per calendar
year. Thereafter, the Chief of Police may recommend suspension or revocation of
the towing carrier's permit and towing services agreement to the City Manager
or City Council.
      (2)   Any appeal of the Chief of Police's decision to suspend a towing
carrier's permit and towing services agreement shall be made to the City
Manager. The appeal shall be conducted in accord and pursuant to the procedures
set forth in §
1-4.01 et seq., with the exception that the hearing officer shall be the City
Manager or his or her designee. Any subsequent appeal shall be to the City
Council as noted in subsection (c)(3) below.
   (c)   Prior to suspending or revoking a permit granted under this chapter,
and towing services agreement entered into pursuant to this chapter, the City
shall give the towing carrier notice and an opportunity to be heard on the
matter, in accordance with the following administrative procedures:
      (1)   City staff shall first notify the towing carrier of the violation
in writing by personal delivery or registered or certified mail, and demand
that the towing carrier cure the default within a reasonable time, which shall
not be less than ten (10) days in the case of the towing carrier's failure to
pay any sum or other amount due the City under this chapter or the towing
carrier's towing services agreement with the City and thirty (30) days in all
other cases. If the towing carrier fails to correct the violation within the
time prescribed or if the towing carrier fails to commence correction of the
violation within the time prescribed, the City shall give the towing carrier
fourteen (14) calendar days written notice of public hearing to be held before
the City Manager. The written notice shall specify the alleged violations
supporting the recommendation for suspension or revocation of the permit and
towing services agreement.
      (2)   The City Manager shall hear and consider all relevant evidence
submitted by staff and the towing carrier or its agent or representative. If
the City Manager finds by a preponderance of the evidence that the towing
carrier has committed a material breach of the towing services agreement or
this chapter, the City Manager may suspend or revoke the towing carrier's
permit and towing services agreement.
      (3)   The towing carrier may appeal the City Manager's decision to the
City Council. The appeal shall be conducted in accord and pursuant to the
procedures set forth in §
1-4.01 et seq.
(§ 1, Ord. 2803, eff. September 16, 2004, § 2, Ord. 3008, eff. January 15,
2015)
Sec. 4-19.16 Transfer or assignment of permit.
   A towing carrier shall not sell, transfer, lease, assign, sublet, mortgage
or dispose of in whole or in part, either by forced or involuntary sale, or by
ordinary sale, contract, consolidation or otherwise, the permit or any rights
or privileges therein granted, without the prior written consent of the City
Council. The City Council's approval of a transfer or assignment of a permit
granted pursuant to this chapter shall be conditioned upon the towing carrier's
sale or disposal of all ownership rights to its tow truck business. A towing
carrier that desires to transfer or assign its permit, because he or she
intends to sell or dispose of all interests in the tow truck business that has
a permit with the City, shall make a written request for transfer or assignment
of the permit. The written request, a deposit of One Thousand Dollars
($1,000.00) and the proposed sale agreement or other document evidencing
disposal of the tow truck business shall be submitted to the Administrative
Services Agency at least one hundred-twenty (120) days before the requested
transfer or assignment date. The Administrative Services Agency and the Police
Department shall investigate the proposed transferee or assignee and determine
whether the transferee or assignee is qualified to serve as a permitted towing
carrier pursuant to the criteria and requirements set forth in this chapter and
make a recommendation to the City Council. Upon completion of the City
Council's approval or denial, the Administrative Services Agency shall provide
the towing carrier that requested the transfer or assignment with an accounting
of the administrative and legal costs associated with the City's review of the
towing carrier's request for a transfer or assignment of the permit, and shall
also provide any refund due. Any attempt to sell, transfer, lease, assign or
otherwise dispose of the permit without the prior consent of the City Council
shall be null and void.
(§ 1, Ord. 2803, eff. September 16, 2004, § 2, Ord. 3008, eff. January 15,
2015)
Sec. 4-19.17 Penalties.
   Any towing carrier, driver or other employee thereof violating the
provisions of this chapter shall be guilty of a misdemeanor or an infraction,
in the City Attorney's discretion. In addition, any towing carrier or towing
company violating the provisions of its towing services agreement or this
chapter shall be subject to revocation or suspension of its privileges to
provide towing services to the City.
(§ 1, Ord. 2803, eff. September 16, 2004, § 2, Ord. 3008, eff. January 15,
2015)
Sec. 4-19.18 Authority for City to maintain own towing operations and towing
facilities.
   Nothing in this chapter shall be construed to restrict or prohibit the City
from conducting its own towing operations or maintaining its own towing storage
yard, either in lieu of, or in addition to any towing carrier permit that is
awarded pursuant to this chapter.
(§ 1, Ord. 2803, eff. September 16, 2004, § 2, Ord. 3008, eff. January 15,
2015)
CHAPTER 20: VIDEO PROVIDERS
Article 1. General Provisions
   
4-20.01   Short title
   
4-20.02   Authority
   
4-20.03   Definitions
Article 2. Procedures for Granting, Renewing, Transferring, and Acquiring Video
Provider Licenses
   
4-20.04   A license is required to operate a video provider system
   
4-20.05   The City may grant a video provider license
   
4-20.06   License duration and renewal
   
4-20.07   Limitations of license
   
4-20.08   Rights reserved to the City
   
4-20.09   Transfers and assignments
   
4-20.10   License area; Annexations
   
4-20.11   Application for licenses; Contents of application
   
4-20.12   Selection of grantee
   
4-20.13   License renewal
   
4-20.14   Multiple licenses
   
4-20.15   License application processing costs
   
4-20.16   License fee
   
4-20.17   Contents of license agreement
   
4-20.18   Rate regulation
   
4-20.19   Breach of license; Grounds for assessment of penalties and license
revocation
   
4-20.20   Procedure for adjudication of breaches of the license
   
4-20.21   Hearing officer procedures
   
4-20.22   City Council hearing procedures
   
4-20.23   Penalties for breach of the license
   
4-20.24   Alternative remedies
   
4-20.25   Removal and abandonment; Purchase of system
   
4-20.26   Receivership and foreclosure
   
4-20.27   Continuity of service mandatory
Article 3. Provisions Relating to the Use of Public Rights-of-Way by Video
Provider Systems
   
4-20.28   Applicability
   
4-20.29   Undergrounding
   
4-20.30   Use of poles
   
4-20.31   Construction standards
   
4-20.32   Approvals
   
4-20.33   Submission of drawings
   
4-20.34   Relocation of facilities and equipment
   
4-20.35   Maintenance
Article 4. Registration of Video Providers Not Using the Public Rights-of-Way
   
4-20.36   Registration requirement
Article 5. Consumer Protection and Service Standards Applicable to All Video
Providers
   
4-20.37   California Government Code Standards
   
4-20.38   Penalties for noncompliance
   
4-20.39   Verification of compliance with standards
   
4-20.40   Negative option billing prohibited
   
4-20.41   Billing disputes
   
4-20.42   Non-discrimination; Tenant rights
   
4-20.43   Written or oral notice to enter property
   
4-20.44   Customer privacy
Article 1. General Provisions
Sec. 4-20.01 Short title.
   This chapter is known and may be cited as the "Video Provider Ordinance" of
the City of Ontario.
(§ 1, Ord. 2833, eff. August 5, 2006)
Sec. 4-20.02 Authority.
   This chapter is enacted by the City pursuant to City's authority pursuant to
the Cable Act, the California Government Code, the City's police powers, its
powers and rights to control the use of the public right-of-way within the
City, and all other applicable laws.
(§ 1, Ord. 2833, eff. August 5, 2006)
Sec. 4-20.03 Definitions.
   For the purposes of this chapter, the following terms, phrases, words, and
abbreviations shall have the meaning given herein. When not inconsistent with
the context, words used in the present tense include the future tense, and
words in singular number include the plural number. Words not defined by this
section shall be given the meaning set forth in the Cable Act, the California
Video Customer Service Act, the California Cable Television and Video Provider
Customer Service and Information Act, and, if not defined therein, their common
and ordinary meaning.
   (a)   "Access, PEG access or PEG use" refers to the availability or use of a
video provider system as set forth in the license agreement for public,
educational or government use (PEG), by public agencies, institutions,
organizations, groups, and individuals, including, but not limited to grantor,
and its designated access providers, to acquire, create, and distribute
programming not under grantee's editorial control, including, but limited to,
the following:
      (1)   Public access or public use where members of the general public are
the primary or designated programmers or users having editorial control over
their programming.
      (2)   Educational access or educational use where educational
institutions are the primary or designated programmers or users having
editorial control over their programming.
      (3)   Government access or government use where grantor or other
governmental institutions designated by grantor are the primary or designated
programmers having editorial control over their programming.
   (b)   "Affiliate" means a person that (directly or indirectly) owns or
controls, is owned or controlled by, or is under common ownership or control
with, another person. For purposes of this definition, the term "own" means to
own an equity interest (or the equivalent thereof) of more than thirty-five
percent (35%).
   (c)   "Cable Act" is the Cable Communications Policy Act of 1984 (47 U.S.C.
§§ 521 et seq.), as amended by the Cable Television Consumer Protection and
Competition Act of 1992 (Public Law No. 102-385) and the Telecommunications Act
of 1996 (Public Law No. 104-104), and as hereinafter may be amended.
   (d)   "Cable service" shall be defined herein as it is defined under Section
602 of the Cable Act, 47 U.S.C. § 522(6), meaning the one-way transmission to
subscribers of video programming, or other programming service, subscriber
interaction, if any, that is required for the selection or use of such video
programming or other programming service, as hereinafter may be amended.
   (e)   "Cable system" shall be defined herein as it is defined under Section
602 of the Cable Act, 47 U.S.C. § 522(7), meaning grantee's facilities,
consisting of a set of closed transmission paths and associated signal
generation, reception, and control equipment that is designed to provide video
programming and that is provided to multiple subscribers within the City. Such
term does not include:
      (1)   A facility that serves solely to retransmit the television signals
of one (1) or more television broadcast stations;
      (2)   A facility that serves subscribers without using any public rights-
of-way;
      (3)   A facility of a common carrier that is subject, in whole or in
part, to the provisions of Subchapter II of Chapter 5 of 47 U.S.C., except that
such facility shall be considered a cable system (other than for purposes of 47
U.S.C. § 541(c)) to the extent such facility is used in the transmission of
video programming directly to subscribers, unless the extent of such use is
solely to provide interactive on-demand services;
      (4)   An open video system, as defined below, that complies with 47
U.S.C. § 573; or
      (5)   Any facilities of any electric utility used solely for operating
its electric utility systems.
   (f)   "City" means the City of Ontario, California.
   (g)   "City Manager" means the City Manager of the City of Ontario, or his
or her designee.
   (h)   "Communications Act" means the Communications Act of 1934 (48 Stat.
1064, 15 U.S.C. § 21; 47 U.S.C. §§ 35, 151–155, 201–221, 301–329, 401–416,
501–505, 601–609 (as subsequently amended and as hereinafter may be amended).
   (i)   "Complete system construction" means the point in time when all
transmission equipment, facilities, and construction work is installed and
completed, and when all appropriate tests have been completed such that
applicable performance standards pertaining to, or dependant upon, such
construction is verified. The term "complete system construction" does not
include marketing and installation of subscriber service.
   (j)   "Control(ing/ed)" means the possession, directly or indirectly, of the
power to direct, or to cause the direction of, the management and policies of a
specified person, whether through the ownership of voting securities, by
contract or otherwise.
   (k)   "Educational access channel" is a channel on the video provider system
that designates educational institutions as the primary providers of non-
commercial programming.
   (l)   "FCC" means the Federal Communications Commission.
   (m)   "Government access channel" means a channel on the video provider
system that is provided by grantee to grantor and other governmental
institutions designated by grantor on which non-commercial informational
programming regarding government activities and programs may be presented.
   (n)   "Grantee" means any person to whom a valid license is granted by the
City under this chapter or to whom an existing franchise agreement was granted
by the City under previous ordinances, and the lawful successor, transferee or
assignee of such person.
   (o)   "Gross revenues."
      (1)   All revenue, cash, credits, property of any nature, and other
consideration derived directly or indirectly by grantee, from or attributable
to the sale of any video programming by or through the video provider system;
or in any manner derived from the operation of the video provider system to
provide cable service, unless otherwise prohibited by federal or state law.
Without limiting the foregoing, as provided by the Cable Act, gross revenues
shall be those revenues derived from the operation of a cable system to provide
cable service. Such revenue and other consideration, regardless of
technological platform, includes, without limitation, the following:
         (i)   Fees received from residential and commercial subscribers for
all video programming services.
         (ii)   Fees received for installation, reconnection, downgrade,
upgrade, and similar services.
         (iii)   Late fees and interest collected on delinquent subscriber fees
or charges.
         (iv)   Fees paid for channels that are designated for commercial use.
         (v)   Fees paid in connection with the rental, lease, or sale of
converters, remote controls, and other equipment.
         (vi)   Leased or access channel revenues received in connection with
the distribution of any video programming service.
         (vii)   All bad debts that are recovered.
         (viii)   All revenue that is received by grantee from the conduct of
any service-related activity directly involving the video portion of the video
provider system, including without limitation revenues derived from advertising
sales, commissions or other compensation paid to the grantee as compensation
for promotion or exhibition of products or services on home shopping channels,
and the sale of program guides.
         (ix)   The fair market value of any nonmonetary consideration received
by grantee in any transaction with another person relating to the receipt of
video programming or the operation of the video provider system as it pertains
to the offering of video programming, such as a barter transaction, but not de
minimis amounts or the value of free service to municipal buildings, employees
or other not-for-profit entities and not less than the customary prices paid in
connection with equivalent transactions.
         (x)   All carriage revenues received from video programming providers,
including incentive fees for carriage, contra expense, barters, or other
transactions, but only to the extent that generally accepted accounting
principles would require treatment as revenue.
         (xi)   A license fee or franchise fee if itemized and added to the
bill.
      (2)   The term "gross revenues" does not include the following:
         (i)   Refundable deposits, rebates, or credits.
         (ii)   Bad debt that is unrecovered or unrecoverable.
         (iii)   Taxes imposed by law on subscribers that grantee is obligated
to collect on behalf of any governmental agency.
         (iv)   Revenues collected by unaffiliated video programming providers.
         (v)   PEG fees paid to the grantor per subscriber as required by the
license agreement.
         (vi)   Advertising commissions paid to advertisers that are not
wholly-owned subsidiaries of grantee.
         (vii)   Programming launch fees and marketing support payments where
grantee receives reimbursements for mandatory marketing costs associated with
the launch and promotion of services offered.
         (viii)   All fees received by an affiliate or other person in exchange
for supplying goods or services used by licensee to provide video programming
over the video provider system.
         (ix)   The sale of video programming on the video provider system for
resale in which the purchaser is required to collect license fees, as that term
is used in §
14-9.16, from purchaser's customer.
         (x)   The sale of video programming to customers who are exempt, as
required or allowed by City, including, without limitation, the provision of
video programming to public institutions as required or permitted under this
chapter.
         (xi)   Sales of capital assets or sales of surplus equipment.
      (3)   Gross revenues shall include revenue received by any entity other
than the grantee where necessary to prevent evasion or avoidance of the
obligation under this agreement to pay the license fees. Gross revenues shall
be computed in accordance with generally accepted accounting principles.
   (p)   "License" means the right to construct, operate and maintain a video
provider system using the City's streets and rights-of-way pursuant to the
terms and conditions of this chapter and other relevant provisions of the
Municipal Code, the license agreement, and any ordinance or resolution
approving the transfer of the license, and any agreement between the City and
grantee relating to the operation of the video provider system.
   (q)   "License agreement" means an agreement granting a license pursuant to
the terms of the agreement and this chapter. Any conflict between the terms of
this chapter and the license agreement shall be resolved in favor of the
license agreement.
   (r)   "License area" means the geographic area within the City designated in
a license where grantee
may operate a video provider system, as defined in the license agreement.
   (s)   "Non-video services" means any service that does not constitute the
provision of video programming directly to multiple subscribers in the license
area.
   (t)   "Normal operating conditions" means service conditions that are within
the control of grantee. Those conditions that are ordinarily within the control
of grantee include, but are not limited to, special promotions, rate increases,
regular peak or seasonal demand periods, and scheduled maintenance or upgrade
of the video provider system. Those conditions that are not in control of
grantee include, but are not limited to, natural disasters, civil disturbances,
power outages, telephone network outages, and severe or unusual weather
conditions. See 47 C.F.R. § 76.309(c)(4)(ii).
   (u)   "OntarioNet" means the fiber-to-the-home network owned by the City and
available for use on a wholesale basis by qualified service providers,
including video providers.
   (v)   "Open video system" means a facility consisting of a set of
transmission paths and associated signal generation, reception, and control
equipment that is designed to provide cable services, including video
programming, and that is provided to multiple subscribers within the City,
provided that the FCC has certified that such system complies with 47 CFR §§
1500 et seq., entitled "Open Video Systems."
   (w)   "Person" means any individual, corporation, partnership,
proprietorship, or other organization authorized to do business in the State of
California.
   (x)   "Public access channel" means a channel on the video provider system
that is provided by grantee for non-commercial programming produced by members
of the public or a nonprofit corporation formed by the City to operate and
manage such a channel.
   (y)   "Public right(s)-of-way" means any of the following that are
controlled, used or dedicated for use by the public and located within the
City's jurisdictional limits: streets, roadways, highways, avenues, lanes,
alleys, sidewalks, public utility easements, rights-of-way and similar public
property within which grantee may place its facilities for operating a video
provider system.
   (z)   "Service interruption" means the loss or impairment of the video
programming services on one (1) or more channels or frequency bands of the
video provider system used in connection with the provision of video
programming to any subscriber.
   (aa)   "Subscriber" means any person who lawfully receives video programming
provided by a video provider.
   (ab)   "Telecommunications facilities" means a video provider's existing and
future telecommunications services facilities.
   (ac)   "Telecommunications services" shall be defined herein as it is
defined under Section 3 of the Communications Act, 47 U.S.C. § 153(46).
   (ad)   "Video programming" shall be defined herein as it is defined under
Section 602 of the Cable Act, 47 U.S.C. § 522(20), meaning any programming
provided by, or generally considered comparable to programming provided by, a
television broadcast station.
   (ae)   "Video service" means video programming services provided through
wireline facilities located at least in part in the public rights-of-way
without regard to delivery technology, including Internet protocol technology.
This definition does include any video programming provided by a commercial
mobile service provider defined in Section 322(d) of the Communications Act.
   (af)   "Video provider" means any person, company, or service which provides
one (1) or more channels of video programming to a business or residence,
including a home, condominium, apartment, or mobile home, in the City, where
some fee is paid, whether directly or as included in dues or rental charges,
for that service, whether or not public rights-of-way are utilized in the
delivery of the video programming. A "video provider" shall include, but not be
limited to, providers of cable television, master antenna television, satellite
master antenna television, direct broadcast satellite, multi-point distribution
services, and other providers of video programming, whatever their technology.
A video provider shall not include a landlord providing only broadcast video
programming to a single-family home or other residential dwelling consisting of
four (4) units or less.
   (ag)   "Video provider system" means any video provider's facilities,
whether leased or owned, located at least in part in the public rights-of-way,
and used to deliver cable services or video services to subscribers, without
regard to delivery technology. However, a video provider's use of OntarioNet,
as authorized by ordinance or agreement with the City, shall not constitute a
video provider system for purposes of determining whether a video provider is
subject to the licensing requirements of this chapter.
(§ 1, Ord. 2833, eff. August 5, 2006)
Article 2. Procedures for Granting, Renewing, Transferring, and Acquiring Video
Provider Licenses
Sec. 4-20.04 A license is required to operate a video provider system
   (a)   It shall be unlawful for any person to establish, operate or carry on
the business of distributing to any persons in the City any video programming,
by means of a video provider system, unless a license therefore is first
obtained pursuant to the provisions of this chapter, and unless such license is
in full force and effect. Subject to applicable law, upon its enactment, this
chapter shall apply equally and generally to all video providers regardless of
the date on which they first provided video programming within the City.
   (b)   It shall be unlawful for any person to construct, install or maintain
within any public right-of-way in the City, or within any other public property
of the City, or within any privately owned area within the City which has not
yet become a public right-of-way but is designated or delineated as a proposed
public right-of-way on any tentative subdivision map approved by the City, any
equipment or facilities for distributing any video programming, by means of a
video provider system, unless a license authorizing such use of such street or
property or area has first been obtained pursuant to the provisions of this
chapter, and unless such license is in full force and effect.
   (c)   It shall be unlawful for any person to make any unauthorized
connection, whether physically, electronically, acoustically, inductively or
otherwise, with any part of a licensed video provider system within this City
for the purpose of enabling him or herself or others to receive any video
programming carried on a video provider system, without the permission of
grantee.
   (d)   It shall be unlawful for any person, without the consent of grantee,
to willfully tamper with, remove, or injure any cables, wires, or equipment
used in conjunction with a video provider system.
   (e)   This section shall be construed to require a license in every
instance, except to the extent that such requirement is preempted by state or
federal law.
   (f)   The City's regulatory authority under Title VI of the Communications
Act is not applicable to the construction, installation, maintenance or
operation of a video provider's telecommunications facilities.
(§ 1, Ord. 2833, eff. August 5, 2006)
Sec. 4-20.05 The City may grant a video provider license.
   The City may by ordinance or resolution grant a license to any person,
whether operating pursuant to an existing license or not, who offers to provide
video programming, by means of a video provider system, pursuant to the terms
and provisions of this chapter.
(§ 1, Ord. 2833, eff. August 5, 2006)
Sec. 4-20.06 License duration and renewal.
   (a)   The term of the license or any license renewal shall be established in
the license agreement.
   (b)   A license may be renewed by the City upon application of grantee,
subject to applicable federal and state law.
(§ 1, Ord. 2833, eff. August 5, 2006)
Sec. 4-20.07 Limitations of license.
   (a)   Any license granted under this chapter shall be nonexclusive and for
the term specified by the license agreement.
   (b)   No privilege or exemption shall be granted or conferred by any license
granted under this chapter except those specifically presented herein or by a
license agreement.
   (c)   The grant of a license to use the public rights-of-way for purposes of
providing video programming, by means of a video provider system, shall not be
construed as a right or license to use such public right-of-way for any other
purpose for which a right or license to use the public right-of-way is
required.
   (d)   Any privilege claimed by grantee under a license in a public rights-
of-way or any other public property shall be subordinate to any prior or
subsequent lawful, non-competitive occupancy or use thereof, or easement
therein, by the City or other government entity for the public health, safety
or welfare.
   (e)   A license granted hereunder shall not relieve grantee of any
obligation related to obtaining pole and/or conduit space from any department
of the City, utility company, or from others maintaining poles and/or conduits
in the public rights-of-way.
   (f)   Any right or power in, or duty imposed upon any officer, employee,
department, or board of the City shall be subject to transfer by the City to
any other officer, employee, department, or board of the City.
(§ 1, Ord. 2833, eff. August 5, 2006)
Sec. 4-20.08 Rights reserved to the City.
   (a)   Subject to those restrictions, if any, that are mandated by state or
federal law, including the requirements of Cal. Gov't Code § 53066.3, neither
the granting of any license nor any of the provisions of this chapter shall be
construed to prevent the City from granting additional licenses.
   (b)   Grantee, by its acceptance of any license, agrees to be bound by all
lawful, non-discriminatory ordinances and regulations of general application
now in effect and to comply with any action or requirements of the City in the
exercise of its police power; provided, however, that such ordinances and
regulations shall not materially affect grantee's rights or obligations under
the license.
   (c)   Neither the granting of any license, nor any of the provisions of this
chapter, shall constitute a waiver or bar to the exercise of any governmental
right or power of the City.
   (d)   This chapter shall not be construed to impair or affect, in any way,
the right of the City to acquire the property of grantee through the exercise
of the power of eminent domain, in accordance with applicable law.
(§ 1, Ord. 2833, eff. August 5, 2006)
Sec. 4-20.09 Transfers and assignments.
   (a)   No license shall be transferred, sold or assigned, nor shall any of
the rights, privileges, interests or property related to the license be
transferred, sold, or assigned, either in whole or in part, directly or
indirectly, voluntarily or involuntarily, to any person without the prior
consent of the City granted by resolution of the City Council. Consent shall
not be unreasonably withheld or delayed. The granting of a security interest in
any assets of the grantee, or any mortgage or other hypothecation, will not be
deemed a transfer for the purposes of this section.
   (b)   Transfer of a license includes, but is not limited to, any transaction
in which control of the license is transferred from one person or group of
persons to another person or group of persons, or ownership or other interest
in grantee or its video provider system is transferred from one person or group
of persons to another person or group of persons so that control of grantee is
transferred, or the rights and obligations held by grantee under the license
agreement are transferred or assigned to another person or group of persons.
   (c)   Notwithstanding the foregoing, a transfer shall not include a transfer
of an ownership or other interest in grantee to the parent of grantee or to
another affiliate of grantee; transfer of an interest in the license or the
rights held by grantee under the license to the parent of grantee or to another
affiliate of grantee; or any action which is the result of a merger of another
affiliate of grantee. With respect to any of the foregoing transactions in
subsection (b) of this section, grantee shall promptly notify the City in
writing of the proposed transfer and the proposed transferee shall agree in
writing that it will abide by and accept all terms of this chapter and the
license agreement, and assume the obligations and liabilities of the previous
grantee under the license.
   (d)   Grantee shall promptly notify the City in writing of a proposed
transfer and shall file with the City Manager an application requesting
approval of the proposed transfer ("Transfer Application"). The transfer
application shall meet the requirements of §
4-20.11 (with the transferee being the applicant), and shall provide complete
information on the proposed transaction, including a copy of the bona fide
offer, and details on the legal, financial, and technical qualifications of the
transferee.
   (e)   In making a determination on whether to approve the transfer
application, the City Council shall, to the extent permitted by applicable law,
consider the legal, financial, technical and other qualifications of the
transferee to operate the system, whether the transferor video provider is in
compliance with its license agreement and this chapter and, if not, the
candidate transferee's commitment and plan to cure such noncompliance, whether
operation by the transferee would adversely affect the delivery of video
programming to subscribers or otherwise be contrary to the public interest, and
such other criteria provided for by applicable state and federal law.
   (f)   A transfer application shall not be granted unless the proposed
transferee agrees in writing that it will abide by and accept all terms of this
chapter and the license agreement, assume the obligations and liabilities of
the previous grantee under the license, and assume such other conditions as may
be lawfully prescribed by the City Council resolution approving the transfer.
   (g)   Approval by the City of a transfer application does not constitute a
waiver or release of any of the rights of the City under this chapter or a
license agreement, whether arising before or after the date of the transfer.
(§ 1, Ord. 2833, eff. August 5, 2006)
Sec. 4-20.10 License area; Annexations.
   (a)   The license area shall be established by the license agreement. In
determining the license area, the City shall assure that access to video
programming is not denied to any group of potential residential subscribers
because of the income of the residents of the local area in which such group
resides.
   (b)   Territory annexed to the City ("Annexed Territory") that is not within
the license area of an existing license may be added to grantee's license
pursuant to the license agreement.
   (c)   All rights acquired under a license or license granted by a public
entity other than the City ("Foreign License") shall terminate by operation of
law as to annexed territory where grantee of such license or license has not
commenced installation of a video provider system in the annexed territory
before the date such annexation becomes effective. Where feasible, City shall
provide notice to the holder of a foreign license of the City's intent to annex
territory that may result in a termination under this section. Failure to
provide such notice shall not affect the termination of the foreign license.
   (d)   Where grantee of a foreign license has commenced installation of a
video provider system in annexed territory on or before the date such
annexation becomes effective, grantee may continue to provide video
programming, by means of a video provider system, to the annexed territory for
the balance of the initial term of said license (exclusive of any renewal or
extension not granted by the City), subject to the terms and conditions then in
effect under such license, and the timely payment to the City of all license
fees paid in connection with such service.
(§ 1, Ord. 2833, eff. August 5, 2006)
Sec. 4-20.11 Application for licenses; Contents of application.
   (a)   Applications for the grant of a new license may be submitted by any
person pursuant to the requirements of this chapter. The City may, by
advertisement or any other means, solicit applications for a new license
pursuant to a request for proposal ("RFP").
   (b)   An application for a new license to construct, operate, or maintain
any video provider system in the City shall be filed with the City Manager and
shall be on forms prescribed by the City. The City may, at its sole discretion,
request new or additional proposals.
   (c)   Unless waived in writing by the City, all applications for a license
shall at the minimum contain the following:
      (1)   The name, address, and telephone number of the applicant and the
identity of all affiliates of the applicant;
      (2)   For open video systems, copies of FCC Form 1275, all "Notices of
Intent" filed under 47 CFR § 76.1503(b)(1), and the Order of the FCC, all of
which relate to certification of the applicant to operate an open video system
in accordance with § 653(a)(1) of the Communications Act and the FCC's rules.
For all video provider systems, a sworn affidavit, signed by an officer or
another person authorized to bind the applicant, that the applicant has filed
or will timely file with the FCC all forms required by the FCC before offering
cable service or video service within the City.
      (3)   A description of the applicant's build-out plans and timelines
consistent with this chapter and applicable law.
      (4)   A description of the video programming services that will be
offered by the applicant over its existing or proposed facilities.
      (5)   A description of the transmission medium that will be used by the
applicant to deliver the video programming services.
      (6)   Information in sufficient detail to establish the applicant's
technical qualifications, experience, and expertise regarding the ownership and
operation of the video provider system described in the application.
      (7)   Financial statements prepared in accordance with generally accepted
accounting principles that demonstrate the applicant's financial ability to:
         (i)   Construct, operate, maintain and remove any new physical plant
that is proposed to be constructed in the City.
         (ii)   Comply with the City's public, educational, and government
access channel requirements.
         (iii)   Comply with the City's requirement that grantee pay a license
fee equal to five percent (5%) of gross revenue.
      (8)   An accurate map showing the location of any existing facilities,
including telecommunications facilities, within the public rights-of-way that
the applicant intends to use, to purchase, or to lease.
      (9)   A copy of any agreement, if existing, between the applicant and any
public utilities providing for the use of any facilities of the utility,
including, but not limited to poles, lines or conduits.
      (10)   If the applicant's operation of the video provider system will
require the construction of new physical plant, modification of existing plant,
or addition of new or additional equipment, in the public rights-of-way (but
not including telecommunications facilities), the following additional
information must be provided:
         (i)   A preliminary construction schedule and completion dates.
         (ii)   Preliminary engineering plans, specifications, and a network
map of any new facilities, modification of existing plant, or addition of new
or additional equipment to be constructed in the City, in sufficient detail to
identify:
            (A)   The locations and routes requested for the applicant's
proposed facilities, whether new or modified.
            (B)   The locations, if any, for interconnection with the
facilities of other service providers.
            (C)   The specific structures, improvements, facilities, and
obstructions, if any, that the applicant proposes to remove or relocate on a
temporary or permanent basis.
         (iii)   The applicant's statement that, in constructing any new
physical plant, modifying existing plant or adding additional equipment, the
applicant will comply with all applicable ordinances, rules, and regulations of
the City, including the payment of all required permit and processing fees.
      (11)   The information and documentation that is required to be submitted
to the City by a video provider, as specified below in §
4-20.36.
      (12)   Any other details, statements, or information pertinent to the
subject matter of such application which shall be required or requested by the
City.
      (13)   A nonrefundable filing fee in an amount established by resolution
of the City Council.
   (d)   If any item of information specified above in subsection (c) of this
section is determined under paramount federal or state law to be unlawful, or
is determined by the City Manager to be inapplicable or unnecessary for the
City's consideration of the application, the City Manager is authorized to
waive the requirement that such information be included in the application.
(§ 1, Ord. 2833, eff. August 5, 2006)
Sec. 4-20.12 Selection of grantee.
   (a)   Within thirty (30) days after receipt of an application filed under §
4-20.11 that is deemed to be complete, the City Manager will give written
notice to the applicant of the City's intent to negotiate a license agreement
setting forth the terms and conditions under which the operation of the
proposed video provider system will be authorized by the City. The commencement
of those negotiations will be on a date that is mutually acceptable to the City
and the applicant.
   (b)   The license shall be deemed granted as of the effective date of the
license agreement.
   (c)   Any provisions in the license agreement which vary materially from
this chapter to the potential competitive disadvantage of any other licensee
shall require an amendment to the license agreement(s) of any existing licensee
(s) to ensure parity, subject to the further approval of the City Council.
(§ 1, Ord. 2833, eff. August 5, 2006)
Sec. 4-20.13 License renewal.
   License renewals shall be processed and reviewed in accordance with then
applicable law. The City and grantee, by mutual consent, may enter into renewal
negotiations at any time during the term of the license.
(§ 1, Ord. 2833, eff. August 5, 2006)
Sec. 4-20.14 Multiple licenses.
   The City may, in exercise of its reasonable discretion, limit the number of
licenses granted at any one time based upon its consideration of all
appropriate criteria which shall include but not be limited to the following:
   (a)   The capability of the public rights-of-way to accommodate the
facilities of any proposed additional video provider systems.
   (b)   Any other consideration necessary to safeguard the public interest.
(§ 1, Ord. 2833, eff. August 5, 2006)
Sec. 4-20.15 License application processing costs.
   All actual and reasonable charges and fees incidental to awarding any
license shall be paid by the licensee or applicant in accordance with § 542 of
the Communications Act. No application shall be considered without payment of a
deposit with the City covering such fee.
(§ 1, Ord. 2833, eff. August 5, 2006)
Sec. 4-20.16. License fee.
   (a)   As compensation for any license granted, and in consideration of
permission to use the public right-of-way in the operation of its video
provider system, and because the City will incur costs in regulating and
administering the license, grantee shall pay to the City a license fee in the
amount equal to five percent (5%) of grantee's gross revenues.
   (b)   The license fee assessed shall be paid quarterly, to be received by
the City Treasurer not later than forty-five (45) days after the close of each
quarter of grantee's fiscal year.
   (c)   On a quarterly basis, grantee shall provide the City a complete and
accurate statement verified by an authorized representative of grantee with
reasonable personal knowledge of the accuracy and completeness of such
statement, indicating gross revenues for the past quarter, listing every
revenue source by category, and depicting gross revenue computations.
   (d)   On an annual basis, grantee shall file a complete and accurate
statement verified by an authorized representative of grantee with reasonable
personal knowledge of the accuracy and completeness of such statement,
indicating all gross revenues for said year, listing every revenue source, by
category, and depicting gross revenue computations. If the City has any
concerns or objections relating to such report, the City shall have sixty (60)
days to notify grantee and request additional information. Grantee shall have
sixty (60) days to provide additional information to resolve any concerns or
objections to the City's satisfaction. Thereafter, the City may, at its sole
discretion, request that such statement be certified by an independent
certified public accountant, at grantee's sole cost; provided, however, that
any such request shall be made within sixty (60) days after grantee's response
is received.
   (e)   Upon reasonable notice, at any time during the term of a license, the
City shall have the right to conduct, or require grantee to obtain, an
independent audit by certified public accountants of any and all records of
grantee that are related to gross revenue reports or computations. Grantee
shall pay the costs of such audit not more frequently than once every three (3)
years in the event such audit reveals an underpayment of five percent (5%) or
more. Grantee shall cooperate with any such audit making readily available any
and all relevant information requested by the City. The certified public
accountants shall be required to certify in the audit that the grantee is in
compliance with this chapter and the license fee requirements of the license
agreement. Grantee shall maintain in a readily accessible place all such
records for a minimum of four (4) years after any payment period that such
record pertains to. This right shall be in addition to City's right to conduct
any other audit.
   (f)   In the event that any license fee payment is not paid by the due date,
interest shall be charged monthly at a monthly rate of one and one-half percent
(1-1/2%), or the highest rate allowed by law, whichever is lower. In addition,
if any license fee is not paid in full within fifteen (15) days after receipt
of notice from the City as to the delinquency of such payment, a one-time late
fee in the amount of five percent (5%) of the delinquent amount shall be
assessed.
   (g)   In the event grantee claims to have overpaid by more than five percent
(5%) the amount of license fee actually due during any given quarter, it shall
file an application with the City within one (1) year after said payment was
made; provided, however, that notwithstanding the foregoing, grantee shall be
permitted to seek refund of overpaid amounts that are revealed by an audit
conducted in accordance with subsection (e) of this section, and the grantee
requests such refund within sixty (60) days of the audit's release. The failure
to timely and properly make such claim shall constitute a waiver by grantee of
any right to such claimed overpayment, whether by refund, offset, credit or any
other accommodation, except to the extent the overpayment is revealed by an
audit conducted in accordance with subsection (e) of this section. All such
applications shall state the amount of claimed overpayment, the reason for the
claimed overpayment, and sufficient documentation to allow the City to verify
grantee's claim. Upon request by the City, grantee shall provide any further
information that is deemed relevant by the City. All such applications shall be
considered by the City Council, and the City Council's decision with respect to
such applications shall be final.
   (h)   If grantee bundles video programming services with non-video service,
grantee agrees that it will allocate the discount associated with such bundle
consistent with the portion allocated in grantee's books and records kept in
the regular course of grantee's business. If grantee bundles video programming
services with non-video services, grantee agrees that it will not intentionally
or unlawfully allocate such revenue for the purpose of evading license fee
payments under its license. The parties agree that tariffed telecommunication
services that cannot be discounted by state or federal law or regulation are to
be excluded from the bundled discount allocation basis.
(§ 1, Ord. 2833, eff. August 5, 2006)
Sec. 4-20.17. Contents of license agreement.
   (a)   The terms and provisions of a license agreement for the operation of a
video provider system may include, without limitation, the following subject
matters:
      (1)   The nature, scope, geographical area, and duration of the license,
including a reasonable period of time for the grantee to become capable of
providing video programming to all households in the license area.
      (2)   The applicable license fee to be paid to the City, including the
percentage amount, the method of computation, frequency of payments and the
time for payments.
      (3)   Requirements relating to compliance with state and federal laws and
regulations pertaining to the operation of the video provider system and the
provision of video programming.
      (4)   Requirements relating to the construction, upgrade, or rebuild of
the video provider system (but not including telecommunications facilities), as
well as the provision of special services, such as the provision of services to
public buildings, including public schools, emergency alert capability, and
parental control devices.
      (5)   Requirements relating to the maintenance of a performance bond, a
security fund, a letter of credit, or similar assurances to secure the
performance of the grantee's obligations under the license agreement.
      (6)   Requirements relating to liability insurance, workers' compensation
insurance, and indemnification.
      (7)   Additional requirements relating to consumer protection and
customer service standards, including the resolution of subscriber complaints
and disputes and the protection of subscribers' privacy rights.
      (8)   Requirements relating to the grantee's support of local video
programming, including the provision of public, educational, and government
access channels, the coverage of public meetings and special events, and
financial or technical support for public, education, and governmental access
uses.
      (9)   Requirements relating to construction, operation, and maintenance
of the video provider system within the public rights-of-way (but not including
telecommunications facilities), including compliance with all lawful, non-
discriminatory building codes and permit requirements of general application,
the abandonment, removal, or relocation of facilities, and compliance with FCC
technical standards.
      (10)   Requirements relating to recordkeeping, accounting procedures,
reporting, periodic financial and technical audits, and performance reviews,
and the inspection of grantee's books and records.
      (11)   Acts or omissions constituting material breaches of or defaults
under the license agreement, and the applicable penalties or remedies for those
breaches or defaults, including fines, penalties, liquidated damages,
suspension, revocation and termination.
      (12)   Requirements relating to the sale, assignment, or other transfer
or change in control of the license.
      (13)   The grantee's obligation to maintain continuity of service.
      (14)   Such additional requirements, conditions, representations and
warranties, policies, and procedures as may be mutually agreed upon by the
parties to the license agreement and that will, in the judgment of the City,
best serve the public interest and protect the public health, welfare, and
safety.
(§ 1, Ord. 2833, eff. August 5, 2006)
Sec. 4-20.18. Rate regulation.
   (a)   The City may regulate a grantee's rates, charges, and prices to the
maximum extent permitted by law now or at a future time.
   (b)   Filing of rates and charges.
      (1)   Throughout the term of any license agreement entered into pursuant
to this chapter, grantee shall maintain on file with the City a complete
schedule of all rates and charges related to providing video programming
services under the license.
      (2)   Changes in rates and charges. Grantee shall provide written notice
to the City and subscribers at least thirty (30) days in advance of any
proposed change in rates and charges within the control of grantee. Such notice
shall be provided in the subscriber's bill, or in a separate mailing.
   (c)   Regulation of equipment for hearing-impaired. To the extent authorized
by law, the City reserves the right to require and regulate the installation or
rental of equipment that facilitates the reception of video programming by
hearing impaired individuals.
(§ 1, Ord. 2833, eff. August 5, 2006)
Sec. 4-20.19. Breach of license; Grounds for assessment of penalties and
license revocation.
   (a)   In addition to all other rights and powers retained by the City under
this chapter or otherwise, the City reserves the right to terminate any license
and all rights and privileges of grantee, revoke any license, or assess damages
or penalties against grantee, in the event of any material breach of its terms
and conditions. A material breach by grantee shall include, but not be limited
to, the following:
      (1)   Violation of any provision of this chapter, the license agreement
or any rule, order, regulation or directive issued in connection with the
license;
      (2)   Evasion of any provision of this chapter or the license agreement,
or the practice of fraud or deceit upon the City or its subscribers and
customers;
      (3)   Material misrepresentation of fact in an application for a new
license, renewal or transfer of a license, whether by act or omission;
      (4)   Failure to pay any license fee when said payment is due;
      (5)   Failure to restore video programming after seventy-two (72)
consecutive hours of interrupted video programming, except in the event of
force majeure or where the City approves in writing a longer period of
interruption after making a determination that there exists just cause for such
longer period of interruption;
      (6)   Failure to provide at least eighty percent (80%) of subscribed
services over the video provider system for a period of five (5) days, except
in the event of force majeure or where the City approves in writing a longer
period of interruption after making a determination that there exists just
cause for such longer period of interruption;
      (7)   Failure to consistently meet customer service standards established
in the license or this chapter for the relevant measurement period specified in
the license or this chapter, as the case may be;
      (8)   Failure to initiate or achieve complete system construction, or
reconstruction within the time set forth in the license, unless the City
Manager expressly approves the delay in writing, due to the occurrence of
conditions beyond grantee's control;
      (9)   Failure to provide or maintain in full force and effect at all
times any insurance coverage, letter of credit or bonds required by the license
agreement;
      (10)   Violation of orders or rulings of any regulatory body having
jurisdiction over grantee relating to the license;
      (11)   Failure to provide, upon written request, relevant data,
documents, reports or information required by this chapter or the license
agreement; provided, however, that grantee shall be afforded a reasonable
amount of time to seek available protections concerning its confidential
information, and/or redact confidential portions of such materials so as to
protect grantee's confidential information from public disclosure; and
      (12)   Dissolution, liquidation or ceasing to conduct business;
abandonment of the video provider system; or the transfer of the video provider
system and/or license (including, but not limited to, by means of a sale of all
or substantially all of grantee's assets) without the City's consent as
provided in this chapter or the license agreement.
(§ 1, Ord. 2833, eff. August 5, 2006)
Sec. 4-20.20. Procedure for adjudication of breaches of the license.
   (a)   Prior to imposing any liquidated damages, sanction or penalty upon
grantee, including termination or revocation of the license, the City Manager,
shall demand in writing that grantee cure such breach or diligently commence a
cure of such breach within a specified period, which period shall not be less
than thirty (30) days following notification. However, only fifteen (15) days
notice shall be required in the case of failure to pay undisputed monies due to
the City. In addition, the City may, in an emergency, prescribe a notice less
than thirty (30) days consistent with the nature of the emergency. An emergency
under this subsection (a) means an occurrence or condition that creates an
actual or imminent danger to life or property.
   (b)   Should grantee fail to provide sufficient written proof within the
specified cure period that corrective action has been taken, or that corrective
action is being actively and expeditiously pursued by grantee, then the City
Manager shall place the issue of termination, revocation or other penalty
before an appropriate hearing officer for his or her determination pursuant to
§
4-20.21. The hearing officer shall issue a recommended decision, which will
then be acted upon by the City Council pursuant §
4-20.22.
   (c)   The City Manager, or any hearing officer authorized to act pursuant to
this chapter shall have the power to issue subpoenas in order to carry out the
fact-finding activities authorized by this chapter. The process for the
issuance and enforcement of such subpoenas shall be governed by the California
Code of Civil Procedure.
(§ 1, Ord. 2833, eff. August 5, 2006)
Sec. 4-20.21. Hearing officer procedures.
   (a)   The City Manager may, at his or her sole discretion, refer to a
hearing officer any controversy or claim arising out of or relating to the
license or its existence, construction, interpretation, performance,
enforcement, operation, breach, continuance or termination. Such hearing
proceedings shall be initiated by the City Manager by written notice to grantee
at least thirty (30) days prior to the hearing, which will specify the time,
place and purpose of such hearing, and provide grantee the opportunity to be
heard.
   (b)   The procedures set forth in §
1-5.08 shall govern the conduct of such administrative hearing.
   (c)   The hearing officer shall be vested with quasi-judicial authority, and
shall be authorized to issue a recommended decision:
      (1)   Ordering grantee to undertake remedial action to cure any breach of
its obligations under its license;
      (2)   Assessing liquidated damages and/or levying a penalty upon grantee
in accordance with the terms of this chapter and the license agreement;
      (3)   Determining that grantee has not violated any of its obligations
under its license; and/or
      (4)   Recommending to the City Council grounds for the revocation of the
license.
(§ 1, Ord. 2833, eff. August 5, 2006)
Sec. 4-20.22. City Council hearing procedures.
   (a)   Based on the hearing officer's recommended decision pursuant to §
4-20.21, the City Council shall determine, in writing, in its discretion
whether or not a material breach occurred and whether to terminate the license
or take other appropriate action.
   (b)   Should the City Council find that there has been a material breach of
the license, but that termination of the license is inappropriate, then the
Council may assess and levy or impose such other relief as the Council deems
appropriate, pursuant to this chapter or the license agreement, including, but
not limited to, any relief specified in §§
4-20.21(c),
4-20.23 or any combination thereof. Failure of grantee to fully and promptly
comply with an order of the City Council shall be deemed a material breach of
the license.
   (c)   The City shall cause grantee to be served with written notice of any
action taken by the City Council. The decision of the City Council as to such
matters shall be final, but may be challenged by grantee in a court of
competent jurisdiction.
   (d)   Nothing herein is intended to limit the City Council's right to make
other determinations that are reasonably related to the license, or to seek any
other appropriate relief to which the City may be entitled, at law or equity,
as a result of any breach by grantee of its obligations under the license.
(§ 1, Ord. 2833, eff. August 5, 2006)
Sec. 4-20.23. Penalties for breach of the license.
   The hearing officer or City Council may, following notice and opportunity to
cure as herein provided, impose the following penalties for any breach of the
license, except any breach of subscriber service standards, which shall be
governed by §
4-20.38, and non-payment of fees, which shall be governed by §
4-20.16(f):
   (a)   Up to Five Hundred Dollars ($500.00) for each day of each material
breach, or such other amount provided in the license agreement.
   (b)   For a second material breach of the same nature occurring within
twelve (12) months where a fine or penalty was previously assessed, One
Thousand Dollars ($1,000.00) for each day of each material breach.
   (c)   For a third or further material breach of the same nature occurring
within twelve (12) months of the first such breach, where a fine or penalty was
previously assessed, Two Thousand Dollars ($2,000.00) for each day of each
material breach.
(§ 1, Ord. 2833, eff. August 5, 2006)
Sec. 4-20.24. Alternative remedies.
   The City may, at its sole discretion, take any lawful action which it deems
appropriate to enforce the City's rights under the license in lieu of
revocation of the license. In no event shall the amount of any insurance, bond,
letter of credit or any other security instrument be construed to limit
grantee's liability for damages.
(§ 1, Ord. 2833, eff. August 5, 2006)
Sec. 4-20.25. Removal and abandonment; Purchase of system.
   (a)   Subject to applicable law, in the event that a license is terminated,
revoked, or is not renewed upon expiration, then grantee shall, upon demand of
the City, and at grantee's sole expense, promptly remove all or any portion of
its video provider system from the public rights-of-way, except with respect to
telecommunications facilities. With respect to telecommunications facilities,
grantee shall certify to the City that the portion of the facilities
responsible for delivering video programming has been disabled. In removing its
video provider system, grantee shall restore all streets to the City's standard
specifications and repair any damage to utilities or other infrastructure
caused by such removal. The liability, indemnity, insurance, security fund and
bonds required under the license shall continue in full force and effect until
such removal is accepted as complete by the City.
   (b)   Subject to applicable law, in the event that a license is not renewed
and the City acquires ownership of a video provider system or effects a
transfer of ownership of a video provider system to another person, any such
acquisition or transfer shall be at fair market value, determined on the basis
of the video provider system valued as a going concern, but with no value
allocated to the license itself. If a license is revoked for cause and the City
acquires ownership of the video provider system or effects a transfer of
ownership of the video provider system to another person, any such acquisition
or transfer shall be at an equitable price. The value of a video provider
system (fair market value or equitable price) shall be determined by an
appraisal committee consisting of three (3) disinterested appraisers. The City
and grantee shall each select one (1) appraiser, and the two (2) selected
appraisers shall agree upon and appoint a third appraiser. The foregoing shall
not apply to telecommunications facilities.
   (c)   If a grantee's plant, or a portion thereof, is deactivated for a
continuous period of thirty (30) days, (except for reasons beyond the grantee's
control), and without prior written notice to and approval by City, then the
grantee must, at City's option and demand, and at the sole expense of the
grantee, promptly remove all of the grantee's property from any streets or
other public rights-of-way, except any property comprising telecommunications
facilities. The grantee must promptly restore the streets or other public areas
from which its property has been removed to the condition existing prior to the
grantee's use.
   (d)   City may, upon written application by a grantee, approve the
abandonment in place by a grantee of any property, under such terms and
conditions as City may approve. Upon City-approved abandonment in place of any
property, the grantee must cause to be executed such instruments as the City
may prescribe in order to transfer and convey ownership of the abandoned
property to the City.
(§ 1, Ord. 2833, eff. August 5, 2006)
Sec. 4-20.26. Receivership and foreclosure.
   (a)   Subject to applicable provisions of the United States Bankruptcy Code,
any license shall, at the option of the City, cease and terminate one hundred
twenty (120) days after the appointment of a receiver or trustee to take over
and conduct the business of grantee whether in a receivership, reorganization,
bankruptcy or other action or proceeding unless such receivership or
trusteeship shall have been vacated prior to the expiration of said one hundred
twenty (120) days, or unless:
      (1)   Such receiver or trustee shall have, within one hundred twenty
(120) days after his or her election or appointment, fully complied with all
terms of the license and remedied all breaches of the license or provided a
plan for the remedy of such breaches which is approved in writing by the City;
and,
      (2)   Such receiver or trustee shall, within said one hundred twenty
(120) days, execute an agreement duly approved by the Court having
jurisdiction, under which such receiver or trustee agrees to be bound by each
and every term, provision and limitation of the license.
   (b)   Upon the foreclosure or other judicial sale of all or a substantial
part of a video provider system, grantee shall notify the City of such fact,
and such notification shall be treated as a notification that a change in
ownership of grantee has taken place and the provisions of this chapter
governing such changes shall apply.
(§ 1, Ord. 2833, eff. August 5, 2006)
Sec. 4-20.27. Continuity of service mandatory.
   Subscribers shall have the right to continue to receive service so long as
their financial and other obligations to video provider are honored. Video
provider shall at all times, and under all conditions, to the greatest extent
economically and technically possible, maintain continuity of service. In the
event of an assignment of the video provider system, the assignor shall
cooperate with the City and the assignee in order to maintain continuity of
service to all subscribers.
(§ 1, Ord. 2833, eff. August 5, 2006)
Article 3. Provisions Relating to the Use of Public Rights-of-Way by Video
Provider Systems
Sec. 4-20.28. Applicability.
   Sections
4-20.29 through
4-20.35 shall not apply with respect to telecommunications facilities.
(§ 1, Ord. 2833, eff. August 5, 2006)
Sec. 4-20.29. Undergrounding.
   (a)   At no time shall grantee place facilities underground without
appropriate authorization from the City in accordance with generally
applicable, non-discriminatory procedures and requirements. Grantee shall be
responsible for its own underground trenching and any associated costs in
connection with the construction, maintenance and operation of a proposed new
video provider system.
   (b)   The video provider system shall be placed underground in all portions
of the license area where either telephone or electric lines are underground.
Whenever the poles on which the video provider system is constructed are
eliminated, grantee shall concurrently replace its aerial facilities with
underground facilities. At no time shall the video provider system be the only
aerial facility in any given area. If the City reimburses any licensee for
undergrounding, all other licensees with facilities requiring undergrounding in
the same area shall be similarly reimbursed.
   (c)   Where the video provider system is installed underground, line
extenders, amplifiers, taps, power supplies, traps and related electronic
equipment and components may be placed in appropriate housings above the
surface of the ground to the extent that the method employed is compliant with
any and all generally applicable, non-discriminatory City, state, federal or
other regulations, and consistent with any other generally applicable
guidelines, policies or procedures that may, from time to time, be adopted by
the City or other applicable government agency. grantee shall provide a
procedure for undergrounding taps and pedestals, the cost of which the
subscriber will bear, and relocating the taps and pedestals within the
technical constraints of the video provider system.
(§ 1, Ord. 2833, eff. August 5, 2006)
Sec. 4-20.30. Use of poles.
   Grantee shall be authorized to utilize existing poles, conduit, and other
facilities of a public utility, subject to applicable law, but shall not be
authorized to construct or install any new, different, or additional poles in
any City streets without prior written approval by the City, which approval
shall not be unreasonably withheld or delayed. Grantee shall comply with
applicable federal and state laws regarding pole attachments.
(§ 1, Ord. 2833, eff. August 5, 2006)
Sec. 4-20.31. Construction standards.
   Grantee shall install and maintain its wires, cables, fixtures, and other
equipment in accordance with applicable California Public Utilities Commission
pole attachment standards, electrical codes and industry standards generally
applicable to the type of video provider system which grantee has constructed,
owns or operates, any applicable pole/conduit agreements, and all license
agreement requirements. Grantee shall adhere to all generally applicable, non-
discriminatory building and zoning regulations currently in force or hereafter
enacted. Grantee shall repair and restore any cuts and/or trenching in the
roadway or sidewalks to generally applicable, non-discriminatory City
standards. Grantee shall locate and maintain its lines, cables, and other
appurtenances, on public property, in such a manner as to cause no unreasonable
interference with the use of such public property by any person.
(§ 1, Ord. 2833, eff. August 5, 2006)
Sec. 4-20.32. Approvals.
   The City Engineer shall approve the location and method of construction of
all underground facilities and equipment located on public right-of-ways
(including any above-grade portion of such facilities and equipment). The City
Engineer also shall approve the location and installation of all new aerial
facilities. All construction shall be subject to City permit and inspection
fees as may be required by other generally applicable, non-discriminatory
applicable laws or regulations.
(§ 1, Ord. 2833, eff. August 5, 2006)
Sec. 4-20.33. Submission of drawings.
   Grantee shall file with the City strand maps of the entire video provider
system located within the public rights-of-say, excluding technical
specifications. Additionally, within thirty (30) days after completion of any
material modification of the video provider system, grantee shall file with the
City strand maps, excluding technical specifications, showing modifications to
the video provider system.
(§ 1, Ord. 2833, eff. August 5, 2006)
Sec. 4-20.34. Relocation of facilities and equipment.
   (a)   Grantee shall remove or relocate at its sole cost any facilities
installed, used or maintained in connection with the license if and when such
removal or relocation is made necessary by any project. For purposes of this
section, the word "project" means any change of grade, alignment or width of
any public street, way, alley or place, including but not limited to, the
construction of any subway or viaduct, that the City may initiate, either by or
through itself or any redevelopment agency, community facility district,
assessment district, undergrounding district, reimbursement agreement or
generally applicable impact fee program.
   (b)   In the event that such removal or relocation is required, grantee
shall commence physical fieldwork on the removal or relocation on or before one
hundred twenty (120) days after written notice of such requirement is provided
by the City Manager. If, despite its reasonable efforts, grantee is unable to
commence removal or relocation within such period, grantee shall provide the
City Manager with written notice explaining in detail the reasons for the delay
and a date certain upon which such removal or relocation is expected to
commence. Grantee shall diligently proceed and promptly complete all such
removal or relocation after it is commenced. Grantee shall confirm such removal
or relocation by providing written certification to the City Manager within
five (5) business days of completion. If the City reimburses any licensee for
any such removal or relocation, all other licensees with facilities requiring
removal or relocation in the same area shall be similarly reimbursed.
(§ 1, Ord. 2833, eff. August 5, 2006)
Sec. 4-20.35. Maintenance.
   Should grantee fail, refuse or neglect to properly perform any maintenance
or construction work required by the license following due notice from the City
and a reasonable opportunity to cure as provided for under this chapter, or
should grantee fail to commence performance of such work within the required
period of time, or fail to diligently proceed and promptly complete such work
thereafter, the City Manager may, subject to applicable law, upon five (5) days
prior written notice to grantee (except in cases of emergency), cause such work
or other act to be completed in whole or in part by the City or others, and
upon so doing shall submit to grantee an itemized statement of the costs
thereof. Grantee shall pay to the City the entire amount due, without offset or
deduction, within thirty (30) days from the date of such statement.
(§ 1, Ord. 2833, eff. August 5, 2006)
Article 4. Registration of Video Providers Not Using the Public Rights-of-Way
Sec. 4-20.36. Registration requirement.
   Pursuant to Cal. Gov't Code § 53088.2, all video providers that are
operating in the City on the effective date of this article, or that intend to
operate in the City after the effective date of this article, and are not
required under applicable law to operate under a license, lease, or similar
written agreement with the City, must register with the City. The registration
form must include or be accompanied by the following:
      (1)   The video provider's name, address, and local telephone numbers.
      (2)   The names of the officers of the video provider.
      (3)   A copy of the video provider's written policies and procedures
relating to customer service standards and the handling of customer complaints,
as required by Cal. Gov't Code §§ 53054 et seq. These customer service
standards must include, without limitation, standards regarding the following:
         (i)   Installation, disconnection, service and repair obligations,
employee identification, and service call response time and scheduling.
         (ii)   Customer telephone and office hours.
         (iii)   Procedures for billing, charges, refunds, and credits.
         (iv)   Procedures for termination of service.
         (v)   Notice of the deletion of a programming service, the changing of
channel assignments, or an increase in rates.
         (vi)   Complaint procedures and procedures for bill dispute
resolution.
         (vii)   The video provider's written acknowledgement of its obligation
under Cal. Gov't Code § 53055.1 to provide to new customers a notice describing
the customer service standards specified above in subparagraphs (A) through (F)
at the time of installation or when service is initiated. The notice must also
include, in addition to all of the information described above in subparagraphs
(A) through (F), all of the following:
            (A)   A listing of the services offered by the video provider that
clearly describes all levels of service and the rates for each level of
service.
            (B)   The telephone number or numbers through which customers may
subscribe to, change, or terminate service, request customer service, or seek
general or billing information.
            (C)   A description of the rights and remedies that the video
provider may make available to its customers if the video provider does not
materially meet its customer service standards.
         (viii)   The video provider's written commitment to distribute
annually to its employees and customers, and to the City, a notice describing
the customer service standards specified above in subparagraphs (A) through
(F). This annual notice must include the report of the video provider on its
performance in meeting its customer service standards, as required by Cal.
Gov't Code § 53055.2.
      (4)   Unless a video provider is exempt under federal law from its
payment, a registration fee in an amount established by resolution of the City
Council to cover the reasonable costs incurred by the City in reviewing and
processing the registration form.
      (5)   In addition to the registration fee specified above in subsection
(4), the written commitment of the video provider to pay to the City, when due,
all costs and expenses reasonably incurred by the City in resolving any
disputes between the video provider and its subscribers, which dispute
resolution is mandated by Cal. Gov't Code § 53088.2(o).
(§ 1, Ord. 2833, eff. August 5, 2006)
Article 5. Consumer Protection and Service Standards Applicable to All Video
Providers
Sec. 4-20.37. California Government Code standards.
   (a)   A video provider must comply with all applicable provisions of the
following state statutes:
      (1)   The Cable Television and Video Provider Customer Service and
Information Act (Cal. Gov't Code §§ 53054, et seq.).
      (2)   The Video Customer Service Act (Cal. Gov't Code §§ 53088, et seq.).
   (b)   The customer service obligations imposed upon video providers by the
Video Customer Service Act, Cal. Gov't Code §§ 53088 et seq.) consist of the
following:
      (1)   Every video provider must render reasonably efficient service, make
repairs promptly, and interrupt service only as necessary.
      (2)   All video provider personnel contacting subscribers or potential
subscribers outside the office of the provider must be clearly identified as
associated with the video provider.
      (3)   At the time of installation, and annually thereafter, all video
providers must provide to all customers a written notice of the programming
offered, the prices for that programming, the provider's installation and
customer service policies, and the name, address, and telephone number of the
City's office that is designated for receiving complaints.
      (4)   All video providers must have knowledgeable, qualified company
representatives available to respond to customer telephone inquiries Monday
through Friday, excluding holidays, during normal business hours.
      (5)   All video providers must provide to customers a toll-free or local
telephone number for installation, service, and complaint calls. These calls
must be answered promptly by the video providers.
      (6)   All video providers must render bills that are accurate and
understandable.
      (7)   All video providers must respond promptly to a complete outage in a
customer's service. The response must occur within twenty-four (24) hours of
the reporting of such outage to the provider, except in those situations beyond
the reasonable control of the video provider. A video provider will be deemed
to respond to a complete outage when a company representative arrives at the
outage location within twenty-four (24) hours and begins to resolve the
problem.
      (8)   All video providers must provide a minimum of thirty (30) days'
written notice before increasing rates or deleting channels. All video
providers must make every reasonable effort to submit the notice to the City in
advance of the distribution to customers. The thirty (30)-day notice is waived
if the increases in rates or deletion of channels are outside the control of
the video provider. In those cases, the video provider must make reasonable
efforts to provide customers with as much notice as possible.
      (9)   Every video provider must allow every residential customer who pays
his or her bill directly to the video provider at least fifteen (15) days from
the date the bill for services is mailed to the customer, to pay the listed
charges unless otherwise agreed to pursuant to a residential rental agreement
establishing tenancy. Customer payments must be posted promptly. No video
provider may terminate residential service for nonpayment of a delinquent
account unless the video provider furnishes notice of the delinquency and
impending termination at least fifteen (15) days prior to the proposed
termination. The notice must be mailed, postage prepaid, to the customer to
whom the service is billed. Notice must not be mailed until the sixteenth day
after the date the bill for services was mailed to the customer. The notice of
delinquency and impending termination may be part of a billing statement. No
video provider may assess a late fee any earlier than the twenty-second day
after the bill for service has been mailed.
      (10)   Every notice of termination of service pursuant to the preceding
subsection (9) must include all of the following information:
         (i)   The name and address of the customer whose account is
delinquent.
         (ii)   The amount of the delinquency.
         (iii)   The date by which payment is required in order to avoid
termination of service.
         (iv)   The telephone number of a representative of the video provider
who can provide additional information and handle complaints or initiate an
investigation concerning the service and charges in question.
      (11)   Service may only be terminated on days in which the customer can
reach a representative of the video provider either in person or by telephone.
      (12)   Any service terminated without good cause must be restored without
charge for the service restoration. Good cause includes, but is not limited to,
failure to pay, payment by check for which there are insufficient funds, theft
of service, abuse of equipment or system personnel, or other similar subscriber
actions.
      (13)   All video providers must issue requested refund checks promptly,
but no later than forty-five (45) days following the resolution of any dispute,
and following the return of the equipment supplied by the video provider, if
service is terminated.
      (14)   All video providers must issue security or customer deposit refund
checks promptly, but no later than forty-five (45) days following the
termination of service, less any deductions permitted by law.
      (15)   Video providers must not disclose the name and address of a
subscriber for commercial gain to be used in mailing lists or for other
commercial purposes not reasonably related to the conduct of the businesses of
the video providers or their affiliates, unless the video providers have
provided to the subscriber a notice, separate or included in any other customer
notice, that clearly and conspicuously describes the subscriber's ability to
prohibit the disclosure. Video providers must provide an address and telephone
number for a local subscriber to use without toll charge to prevent disclosure
of the subscriber's name and address.
(§ 1, Ord. 2833, eff. August 5, 2006)
Sec. 4-20.38. Penalties for noncompliance.
   (a)   Purpose. The purpose of this section is to authorize the imposition of
monetary penalties for the violation of the customer service standards
established by §
4-20.37. The imposition of penalties authorized by this section will not
prevent the City or any other affected party from exercising any other remedy
to the extent permitted by law, including but not limited to any judicial
remedy as provided below in subsection (b)(4) of this section.
   (b)   Administration and appeals.
      (1)   The City Manager or the City Manager's designee is authorized to
administer this section. Decisions by the City Manager to assess monetary
penalties against the grantee must be in writing and must contain findings
supporting the decisions. Decisions by the City Manager are final, unless
appealed by the grantee or aggrieved party.
      (2)   If the grantee or any interested person is aggrieved by a decision
of the City Manager, the aggrieved party may, within ten (10) days of the
written decision, appeal that decision in writing to the City Council. The
appeal shall be conducted in accordance with the provisions of OMC §
1-5.08.
      (3)   Schedule of penalties. The following schedule of monetary penalties
may be assessed against the grantee for the material violation of the
provisions of the customer service standards set forth in this section,
provided that the violation is within the reasonable control of the grantee:
         (i)   The maximum penalty for a first material violation is Two
Hundred Dollars ($200.00) for each day of the material violation, not to exceed
Six Hundred Dollars ($600.00) for each occurrence of the material violation.
         (ii)   For a second material violation of the same nature within a
twelve (12)-month period for which the City has provided notice and a penalty
has been assessed, the maximum penalty is Four Hundred Dollars ($400.00) for
each day of the material violation, not to exceed One Thousand Two Hundred
Dollars ($1,200.00) for each occurrence of the material violation.
         (iii)   For a third or further material violation of the same nature
within a twelve (12)-month period for which the City has provided notice and a
penalty has been assessed, the maximum penalty is One Thousand Dollars
($1,000.00) for each day of the material violation, not to exceed Three
Thousand Dollars ($3,000.00) for each occurrence of the material violation.
      (4)   Judicial remedy. This subsection does not preclude any affected
party from pursuing any judicial remedy available to that party without regard
to this section.
      (5)   Notice of violation. The City must give the grantee written notice
of any alleged violation of the consumer service standards and allow the
grantee at least thirty (30) days from receipt of the notice to remedy the
specified violation.
      (6)   Assessment of monetary penalties.
         (i)   If a violation has not been corrected or cured by grantee within
the time specified by the City, the monetary penalties specified above in
subsection (3) above may be assessed from the date of delivery to grantee of
the City's written notice of violation.
         (ii)   In assessing monetary penalties under this section, the City
Manager or the City Council, as applicable, may take into account the nature,
circumstances, extent and gravity of the violation and, with respect to the
grantee, the degree of culpability, any history of prior violations, and such
other matters as may be relevant. If warranted under the circumstances, the
monetary penalty to be assessed may be less than the maximum penalty amount
specified above in subsection (3).
(§ 1, Ord. 2833, eff. August 5, 2006)
Sec. 4-20.39. Verification of compliance with standards.
   Upon thirty (30) days' prior written notice, the City may require a video
provider to provide a written report demonstrating its compliance with any of
the customer service standards specified in §
4-20.37. The video provider must provide sufficient documentation to enable the
City to verify compliance.
(§ 1, Ord. 2833, eff. August 5, 2006)
Sec. 4-20.40. Negative option billing prohibited.
   No charge may be imposed for any service or equipment that the subscriber
has not affirmatively selected. Payment of the regular monthly bill will not by
itself constitute an affirmative selection.
(§ 1, Ord. 2833, eff. August 5, 2006)
Sec. 4-20.41. Billing disputes.
   (a)   In case of a billing dispute, the video provider must respond to a
written complaint from a subscriber within thirty (30) days.
   (b)   At the time of the initial complaint, the video provider shall provide
written or verbal notice to customers that in the event of a billing dispute,
the video provider, upon resolution of the dispute when the video provider is
at fault, shall waive a late fee.
   (c)   Subscribers shall not be charged a late fee or otherwise penalized for
any failure by the video provider, its employees, or contractors, including
failure to timely or correctly bill the subscriber, or failure to properly
credit the subscribers for a payment made in a timely manner.
   (d)   The video provider shall afford each subscriber with a right to
rescind the subscriber's ordering of service within three (3) days after
ordering, provided that such right of rescission shall end upon activation of
the service ordered.
   (e)   The grantee shall assess any late fees in accordance with California
law. In no event shall a late fee exceed the maximum amount permissible under
California law.
(§ 1, Ord. 2833, eff. August 5, 2006)
Sec. 4-20.42. Non-discrimination; Tenant rights.
   (a)   No person, firm or corporation in the existing service area of a video
provider shall be arbitrarily refused service; provided, however, that the
video provider shall not be required to provide service to any subscriber who
does not pay the applicable connection fee or monthly service charge hereby
authorized.
   (b)   It is the City's intent that tenants not be discriminated against in
the ability to subscribe to the video provider services. A video provider shall
be required to provide service to tenants in individual units of a multiple
housing facility with all services offered to other dwelling units within the
video provider's service area within the city, so long as the owner of the
facility consents in writing, if requested by the video provider, to the
following:
      (1)   Video provider's providing the service to units of the facility on
such terms and conditions as are reasonable, provided that:
         (i)   The owner of the facility shall not seek to charge video
provider any fee or consideration for access to the facility or for the right
of providing video provider service to the dwelling units within the facility,
         (ii)   Video provider shall not seek to charge the owner of the
facility any fee or consideration for installing such service other than its
actual costs as provided for herein, and
         (iii)   Such terms and conditions shall be in compliance with
applicable law;
      (2)   Reasonable access to the premises by the video provider for
installation, maintenance, and inspection of the system on the premises;
      (3)   Reasonable conditions promulgated by the video provider to protect
the video provider's equipment and to encourage widespread use of the system;
      (4)   The owner shall not discriminate in rental charges, or otherwise,
between tenants who receive video provider service and those who do not; and
      (5)   The owner shall provide all easements, rights-of-way, and other
rights of access deemed reasonably necessary or appropriate by video provider
for purposes of providing video provider service to the facility.
(§ 1, Ord. 2833, eff. August 5, 2006)
Sec. 4-20.43. Written or oral notice to enter property.
   Under normal operating conditions, a video provider shall provide written or
oral notice, in light of circumstances, prior to entering any private property.
(§ 1, Ord. 2833, eff. August 5, 2006)
Sec. 4-20.44. Customer privacy.
   (a)   A video provider will abide by all customer privacy requirements of
federal and state law. Without limiting the foregoing, at least annually, a
video provider shall provide notice in the form of a separate, written
statement to each subscriber, which clearly and conspicuously informs the
subscriber of:
      (1)   The nature of personally identifiable information collected or to
be collected with respect to the subscriber and the nature of the use of such
information;
      (2)   The nature, frequency and purpose of any disclosure, which may be
made of such information, including the identification of the types of persons
to whom the disclosure may be made;
      (3)   The period during which such information will be maintained by the
video provider;
      (4)   The times and place at which the subscriber may have access to such
information in accordance with federal and state law; and
      (5)   The limitations provided in federal and state law with respect to
the collection and disclosure of information by the video provider and the
right of the subscriber under law.
   (b)   Data collection. A video provider's data collection and dissemination
practices regarding subscribers shall be in compliance with this chapter,
including, without limitation, §
4-20.37(b)(15), and, if applicable, the Cable Act (including § 631).
   (c)   Revealing subscriber preferences.
      (1)   A video provider shall not reveal individual subscriber
preferences, viewing habits, beliefs, philosophy, creeds or religious beliefs
to any third person, firm, agency, governmental unit or investigating agency
without court authority or prior written consent of the subscriber.
      (2)   Such written consent, if given, shall be limited to a period of
time not to exceed one (1) year or a term agreed upon by the video provider and
subscriber.
      (3)   A video provider shall not condition the delivery or receipt of
services to any subscriber on any such consent.
      (4)   Such a subscriber may revoke without penalty or cost any consent
previously made by delivering to the video provider in writing a substantial
indication of his or her intent to so revoke.
   (d)   Other persons affected. This section, except the written notice
requirements of subsection (a) of this section, shall apply to all of the
following, to the extent they have access to subscriber information, as well as
to any video provider:
      (1)   Officers, directors, employees and agents of the video provider;
      (2)   General and limited partners of the video provider;
      (3)   Any person or combination of persons owning, holding or controlling
five percent (5%) or more of any corporate stock or other ownership interest of
the video provider;
      (4)   Any affiliated or subsidiary entity owned or controlled by the
video provider, or in which any officer, director, stockholder, general or
limited partner or person or group of persons owning, holding or controlling
any ownership interest in the video provider, shall own, hold or control five
percent (5%) or more of any corporate stock or other ownership interest;
      (5)   Any person, firm or corporation acting or serving in the capability
of holding or controlling company of the video provider.
(§ 1, Ord. 2833, eff. August 5, 2006)
CHAPTER 20A: STATE VIDEO SERVICE FRANCHISES
4-20.50   Purpose
4-20.51   Rights reserved
4-20.52   Compliance with chapter
4-20.53   Definitions
4-20.54   State franchise fees
4-20.55   PEG fees
4-20.56   Payment of fees
4-20.57   Audits
4-20.58   Late payments
4-20.59   Lease of City-owned network
4-20.60   Customer service and consumer protection standards
4-20.61   Penalties for violations of standards
4-20.62   Construction in the public rights-of- way
4-20.63   Permits
4-20.64   Participation with other utilities
4-20.65   Underground services alert
4-20.66   Emergency alert systems
4-20.67   Interconnection for PEG programming
4-20.68   Notices
Sec. 4-20.50. Purpose.
   This Chapter 20A is applicable to all video service providers who are
eligible for, and have been awarded, a state video franchise under the Cal.
Public Utilities Code §§ 5800 et seq., (the Digital Infrastructure and Video
Competition Act of 2006), to provide cable or video services in any portion of
the City.
(§ 2, Ord. 3035, eff. December 31, 2015)
Sec. 4-20.51. Rights reserved.
   The rights reserved to the City under this chapter, are in addition to all
other rights of the City whether reserved by this chapter, or authorized by
other applicable law, and no action, proceeding or exercise of a right shall
affect any other rights which may be held by the City.
(§ 2, Ord. 3035, eff. December 31, 2015)
Sec. 4-20.52. Compliance with chapter.
   Nothing contained in this chapter exempts a state franchise holder from
compliance with all ordinances, rules or regulations of the City now in effect
or which may be hereafter adopted which are not inconsistent with this chapter
or Cal. Public Utilities Code §§ 5800 et seq., or obligations under any
franchise previously issued by the City, insofar as those may be enforced under
Cal. Public Utilities Code § 5800.
(§ 2, Ord. 3035, eff. December 31, 2015)
Sec. 4-20.53. Definitions.
   For purposes of this chapter, the following terms, phrases, words and their
derivations shall have the meaning given herein. Unless otherwise expressly
stated, words not defined in this chapter, including but not limited to “gross
revenue,” “cable service,” “video service provider” and “video service” shall
be given the meaning as set forth in
Title 1, Chapter 3, Section
1-3.13 of this Code or in the Digital Infrastructure and Video Competition Act
of 2006, Cal. Public Utilities Code §§ 5800 et seq., as amended from time to
time.
   “Applicant” means any person submitting any application required under the
Cal. Public Utilities Code §§ 5800 et seq.
   “Applicable law” means all lawfully enacted and applicable federal, state
and City laws, ordinances, codes, rules, regulations and orders as the same may
be amended or adopted from time to time.
   “City Engineer” means the City Engineer or his or her designee.
   “City Manager” means the City Manager of the City or his or her duly
authorized designee.
   “Construction,” and similar formulations of that term mean the named actions
interpreted broadly, encompassing, among other things, installation, extension,
maintenance, replacement of components, relocation, undergrounding, grading,
site preparation, adjusting, testing, make-ready, excavation and tree trimming.
   “DIVCA” means the Digital Infrastructure and Video Competition Act of 2006,
Cal. Public Utilities Code §§ 5800 et seq., as may be amended from time to
time.
   “PEG” means public, educational, or governmental access.
   “State franchise” means a franchise issued by the California Public
Utilities Commission to provide cable service or video service, as those terms
are defined in DIVCA, within any portion of the City.
   “State franchise holder” means a person who holds a state franchise.
   “Subscriber” means the City or any person who legally receives any cable
service or video service from a state franchise holder delivered over that
state franchise holder’s network.
(§ 2, Ord. 3035, eff. December 31, 2015)
Sec. 4-20.54. State franchise fees.
   A.   Any state franchise holder operating within the City shall pay to the
City a state franchise fee equal to five percent (5%) of the gross revenues of
it, or any affiliate, that is subject to a franchise fee under Cal. Public
Utilities Code § 5860.
   B.   The City Manager shall promptly send any state franchise holder that
notifies the City that it intends to provide video service in the City a copy
of this chapter and a notice designating the person to whom the state franchise
fee payments should be made.
(§ 2, Ord. 3035, eff. December 31, 2015)
Sec. 4-20.55. PEG fees.
   A.   Every state franchise holder operating within the boundaries of the
City shall pay a PEG fee in the amount of one percent (1%) of the state
franchise holder’s gross revenues.
   B.   To the extent reauthorization is required by law, this chapter,
including the PEG fee in the amount of one percent (1%) of the state franchise
holder’s gross revenues, is automatically reauthorized as to each affected
state video franchise holder upon the expiration of any state franchise. Any
and all reauthorizations shall be effective for so long as such reauthorization
is required by law.
(§ 2, Ord. 3035, eff. December 31, 2015 as amended by § 4, Ord. 3091, eff.
April 19, 2018)
Sec. 4-20.56. Payment of fees.
   The state franchise fee required pursuant to §
4-20.54, and the PEG fee required pursuant to §
4-20.55, shall each be paid to the City quarterly, in a manner consistent with
Cal. Public Utilities Code § 5860. The state franchise holder shall deliver to
the City, by check or other means specified by the City, a payment for the
state franchise fee and a separate payment for the PEG fee not later than
forty-five (45) days after the end of each calendar quarter. Each payment made
shall be accompanied by a summary explaining the basis for the state franchise
fees, containing such information as the City Manager may require consistent
with DIVCA.
(§ 2, Ord. 3035, eff. December 31, 2015)
Sec. 4-20.57. Audits.
   The City may audit the business records of the holder of a state franchise
in a manner consistent with Cal. Public Utilities Code § 5860(i).
(§ 2, Ord. 3035, eff. December 31, 2015)
Sec. 4-20.58. Late payments.
   In the event a state franchise holder fails to make payments required by
this chapter on or before the due dates specified in this chapter, the City
shall impose a late charge at the rate per year equal to the highest prime
lending rate during the period of delinquency, plus one percent (1%).
(§ 2, Ord. 3035, eff. December 31, 2015)
Sec. 4-20.59. Lease of City-owned network.
   In the event a state franchise holder leases access to a network owned by
the City, the City may set a franchise fee for access to the City-owned network
separate and apart from the franchise fee charged as rent or a toll to state
franchise holders for use of the City’s rights-of-way pursuant to §
4-20.54, which fee shall otherwise be payable in accordance with the procedures
established by this chapter.
(§ 2, Ord. 3035, eff. December 31, 2015)
Sec. 4-20.60. Customer service and consumer protection standards.
   Each state franchise holder shall comply with all applicable customer
service and consumer protection standards to the extent consistent with Cal.
Public Utilities Code § 5900, including, but not limited to, all existing and
subsequently enacted customer service and consumer protection standards
established by state and federal law and regulation pertaining to the provision
of video service.
(§ 2, Ord. 3035, eff. December 31, 2015)
Sec. 4-20.61. Penalties for violations of standards.
   A.   The City shall enforce the provisions of Code §
4-20.60.
   B.   The local entity shall give the video service provider written notice
of any alleged material breach of the customer service standards and allow the
video provider at least 30 days from receipt of the notice to remedy the
specified material breach.
   C.   For material breaches, as defined in Cal. Public Utilities Code § 5900,
by a state franchise holder of applicable customer service and consumer
protection standards, the City may impose the following penalties:
      1.   For the first occurrence of a material breach, a fine of $500.00 may
be imposed for each day the violation remains in effect, not to exceed
$1,500.00 for each violation.
      2.   For a second material breach of the same nature within 12 months, a
fine of $1,000.00 may be imposed for each day the violation remains in effect,
not to exceed $3,000.00 for each violation.
      3.   For a third material breach of the same nature within 12 months, a
fine of $2,500.00 may be imposed for each day the violation remains in effect,
not to exceed $7,500.00 for each violation.
   D.   Any penalties imposed by the City shall be imposed in a manner
consistent with Cal. Public Utilities Code § 5900.
   E.   The City Manager is authorized to provide any notices required under
Cal. Public Utilities Code § 5900. The City Manager may coordinate with the
Division of Ratepayer Advocate to protect consumers in the City.
   F.   A state video franchise holder may appeal a penalty assessed by the
City Manager to the City Council within sixty (60) days of the initial
assessment. The City Council shall hear the matter consistent with the
provisions contained in Chapter 4 of Title 1 of this Municipal Code.
(§ 2, Ord. 3035, eff. December 31, 2015)
Sec. 4-20.62. Construction in the public rights-of-way.
   Except as expressly provided in this chapter, the provisions of Chapters 3,
5, 6, and 7 of Title 7 of this Code, and all City administrative rules and
regulations developed pursuant to Chapters 3, 5, 6, and 7 of Title 7, as now
existing or as hereafter amended, shall apply to all work performed by or on
behalf of a state franchise holder in any public rights-of-way.
(§ 2, Ord. 3035, eff. December 31, 2015)
Sec. 4-20.63. Permits.
   A.   Prior to commencing any work for which a permit is required by
Chapter 3 of Title 7  of this Code, a state franchise holder shall apply for
and obtain a permit in accordance with the provisions of
Chapter 3 of Title 7 . A permit application is complete when the state
franchise holder has complied with all applicable laws and regulations,
including but not limited to all City administrative rules and regulations, and
all applicable requirements of Division 13 of the Cal. Public Resources Code §§
21000 et seq., (the California Environmental Quality Act) and preparation of
plans and specifications as required by the City Engineer.
   B.   The City Engineer shall, in the exercise of reasonable discretion as
permitted by state law, either approve or deny a state franchise holder’s
application for any permit required under
Chapter 3 of Title 7 within sixty (60) days of receiving a complete permit
application from the state franchise holder.
   C.   If the City Engineer denies a state franchise holder’s application for
a permit, the City Engineer shall, at the time of notifying the applicant of
denial, furnish to the applicant a detailed explanation of the reason or
reasons for the denial.
   D.   A state franchise holder that has been denied a permit by final
decision of the City Engineer may appeal to the City Council with the time
frame set forth and consistent with the provisions contained in §
7-3.06 of this Municipal Code. The City Engineer shall transmit to the Council
all maps, diagrams, records, papers, and files that constitute the record in
the action from which the appeal was taken.
   E.   The issuance of a permit under
Chapter 3 of Title 7 of this Code is not a franchise, and does not grant any
vested rights in any location in the public rights of way, or in any particular
manner of placement within the rights of way. A permit to place cabinets and
similar appurtenances aboveground may be revoked and the permittee required to
place facilities underground, upon reasonable notice to the permittee.
(§ 2, Ord. 3035, eff. December 31, 2015)
Sec. 4-20.64. Participation with other utilities.
   Each state franchise holder shall cooperate in the planning, locating and
construction of its network in utility joint trenches or common duct banks with
other communications providers.
(§ 2, Ord. 3035, eff. December 31, 2015)
Sec. 4-20.65. Underground services alert.
   Each state franchise holder shall be a member of the regional notification
center for subsurface installations (underground services alert) and shall
field mark, at its sole cost and expense, the locations of its underground
network facilities upon notification in accordance with the requirements of §
4216 of the Cal. Government Code, and any other applicable law.
(§ 2, Ord. 3035, eff. December 31, 2015)
Sec. 4-20.66. Emergency alert systems.
   Each state franchise holder shall comply with the emergency alert system
requirements of the Federal Communications Commission in order that emergency
messages may be distributed over the state franchise holder’s network.
(§ 2, Ord. 3035, eff. December 31, 2015)
Sec. 4-20.67. Interconnection for PEG programming.
   Each state franchise holder, and each incumbent cable operator, shall
negotiate in good faith to interconnect their networks for the purpose of
providing PEG programming. Interconnection may be accomplished by any means
authorized under Public Utilities Code § 5870(h). Each state franchise holder
and incumbent cable operator shall provide interconnection of PEG channels on
reasonable terms and conditions and may not withhold the interconnection. If a
state franchise holder and an incumbent cable operator cannot reach a mutually
acceptable interconnection agreement, the City may require the incumbent cable
operator to allow the state franchise holder to interconnect its network with
the incumbent cable operator’s network at a technically feasible point on the
state franchise holder’s network as identified by the state franchise holder.
If no technically feasible point for interconnection is available, each state
franchise holder will make an interconnection available to each channel
originator providing PEG programming to an incumbent cable operator, and will
provide the facilities necessary for the interconnection. The cost of any
interconnection will be borne by the state franchise holder requesting the
interconnection unless otherwise agreed to by the state franchise holder and
the incumbent cable operator.
(§ 2, Ord. 3035, eff. December 31, 2015)
Sec. 4-20.68. Notices.
   A.   Each state franchise holder or applicant for a state franchise shall
file with the City a copy of all applications or notices that the state
franchise holder or applicant is required to provide to the City under DIVCA.
   B.   Unless otherwise specified in this chapter, all notices or other
documentation that a state franchise holder is required to provide to the City
under this chapter or the California Public Utilities Code shall be provided to
the City Manager.
(§ 2, Ord. 3035, eff. December 31, 2015)
CHAPTER 21: FIREWORKS, PYROTECHNIC DEVICES, EXPLOSIVES, DESTRUCTIVE DEVICES OR
THEIR COMPONENTS
   
4-21.01   Definitions
   
4-21.02   Prohibitions
   
4-21.03   Responsible persons–Violations occurring on real property
   
4-21.04   Responsible persons–Parental responsibilities
   
4-21.05   Administrative fines
   
4-21.06   Dangerous fireworks–Additional costs
Sec. 4-21.01. Definitions.
   (a)   “Explosives” and “Destructive Devices” shall include any items listed
as such in: Articles 2 and 77 of the Cal. Fire Code; § 12000 of the Cal. Health
& Safety Code; and § 12301 of the Cal. Penal Code. These items include, but are
not limited to, the following:
      (1)   Bombs, grenades, explosive missiles, firecracker-type devices
containing fifty (50) mg or more of pyrotechnic/explosive composition.
      (2)   Detonators and blasting caps.
      (3)   Firebombs consisting of an ignitable liquid, breakable container
and a wick or similar device capable of being ignited.
      (4)   Homemade destructive devices including pipe bombs, chemical bombs,
acid bombs, dry ice bombs, etc.
      (5)   Military explosives and explosive devices such as grenades, mines,
rockets, missiles, detonation cord.
      (6)   Components to construct or manufacture explosives or destructive
devices, including explosives, gunpowder/propellant, pyrotechnic compositions
and fuses.
   (b)   “Fireworks” and “Pyrotechnic Devices” shall mean any items or
materials listed as such in: Articles 2 and 78 of the Cal. Fire Code; §§ 12500
through 12726 of the Cal. Health & Safety Code; and Chapter 6 of the Cal. Code
of Regulations. These items include, but are not limited to, the following:
      (1)   ‘Dangerous fireworks’ as that term is defined by § 12505 of the
Cal. Health & Safety Code, which includes, but is not limited to, the
following: firecrackers, rockets, skyrockets, Roman candles, and torpedoes
among others.
      (2)   ‘Safe and sane fireworks’ as that term is defined by § 12529 of the
Cal. Health & Safety Code, which includes, but is not limited to, the
following: cones; fountains; smoke bombs; and “Piccolo-Pete” type fountains/
cones among others.
      (3)   Homemade fireworks or pyrotechnic devices that are constructed
using pyrotechnic compositions/filler with the intent to explode or burn,
including fireworks kits and components to construct fireworks or pyrotechnic
devices.
      (4)   Military pyrotechnic devices, such as smoke signals and signal
flares.
      (5)   Components to construct or manufacture fireworks or pyrotechnic
devices including explosives, gunpowder/propellant, pyrotechnic compositions
and fuses.
   (c)   “Person” means a natural person, legal entity (such as a partnership,
corporation, or joint venture), or any other entity of any nature.
   (d)   “Responsible person” means a person who causes a violation of this
chapter to occur or allows a violation to exist or continue, by his or her
action or failure to act, or whose agent, employee or independent contractor
causes a violation to occur, or allows a violation to exist or continue.
   (e)   “Use” shall include the acts of lighting, discharging, displaying, or
attempting to do any of these.
(§ 1, Ord. 2859, eff. May 31, 2007, amended by § 2, Ord. 3029, eff. November
19, 2015)
Sec. 4-21.02. Prohibitions.
   (a)   Any violation of this chapter is punishable as a misdemeanor. All
provisions of
Chapter 2 of Title 1 of this Code shall apply to this chapter unless
contradicted by the specific provisions of this chapter. Responsible persons
are considered in violation of this chapter to the same extent as if they
committed the violation themselves.
   (b)   No person may use fireworks, pyrotechnic devices, explosives,
destructive devices, or the components of fireworks, pyrotechnic devices,
explosives, or dangerous devices, without a permit issued by the Fire
Department, in any location in the City.
   (c)   No person may possess, store, manufacture, or grant permission to
store fireworks, pyrotechnic devices, explosives, destructive devices, or the
components of fireworks, pyrotechnic devices, explosives, or destructive
devices, without a permit issued by the Fire Department, in any location in the
City.
   (d)   The failure of any person to comply with any permit conditions or
requirements imposed by the Fire Department for the possession, use, storage or
manufacture of fireworks, pyrotechnic devices, explosives, destructive devices,
or the components of fireworks, pyrotechnic devices, explosives, or destructive
devices is prohibited.
(§ 1, Ord. 2859, eff. May 31, 2007, amended by § 2, Ord. 3029, eff. November
19, 2015)
Sec. 4-21.03. Responsible Persons–Violations Occurring on Real Property.
   (a)   There is a rebuttable presumption that the record owner of a
residential parcel, as shown on the County’s latest equalized property taxes
assessment rolls, and lessee of a residential parcel has a notice of any
violation existing on said property. As such, these individuals shall be
treated as responsible persons for all violations of this chapter occurring on
their real property.
   (b)   For purposes of this chapter, there may be more than one responsible
person for a violation.
(§ 2, Ord. 3029, eff. November 19, 2015)
Sec. 4-21.04. Responsible persons–Parental responsibilities.
   (a)   Every parent, guardian or other person, having the legal care, custody
or control of any person under the age of 18 years, who knows or reasonably
should know that a minor is in violation of this chapter, may be issued a
citation in accordance with the provisions of this chapter, in addition to any
citation that may be issued to the offending minor.
(§ 2, Ord. 3029, eff. November 19, 2015)
Sec. 4-21.05. Administrative fines.
   (a)   In addition to any other remedy available at law, any person in
violation of this chapter is subject to an administrative fine in the amount of
One Thousand Dollars ($1,000.00).
   (b)   The provisions and procedures concerning administrative citations set
forth in
Chapter 5 of Title 1 of the Ontario Municipal Code shall apply to
administrative citations issued for violations of this chapter. A violation of
this chapter shall constitute a “transient” violation within the meaning of
that chapter. To the extent there are any conflicts between the provisions of
the two chapters, the provisions of this chapter shall supersede and control
administrative citations issued for violations of this chapter.
(§ 1, Ord. 2859, eff. May 31, 2007, amended by § 2, Ord. 3029, eff. November
19, 2015)
Sec. 4-21.06. Dangerous fireworks–Additional costs.
   (a)   Where dangerous fireworks are involved, to the extent this chapter is
subject to § 12557 of the Cal. Health & Safety Code, this chapter shall apply
only to the seizure of 25 pounds or less of such fireworks. In such cases, in
addition to the administrative fines set forth above, violators will be subject
to an additional fine to reimburse the Office of the State Fire Marshal for the
cost of transportation and disposal of the seized fireworks. In such cases, the
citation for the violation of this chapter will indicate that the violator may
be responsible for such additional costs. Fines collected in connection with
this procedure shall not be subject to § 12706 of the Cal. Health & Safety
Code.
(§ 2, Ord. 3029, eff. November 19, 2015)
CHAPTER 22 – PROHIBITIONS AGAINST CONSUMPTION OF ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES BY MINORS
AND ALLOWING OR HOSTING GATHERINGS WHERE UNSUPERVISED MINORS ARE CONSUMING
ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES
   
4-22.01   Purpose
   
4-22.02   Definitions
   
4-22.03   Consumption of alcoholic beverage by minors prohibited in public
place, place open to public, or place not open to public
   
4-22.04   Hosting, permitting, allowing a gathering where minors consuming
alcoholic beverages prohibited
   
4-22.05   Violation; Penalty for hosting, permitting, allowing a gathering
where minors consuming alcoholic beverages prohibited
Sec. 4-22.01 Purpose.
   The purpose of this chapter is to address the problems identified in herein
and protect the public health, safety and general welfare by enhancing the
enforcement of laws prohibiting the consumption of alcohol by minors and
reducing the costs of providing police services to parties, gatherings, or
events requiring a response, by requiring hosts to ensure minors are not
consuming alcoholic beverages.
(§ 2, Ord. 2889, eff. March 6, 2008)
Sec. 4-22.02 Definitions.
   As used in this chapter, specific words and phrases are defined as follows:
   (a)   "Alcohol" shall have the same meaning is in Cal. Business &
Professions Code § 23003 or any successor section.
   (b)   "Alcoholic beverage" shall have the same meaning is in Cal. Business &
Professions Code § 23004 or any successor section.
   (c)   "Gathering" means a group of persons who have assembled or are
assembling for a social occasion social activity.
   (d)   "Guardian" means:
      (1)   A person who, under court order, is the guardian of the person of a
minor; or
      (2)   A public or private agency with whom a minor has been placed by the
court.
   (e)   "Minor" means any person under twenty-one (21) years of age.
   (f)   "Parent" means a person who is a natural parent, adoptive parent, or
step-parent of another person.
   (g)   "Premises" means any residence or other private property, individual
unit or place, including any commercial or business premises.
   (h)   "Public place" means any place to which the public or a substantial
group of the public has access and includes, but is not limited to, streets,
highways, and the common areas of schools, hospitals, apartment houses, office
buildings, transport facilities and shops.
(§ 2, Ord. 2889, eff. March 6, 2008)
Sec. 4-22.03 Consumption of alcoholic beverage by minors prohibited in public
place, place open to public, or place not open to public.
   Except as permitted by state law, it is unlawful for any minor to:
   (a)   Consume at any public place or any place open to the public any
alcoholic beverage; or
   (b)   Consume at any place not open to the public any alcoholic beverage,
unless in connection with the consumption of the alcoholic beverage that minor
is being supervised by his or her parent or legal guardian.
(§ 2, Ord. 2889, eff. March 6, 2008)
Sec. 4-22.04 Hosting, permitting, allowing a gathering where minors consuming
alcoholic beverages prohibited.
   (a)   Except as permitted by state law, it is unlawful for any person to
permit, allow, or host a gathering at his or her place of residence or other
private property, public place, or any other premises under his or her control
where alcoholic beverages have been consumed by a minor, if such person either
knows or reasonably should know that a minor has consumed an alcoholic
beverage.
   (b)   A person who permits, allows or hosts a gathering shall be deemed to
have actual or constructive knowledge that a minor has consumed alcoholic
beverages if the person has not taken all reasonable steps prevent the
consumption of alcoholic beverages by minors as set forth in subdivision (f)
below.
   (c)   Any person who permits, allows or hosts a gathering shall be
rebuttably presumed to have actual or constructive knowledge that minors have
consumed alcoholic beverages if such person is present at the premises of the
gathering at the time any minor consumes an alcoholic beverage.
   (d)   This section shall not apply if all minors who are consuming an
alcoholic beverage are being supervised by their parents or guardians.
   (e)   This section shall not apply to any location or place regulated by the
California Department of Alcohol and Beverage Control.
   (f)   It is the duty of any person who permits, allows or hosts a gathering
at his or her place of residence other private property, public place, or any
other premises under his or her control, where minors will be present, to take
all reasonable steps to prevent the consumption of alcoholic beverages by any
minor at the gathering. Reasonable steps are controlling access to alcoholic
beverages at the gathering, controlling the quantity of alcoholic beverages at
the gathering, verifying the age of persons attending the gathering by
inspecting drivers licenses or other government-issued identification cards to
ensure that minors do not consume alcoholic beverages at the gathering,
monitoring the activities of persons at the gathering, and monitoring the
conduct of minors at the gathering.
   (g)   A person who hosts a gathering shall not be in violation of this
chapter if he or she seeks assistance from the Police Department or other law
enforcement agency to remove any person who refuses to abide by the host's
performance of the duties imposed by this chapter, or terminate the gathering
because the host has been unable to prevent minors from consuming alcoholic
beverages despite having taken all reasonable steps to do so, as long as such
request is made before any other person makes a complaint about the gathering.
(§ 2, Ord. 2889, eff. March 6, 2008)
Sec. 4-22.05 Violation; Penalty for hosting, permitting, allowing a gathering
where minors consuming alcoholic beverages prohibited.
   (a)   Violation of this chapter is either an infraction or misdemeanor in
the discretion of the citing officer, City Prosecutor, or City Attorney's
Office, punishable as set forth in OMC §
1-2.01. Violations of this chapter may be charged as either infractions or
misdemeanors in the discretion of the citing officer, City Prosecutor, or City
Attorney's Office.
   (b)   Civil penalties shall be no less than Two Hundred Fifty Dollars
($250.00) for the first violation, Five Hundred Dollars ($500.00) for the
second violation and One Thousand Dollars ($1,000.00) for each subsequent
violation by the same person occurring within one (1) year of the first
violation.
   (c)   Nothing in this chapter in any way limits any other remedy that may be
available to the City, or any penalty that may be imposed by the City.
(§ 2, Ord. 2889, eff. March 6, 2008)
CHAPTER 23: REGULATION OF REGISTERED SEX OFFENDERS
   
4-23.01   Purpose
   
4-23.02   Definitions
   
4-23.03   Prohibitions
   
4-23.04   Penalties
Sec. 4-23.01 Purpose.
   The City of Ontario desires to impose safety precautions in furtherance of
the compelling interest of protecting children from registered sex offenders by
restricting where sex offenders’ may reside. The City Council finds that sex
offenders pose a clear threat to the children residing in or visiting the
community. It is the intent of these restrictions to reduce the threat that sex
offenders pose to these children by limiting the ability of sex offenders to be
in contact with these children. This chapter is not intended to conflict with,
but to supplement, state law by imposing more stringent restrictions on the
locations where sex offenders may reside.
(§ 1, Ord. 2941, eff. November 18, 2011, § 2, Ord. 3003, eff. January 1, 2015)
Sec. 4-23.02 Definitions.
   For the purposes of this chapter, the City Council established and defined
locations prohibited from registered sex offenders as those that are primarily
dedicated to providing programs to children. The following definitions shall
apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning:
   (a)   “Child” or “children”. Any person under the age of eighteen (18) years
of age.
   (b)   “Day care center”. Any licensed child day care facility including
infant centers, preschools, extended day care facilities, and school-age child
care centers. It does not include a family day care home as defined in Health
and Safety Code Section 1596.78.
   (c)   “Park or Playground”. Means one of the following:
      (1)   Any land, including improvements to the land that is administered,
operated or managed by the City of Ontario and/or any private home owners group
for use by the public as a recreational area.
      (2)   City recreational areas include, but are not limited to,
conservation area, jogging trail, hiking trail, bicycle trail, recreational
center, water park, swimming pool, soccer field or baseball field.
      (3)   Any areas owned, leased, controlled, maintained, or managed by a
public entity which are open to the public where children regularly gather and
which provide recreational, cultural, and/or community service activities,
including but not limited to public parks, playgrounds, playfields, athletic
courts or fields, and amusement centers.
   (d)   “Permanent residence”. A place where the person abides, lodges or
resides for fourteen (14) or more consecutive days.
   (e)   “Registered sex offender”. An individual who is required by law to
register with a governmental entity as a sex offender as a result of a
conviction, or placed on deferred adjudication, of any specified sex offense
outlined in California Penal Code 290.
       (1)   It shall be prima facie evidence that this chapter applies to such
a person if that person’s recordappears in/on the Department of Justice Sex
Offender Tracking Program Database.
   (f)   “School”. The buildings and grounds of any public or private school
used for purposes of the education of children in kindergarten or any grades
one (1) to twelve (12), inclusive.
   (g)   “Temporary Residence”. A place where a person abides, lodges or
resides for a period of fourteen (14) or more days in the aggregate, during any
calendar year which is not the person’s permanent address; or a place where the
person routinely abides, lodges or resides for a period of four (4) or more
consecutive or nonconsecutive days in any month and which is not the person’s
permanent residence.
(§ 1, Ord. 2941, eff. November 18, 2011, § 2, Ord. 3003, eff. January 1, 2015)
Sec. 4-23.03 Prohibitions.
   (a)   Any registered sex offender is prohibited from residing within two
thousand (2,000) feet of any school, park or day care center. The two thousand
(2,000) feet residence prohibition shall not apply to a registered sex offender
who is registered with a governmental agency as residing at an address within
two thousand (2,000) feet from a school, park or day care center prior to
initial operation of the child care center, park or school and/ or on the
initial effective date of this Chapter (i.e., November 18, 2011).
   (b)   Any registered sex offender is prohibited from living in single family
dwellings, multi-family dwellings, duplex dwelling, multi-unit residential
dwellings, or hotel/motel/inns where another sex offender already resides. This
prohibition does not apply under the following condition(s):
      (1)   State Parole has mandated placement of said registered sex offender
in a state housing facility that houses multiple sex offenders at one time to
include any prison or mental health facility.
      (2)   Registered sex offenders reside together as they are related by
blood, marriage or adoption.
   (c)   Sex offenders may not rent or otherwise occupy a single-family
dwelling or any unit in a multi-family dwelling as a temporary resident. This
prohibition does not apply under the following condition:
      (1)   State Parole has mandated placement of said registered sex offender
in a state housing/boarding facility on a temporary housing status.
   (d)   A registered sex offender shall not, on October 31st (or any other
date set by the City of Ontario for trick-or-treaters) between the hours of 4:
00 p.m. and 12:00 a.m., leave an exterior porch light, which faces the street,
on or otherwise invite trick-or-treaters to solicit the premises in which the
sex registrant resides.
   (e)   For the purposes of this Chapter, distances shall be measured from the
edge of the parcel or contiguous parcels where the identified use is located.
(§ 1, Ord. 2941, eff. November 18, 2011, § 2, Ord. 3003, eff. January 1, 2015)
Sec. 4-23.04 Penalties.
   Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall be guilty
of a misdemeanor, and upon conviction thereof, the penalty shall be a fine of
not more than one thousand dollars ($1,000) or imprisonment in the county jail
for a period of not more than six (6) months or by both such fine and
imprisonment. Other penalties set forth in the California Penal Code and/or
Municipal Code may also be applicable.
(§ 1, Ord. 2941, eff. November 18, 2011, § 2, Ord. 3003, eff. January 1, 2015)
CHAPTER 24: UNLAWFUL POSSESSION OF A
CATALYTIC CONVERTER PROHIBITED
   
4-24.01   Unlawful possession of a catalytic converter prohibited
   
4-24.02   Definitions
   
4-24.03   Violations; misdemeanor
Sec. 4-24.01 Unlawful possession of a catalytic converter prohibited.
   (a)   It shall be unlawful to possess any catalytic converter that is not
attached to a vehicle, unless the possessor has valid documentation or other
proof to verify that they are in lawful possession of the catalytic converter.
   (b)   It is unlawful for any person to falsify or cause to be falsified any
information in any documentation or other proof intended to show valid proof of
ownership or possession of a catalytic converter.
(§ 3, Ord. 3237, eff. January 19, 2023)
Sec. 4-24.02 Definitions.
   (a)   For purposes of this section, "lawful possession" includes (1) being
the lawful owner of the catalytic converter or (2) in possession of the
catalytic converter with the lawful owner's written consent. It is not required
to prove the catalytic converter was stolen to establish the possession is not
a "lawful possession."
   (b)   For purposes of this section, "documentation or other proof" means
written document(s) that clearly identify the vehicle from which the catalytic
converter originated based on the totality of the circumstances, and includes,
but is not limited to, the following types of documents:
      (1)   Bill of sale from the original owner with the signature of the
vehicle owner authorizing removal of the catalytic converter, as well as the
name, address, and telephone number of the vehicle owner.
      (2)   Documentation from an auto-body shop or similar business proving
that the owner relinquished the catalytic converter to the auto-body shop or
similar business.
      (3)   Verifiable electronic communication from the previous owner to the
possessor relinquishing ownership of the catalytic converter.
      (4)   Photographs of the vehicle from which the catalytic converter
originated clearly showing the license plate number and vehicle identification
number (VIN) of the car from which the catalytic converter was removed.
(§ 3, Ord. 3237, eff. January 19, 2023)
Sec. 4-24.03 Violations; misdemeanor.
   (a)   Each and every violation of this section shall constitute a separate
violation and shall be subject to all remedies and enforcement measures
authorized by the Ontario Municipal Code. Each and every catalytic converter
unlawfully possessed is a separate violation of this section.
   (b)   It is unlawful and a misdemeanor subject to punishment in accordance
with
Chapter 1-2.01 of Title 1 of this Code, for any person to violate any provision
of this section.
   (c)   The remedies provided herein are not to be construed as exclusive
remedies. The City is authorized to pursue any proceedings or remedies provided
by law.
(§ 3, Ord. 3237, eff. January 19, 2023)
TITLE 5. PUBLIC WELFARE, MORALS AND CONDUCT
      Chapter
         
1.   ADVERTISING DISTRIBUTION
         
2.   AUCTION SALES (REPEALED)
         
3.   COMIC BOOKS AND OBSCENE PUBLICATIONS (REPEALED)
         
4.   DANCE HALLS, DANCING CLUBS, AND BALLROOMS
         
5.   GAMBLING
         
6.   REGULATIONS OF PERSONAL PROPERTY, SECONDHAND DEALERS, AND PAWNBROKERS
         
7.   CURFEW AND DAYTIME LOITERING
         
8.   PINBALL GAMES AND SIMILAR AMUSEMENT MACHINES (REPEALED)
         
9.   TRESPASSING
         
10.   WEAPONS
         
11.   MISCELLANEOUS OFFENSES
         
12.   ABATEMENT AND REMOVAL OF ABANDONED, WRECKED, DISMANTLED, AND INOPERATIVE
VEHICLES
         
13.   SECURITY PROVISIONS FOR CAR LOTS (REPEALED)
         
14.   REMOVAL OF IGNITION KEYS FROM UNATTENDED MOTOR VEHICLES
         
15.   YARD SALES
         
16.   REGULATION AND LICENSING OF FESTIVALS
         
17.   PROHIBITION AGAINST CERTAIN OBNOXIOUS NUDE CONDUCT (REPEALED)
         
18.   BINGO FOR CHARITY
         
18A.   REMOTE CALLER BINGO
         
19.   RETAIL GROCERY ITEM PRICE MARKING
         
20.   PICTURE ARCADES
         
21.   MOBILE HOME RENT REGULATIONS (REPEALED)
         
22.   PROPERTY APPEARANCE - NUISANCE
         
23.   CAMPING AND STORAGE OF PERSONAL PROPERTY
         
24.   REGULATION OF PUBLIC LODGING FACILITIES
         
25.   SHOPPING CART REGULATIONS
         
26.   TEMPORARY STREET CLOSURES DUE TO CONTINUING CRIMINAL ACTIVITY
         
27.   SEIZURE AND FORFEITURE OF VEHICLES USED TO SOLICIT PROSTITUTION, ACQUIRE
OR ATTEMPT TO ACQUIRE CONTROLLED SUBSTANCES (REPEALED)
         
28.   SEIZURE AND FORFEITURE OF VEHICLES USED TO PARTICIPATE IN MOTOR VEHICLE
SPEED CONTESTS (REPEALED)
         
29.   NOISE
         
30.   ABANDONED PROPERTY REGISTRATION
         
31.   SIDEWALK VENDING
         
32.   CITY LIBRARIES, MUSEUM OF HISTORY AND ART, AND RECREATION AND COMMUNITY
SERVICES COMMUNITY FACILITIES RULES
         
33.   PUBLIC ART PROGRAM
CHAPTER 1: ADVERTISING DISTRIBUTION
   
5-1.01   Definitions
   
5-1.02   Purposes of provisions
   
5-1.03   Interpretation of provisions
   
5-1.04   Exceptions to provisions
   
5-1.05   Compliance with provisions
   
5-1.06   Licenses: Required: Exception
   
5-1.07   Licenses: Applications: Form
   
5-1.08   Reserved
   
5-1.09   Licenses: Nontransferable
   
5-1.10   Licenses: Revocation
   
5-1.11   Posting in public places
   
5-1.12   Posting and distributing offensive and immoral signs and handbills
   
5-1.13   Depositing and throwing in public places
   
5-1.14   Depositing and throwing in and on vehicles
   
5-1.15   Depositing and throwing on vacant premises
   
5-1.16   Depositing and throwing on posted premises
   
5-1.17   Depositing and throwing on unposted premises
   
5-1.18   Depositing, throwing, and circulating unidentified handbills
   
5-1.19   Duty of owners and occupants of premises
   
5-1.20   Violations: Penalties
Sec. 5-1.01. Definitions.
   For the purposes of this chapter, unless otherwise apparent from the
context, certain words and phrases used in this chapter are defined as follows:
   (a)   “Billposter” shall mean and include any person engaging for hire in
the business of posting, fastening, nailing, or otherwise affixing any written,
painted, or printed matter of any kind, or other form or reproduction thereof,
hereinafter called “sign,” containing a message or information of any kind
whatsoever, to any outdoor billboard, or to or upon any bridge, fence, pole,
post, sidewalk, tree, or to or upon the exterior of any other structure;
provided, however, the provisions of this subsection shall not apply to, nor
include, any such sign mounted on, fastened to, or suspended from the outside
of any building or other structure in accordance with, and authorized by, any
law, either for any public convenience or use, or regulating the construction
or use of so-called outdoor display signs, whether such display signs are
illuminated or not.
   (b)   “Commercial handbill” shall mean and include any printed or written
matter, sample, device, dodger, circular, leaflet, pamphlet, paper, booklet, or
any other printed or otherwise reproduced original or copies of any matter or
literature.
      (1)   Which advertises for sale any merchandise, products, commodity, or
thing;
      (2)   Which directs attention to any business, mercantile, or commercial
establishment or other activity for the purpose of either directly or
indirectly promoting the interest thereof by sales;
      (3)   Which directs attention to or advertises any meeting, theatrical
performance, exhibition, or event of any kind for which an admission fee is
charged for the purpose of private gain or profit; provided, however, the
provisions of this subsection shall not apply where an admission fee is charged
or a collection is taken for the purpose of defraying the expenses incident to
such meeting, theatrical performance, exhibition, or event of any kind when the
same is held, given, or takes place in connection with the dissemination of
information which is not restricted under the ordinary rules of decency, good
morals, public peace, safety, and good order; and provided, further, the
provisions of this subsection shall not be deemed to authorize the holding,
giving, or taking place of any meeting, theatrical performance, exhibition, or
event of any kind without a license where such license is, or may be, required
by any law of the State or the City;
      (4)   Which, while containing reading matter other than advertising
matter, is predominately and essentially an advertisement and is distributed or
circulated for advertising purposes or for the private benefit and gain of any
person so engaged as an advertiser or distributor; or
      (5)   Which is not included in the provisions relating to signs in
subsection (a) of this section.
   (c)   “Handbill distributor” shall mean and include any person engaging or
engaged for hire or gain in the business of distributing commercial or
noncommercial handbills, other than newspapers distributed to subscribers
thereof, and any person receiving compensation directly or indirectly for the
distribution of such handbills.
   (d)   “Newspaper” shall mean and include any newspaper of general
circulation, as defined by the general laws of the State, any newspaper duly
entered with the Post Office Department of the United States in accordance with
Federal laws, and any newspaper filed and recorded with any recording officer
as provided by the general laws of the State, and, in addition thereto, shall
mean and include any periodical or current magazine regularly published with
not less than four (4) issues per year and sold to the public.
   (e)   “Noncommercial handbill” shall mean and include any printed or written
matter, any sample, device, dodger, circular, leaflet, pamphlet, newspaper,
magazine, paper, booklet, or any other printed or otherwise reproduced original
or copies of any matter or literature not included in the provisions relating
to signs in subsection (a) of this section, or a commercial handbill, or a
newspaper.
   (f)   “Private premises” shall mean and include any dwelling, house,
building, or other structure designed or used either wholly or in part for
private residential purposes, whether inhabited or temporarily or continuously
uninhabited or vacant, and shall include any yard, grounds, walk, driveway,
porch, steps, vestibule, or mailbox belonging or appurtenant to such dwelling,
house, building, or other structure.
   (g)   “Public place” shall mean and include any and all streets, boulevards,
avenues, lanes, alleys, or other public ways and any and all public parks,
squares, spaces, plazas, grounds, and buildings.
(§ 2, Ord. 834, eff. May 18, 1949)
Sec. 5-1.02. Purposes of provisions.
   To protect the public against the nuisance of and incident to the
promiscuous distribution of handbills and circulars, particularly commercial
handbills, as defined in §
5-1.01(b) of this chapter, with the resulting detriment and danger to the
public health and safety, the public interest, convenience and necessity
require the regulation thereof, and to that end the purposes of this chapter
are specifically declared to be as follows:
   (a)   To protect the public against the unlawful activities or operations of
dissolute persons of criminal habits or tendencies, representing themselves as
solicitors, canvassers, or handbill distributors, by requiring the registration
of all such solicitors, canvassers, or handbill distributors, together with the
names of their employers, and by regulating the business of handbill and
advertising distribution through the imposition of reasonable license fees;
   (b)   To protect local residents against trespassing by solicitors,
canvassers, or handbill distributors upon the private property of such
residents if they have given reasonable notice that they do not wish to be
solicited by such persons or do not desire to receive handbills or advertising
matter;
   (c)   To protect the public against the menace to health and safety and the
expense incident to the littering of the streets and public places by the
promiscuous and uncontrolled distribution of advertising matter and commercial
handbills; and
   (d)   To preserve to the public its constitutional right to receive and
disseminate information not restricted under the ordinary rules of decency and
good morals and public order by distinguishing between the nuisance created by
the promiscuous distribution of advertising and commercial circulars and the
right to deliver noncommercial handbills to all persons who are willing to
receive the same.
(§ 1, Ord. 834, eff. May 18, 1949)
Sec. 5-1.03. Interpretation of provisions.
   The provisions of this chapter shall not be deemed to repeal, amend, or
modify any ordinance prohibiting, regulating, or licensing canvassers, hawkers,
peddlers, transient merchants, or any person using the public streets or places
for any private business or enterprise or for commercial sales not covered by
the provisions of this chapter.
(§ 14, Ord. 834, eff. May 18, 1949)
Sec. 5-1.04. Exceptions to provisions.
   (a)   The provisions of this chapter shall not be deemed to apply to the
distribution of mail by the United States, nor to newspapers, as defined in §
5-1.01 (d) of this chapter, nor to catalogs, business cards, or samples handed
to persons willing to accept the same from any agents of any person licensed as
solicitors by the City.
   (b)   The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to any person
advertising his business or activity upon his own premises if such business or
activity is regularly established at a definite location in the City and if a
license, if required by any applicable law, has been obtained for such business
or activity.
(§§ 10(a) and § 11, Ord. 834, eff. May 18, 1949, as amended by § 1, Ord. 1454,
eff. February 1, 1962)
Sec. 5-1.05. Compliance with provisions.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in the business of a
billposter for hire or a handbill distributor for hire, or for any person to
distribute commercial or noncommercial handbills, without first complying with
the provisions of this chapter and all other relevant laws and regulations.
(§ 10(a), Ord. 834, eff. May 18, 1949)
Sec. 5-1.06. Licenses: Required: Exception.
   (a)   Required. Any person desiring to engage as principal, either in the
business of a billposter for hire or in the business of distributing commercial
or noncommercial handbills for hire, shall make application to, and receive
from, the License Official a license in the manner and for the period
prescribed by the provisions of this chapter and by all relevant provisions of
this Code.
   (b)   Exception. Persons acting for licenses as agents or employees in the
posting or distributing of any such signs or handbills shall not be required to
obtain a license or pay a fee; provided, however, each such person shall comply
with, and be subject to, all the other provisions of this chapter.
(§ 10(b) and (d), Ord. 834, eff. May 18, 1949)
Sec. 5-1.07. Licenses: Applications: Form.
   The applicant for such license shall make a written application to the
License Official upon a form provided for such purpose by the License Official.
Such form shall contain, among other things which may be required, together
with a request for a license for the period for which the applicant seeks to
engage in business, the following information:
   (a)   The applicants name;
   (b)   The applicant's business address;
   (c)   A brief description of the nature of the business to be conducted by
the applicant; and
   (d)   The probable number of agents and employees to be engaged in the
business.
   Such application shall be accompanied by the fee provided for in §
3-1.205(b)(1) of this Code.
(§ 10(b) and (c), Ord. 834, eff. May 18, 1949)
Sec. 5-1.08. Reserved.
Sec. 5-1.09. Licenses: Nontransferable.
   No license issued pursuant to the provisions of this chapter shall be
transferable.
(§ 10(c), Ord. 834, eff. May 18, 1949)
Sec. 5-1.10. Licenses: Revocation.
   Without excluding other just grounds for revocation, the Council or official
so empowered by law may revoke any license obtained pursuant to an application
containing a false or fraudulent statement knowingly made by the applicant with
the intent to obtain a license by means of false or fraudulent representations,
or for the violation of the provisions of this chapter, or on any other grounds
specified by law.
(§ 10(c), Ord. 834, eff. May 18, 1949)
Sec. 5-1.11. Posting in public places.
   No person shall post, stick, stamp, paint, or otherwise fix, or cause the
same to be done by any person, any notice, sign, placard, bill, card, poster,
advertisement, or other paper or device calculated to attract the attention of
the public to or upon any sidewalk, crosswalk, curb, curbstone, flagstone, or
any other portion or part of any public way or public place, or any lamp post
or electric light, telegraph, telephone, or trolley line pole, or any railway
structure, hydrant, shade tree, or tree box, or upon the piers, columns,
trusses, girders, railings, gates, or other parts of any public bridge,
viaduct, or other public structure or building, or upon any pole, box, or
fixture of the fire alarm or police telegraph system, except such paper or
device which may be authorized or required by the laws of the United States,
State, or City.
(§ 3, Ord. 834, eff. May 18, 1949, as amended by § 1, Ord. 2921, eff. June 3,
2010)
Sec. 5-1.12. Posting and distributing offensive and immoral signs and
handbills.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to post, hand out, distribute, or
transmit any sign or any commercial or noncommercial handbill:
   (a)   Which may reasonably tend to incite riot or other public disorder, or
which advocates disloyalty to, or the overthrow of, the government of the
United States or the State by means of any artifice, scheme, or violence, or
which urges any unlawful conduct, or encourages, or tends to encourage, a
breach of the public peace or good order of the community; or
   (b)   Which is offensive to public morals or decency, or which contains
blasphemous, obscene, libelous, or scurrilous language.
(§ 13, Ord. 834, eff. May 18, 1949)
Sec. 5-1.13. Depositing and throwing in public places.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to deposit, place, throw, scatter, or
cast any commercial handbill in or upon any public place within the City, and
it shall be unlawful for any person to hand out, distribute, or sell any
commercial handbill in any public place; provided, however, it shall not be
unlawful for any person to hand out or distribute, without charge to the
receiver thereof, any noncommercial handbill in any public place to any person
willing to accept such noncommercial handbill.
(§ 4, Ord. 834, eff. May 18, 1949)
Sec. 5-1.14. Depositing and throwing in and on vehicles.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to distribute, deposit, place, throw,
scatter, or cast any commercial or noncommercial handbill in or upon any
automobile or other vehicle. The provisions of this section shall not be deemed
to prohibit the handing, transmitting, or distributing of any noncommercial
handbill to the owner or other occupant of any automobile or other vehicle who
is willing to accept the same.
(§ 5, Ord. 834, eff. May 18, 1949)
Sec. 5-1.15. Depositing and throwing on vacant premises.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to distribute, deposit, place, throw,
scatter, or cast any commercial or noncommercial handbill in or upon any
premises which are temporarily or continuously uninhabited or vacant.
(§ 6, Ord. 834, eff. May 18, 1949)
Sec. 5-1.16. Depositing and throwing on posted premises.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to distribute, deposit, place, throw,
scatter or cast any commercial or noncommercial handbill upon any premises if
requested by any person thereon not to do so or if there is placed on such
premises in a conspicuous position near the entrance thereof a sign bearing the
words “No Trespassing,” “No Peddlers or Agents,” or “No Advertisements” or any
similar notice indicating in any manner that the occupants of such premises do
not desire to be molested or to have their right of privacy disturbed or to
have any such handbills left upon such premises.
(§ 7, Ord. 834, eff. May 18, 1949)
Sec. 5-1.17. Depositing and throwing on unposted premises.
   No person licensed pursuant to the provisions of this chapter, nor any other
person, shall distribute, deposit, place, throw, scatter, or cast any
commercial or noncommercial handbill or newspaper in or upon any private
premises where such premises have not been posted, as provided in §
5-1.16 of this chapter, without having first obtained and registered with the
Police Chief the written permission of the owner or of an adult resident or
occupant thereof and without placing or depositing such handbill or newspaper
in such a way as to secure or prevent the same from being blown or drifted
about such premises or elsewhere; provided, however, mailboxes shall not be
used where so prohibited by feral postal laws or regulations.
(§ 8, Ord. 834, eff. May 18, 1949 as amended by § 1, Ord. 1162, eff. August 2,
1956)
Sec. 5-1.18. Depositing, throwing, and circulating unidentified handbills.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to distribute, deposit, scatter, hand
out, or circulate any commercial or noncommercial handbill in any place under
any circumstances, which handbill does not have printed on the cover, front, or
back thereof the name and address of the following:
   (a)   The person who printed, wrote, compiled, or manufactured such
handbill;
   (b)   The person who caused the same to be distributed; and
   (c)   In the case of a fictitious person or club, in addition to such
fictitious name, the true names and addresses of the owners, managers, or
agents of the person sponsoring such handbill.
(§ 9, Ord. 834, eff. May 18, 1949)
Sec. 5-1.19. Duty of owners and occupants of premises.
   It shall be unlawful for the owner, lessee, occupant, or agent of any
premises to permit any person, whether licensed or acting pursuant to the
provisions of this chapter or otherwise, to post, affix, or otherwise attach to
any building, structure, or fixture located upon such premises, whether such
fixture is natural or artificial, any poster or handbill containing any matter
prohibited by the provisions of this chapter.
(§ 12, Ord. 834, eff. May 18, 1949)
Sec. 5-1.20. Violations: Penalties.
   (a)   Each violation of the provisions of this chapter, or of any
regulations, order, or ruling promulgated or made pursuant hereto, shall
constitute a misdemeanor and shall be punishable as set forth in
Chapter 2 of Title 1 of this Code.
   (b)   In addition, the City may institute in any court of competent
jurisdiction an action to prevent, restrain, correct, or abate any violation of
the provisions of this chapter or any order or ruling in connection with the
administration or enforcement of said provisions, and the court shall adjudge
to the City such relief, by way of injunction (which may be mandatory) or
otherwise, as may be proper.
(§ 2, Ord. 2921, eff. June 3, 2010)
CHAPTER 2: AUCTION SALES (REPEALED)
CHAPTER 3: COMIC BOOKS AND OBSCENE PUBLICATIONS (REPEALED) *
* Sections 5-3.01 through 5-3.06, codified from Ord. 1036, eff. December 16,
1954, repealed by § 1, Ord. 2314, eff. August 1, 1985.
CHAPTER 4: DANCE HALLS, DANCING CLUBS, AND BALLROOMS
   
5-4.01   Police officers: Attendance
   
5-4.02   Police officers: Powers and duties
   
5-4.03   Hours of operation
   
5-4.04   Prohibitions on crowd surfing and stage diving
Sec. 5-4.01. Police officers: Attendance.
   No person shall conduct any public dance hall, dance floor, or ballroom open
to the public without maintaining at his own expense at every such dance a
police officer of the City, to be approved by the Police Chief or his designee.
(§ 26, Ord. 1280, eff. January 1, 1958, as amended by § 4, Ord. 1320, eff.
November 6, 1958, and § 6, Ord. 1670, eff. November 22, 1967)
Sec. 5-4.02. Police officers: Powers and duties.
   Any police officer of the City shall have the right to enter all such places
and, if, in his judgment, any dance or other proceeding is improper, such
police officer shall have the right, and it shall be his/her duty, to stop the
same.
(§ 26, Ord. 1280, eff. January 1, 1958, as amended by § 4, Ord. 1320, eff.
November 6, 1958, and § 6, Ord. 1670, eff. November 22, 1967)
Sec. 5-4.03. Hours of operation.
   All such halls, clubs, or places shall close not later than 2:00 a.m. and
shall not reopen earlier than 2:00 p.m. of the following afternoon.
(§ 26, Ord. 1280, eff. January 1, 1958, as amended by § 4, Ord. 1320, eff.
November 6, 1958, § 1, Ord. 1582, eff. December 4, 1964, and § 6, Ord. 1670,
eff. November 22, 1967)
Sec. 5-4.04. Prohibitions on crowd surfing andstage diving.
   No person in charge of or assisting in the conduct of any event at a public
dance hall, dance club, ballroom, or any venue public or private within the
City where dancing takes place shall permit or allow any dance activities
characterized by violent physical contact between and among patrons, performer
or other assisting in the conduct of such event, including, but not limited to,
activities where patrons or performers are suspended above the shoulders of any
person for the purpose of passing or maneuvering such patrons or performers
form one person to another, or activities characterized by having patrons or
performers diving or leaping into a crowd of persons from stages or any other
elevated platform. Such prohibited activities described above shall include,
but not be limited to, activities commonly known as crowd or body surfing, or
stage diving. Patrons or performers engaging in such prohibited activities
shall be guilty of an infraction and subject to the penalty provisions of §
1-2.02 of this Code.
(§ 1, Ord. 2703, eff. December 2, 1999)
CHAPTER 5: GAMBLING
   
5-5.01   Operation of card games
   
5-5.02   Advertising card games
   
5-5.03   Possession of betting devices
Sec. 5-5.01. Operation of card games.
   It shall be unlawful to play, maintain, or operate the game of draw poker or
any other card game in the City for money, chips, tokens, or any other thing
where such playing, maintenance, or operation is in a room, hall, place of
business, or any public place and where a charge is made as a rental for the
use of tables, chairs, cards, or any other equipment or for admission or
membership fees.
(§ 1, Ord. 639, eff. August 9, 1939)
Sec. 5-5.02. Advertising card games.
   It shall be unlawful for any person, organization, association, club, or
corporation to maintain, display, or exhibit any sign visible to any person on
any sidewalk or street of the City advertising that any game can be played
therein where such game is played with cards for money, chips, tokens, or any
other thing.
(§ 2, Ord. 639, eff. August 9, 1939)
Sec. 5-5.03. Possession of betting devices.
   No person shall possess, or have the custody or control of, a book, paper,
apparatus, device, or paraphernalia used or for use in receiving, taking,
making, offering, laying, accepting, recording, or registering bets or
purported bets upon the result or purported result of any trial or contest of
skill, speed, or power between or among men or beasts.
(§ 1, Ord. 945, March 18, 1953)
CHAPTER 6: REGULATIONS OF PERSONAL PROPERTY, SECONDHAND DEALERS, AND
PAWNBROKERS
   
5-6.01   State law: License
   
5-6.02   Fee
Sec. 5-6.01. State law: License.
   Subject to the regulatory provisions of the laws of the State of California,
including Cal. Bus. & Prof. Code §§ 21625 et seq., as they now exist and as
they may be amended from time to time, the Chief of Police is authorized to
grant such license to secondhand dealers and renewals thereto.
(§ 2 (part), Ord. 2126, eff. April 16, 1981)
Sec. 5-6.02. Fee.
   Applicants for such license shall be charged a fee as provided by state laws
for initial license applications and shall be charged a fee for renewals
thereof as specified by the Chief of Police and approved by the City Council by
resolution.
(§ 2 (part), Ord. 2126, eff. April 16, 1981)
CHAPTER 7: CURFEW AND DAYTIME LOITERING
   
5-7.01   Definitions
   
5-7.02   Curfew restrictions for minors
   
5-7.03   Duty of parents and guardians
   
5-7.04   Daytime loitering by minors
   
5-7.05   Police services fee for repeat curfew and daytime loitering violators
Sec. 5-7.01. Definitions.
   As used in this chapter:
   (a)   “Emergency” means the unforeseen combination of circumstances or the
resulting state that calls for immediate action. The term includes but is not
limited to fire, natural disaster, automobile accident or requirement for
immediate medical care for another person.
   (b)   “Establishment” means any privately owned place of business operated
for a profit to which the public is invited, including but not limited to, any
eating place, place of amusement or entertainment.
   (c)   “Minor” means any person under eighteen (18) years of age who is not
emancipated pursuant to law.
   (d)   “Parent” means a person who is the natural or adoptive parent of a
person. This includes a court appointed guardian or other person eighteen (18)
years of age or older authorized by the parent, by a court order or by a court
appointed guardian to have the care and custody of that minor.
   (e)   “Public place” means any place to which the public or a substantial
group of the public has access and includes but is not limited to streets,
highways, parks and the common areas of schools, vacant lots, hospitals, office
buildings, transport facilities, shopping centers, and malls.
(§ 1, Ord. 2497, eff. March 21, 1991, as amended by § 1, Ord. 2688, eff. May
20, 1999)
Sec. 5-7.02. Curfew restrictions for minors.
   It is unlawful for any person under the age of eighteen (18) years to remain
on or about any public street, avenue, alley, park or other public place
between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and the time of sunrise the following day
unless:
   (a)   The minor is accompanied by his or her parent or a guardian having
legal custody and control of the minor; or
   (b)   The minor has been emancipated under the Emancipation of Minors Law
(Cal. Family Code §§ 7000 et seq.); or
   (c)   The minor is upon an errand directed by his or her parent or a
guardian having legal custody and control of the minor; or
   (d)   The minor is returning directly home from a public meeting, or public
place, such as a library, or a place of public entertainment, such as a movie,
play, sporting event, dance or school activity; or
   (e)   The presence of the minor in said place or places is connected with or
required with respect to a business, trade, profession, or occupation in which
said minor is lawfully engaged; or
   (f)   The minor is involved in an emergency which may include an unforeseen
combination of circumstances related to a fire, natural disaster, automobile
accident or requirement for immediate medical care for another person; or
   (g)   The minor is on the sidewalk directly adjacent to the minor’s
residence; or
   (h)   The minor is exercising First Amendment rights protected by the United
States Constitution.
(§ 1, Ord. 843, eff. May 18, 1949, as amended by § 1, Ord. 2497, eff. March 21,
1991, Ord. 2645, eff. December 3, 1997, § 1, Ord. 2688, eff. May 20, 1999)
Sec. 5-7.03. Duty of parents and guardians.
   It shall be unlawful for any parent, guardian or other person having the
legal care, custody or control of any person under the age of eighteen (18)
years to permit such person to violate the provisions of this chapter.
(§ 2, Ord. 843, eff. May 18, 1949, as amended by § 1, Ord. 2497, eff. March 21,
1991, § 1, Ord. 2688, eff. May 20, 1999)
Sec. 5-7.04. Daytime loitering by minors.
   It is unlawful for any minor, who is subject to compulsory full-time
education or to compulsory continuation education under State law, to remain in
or upon any public streets, highways, roads, alleys, parks, playgrounds, or
other public grounds, public places, public buildings, or the premises of any
establishment, vacant lots, or other place away from his or her place of
residence, during the hours and on days when the minor’s school is in session.
The provisions of this section do not apply if:
   (a)   The minor is accompanied by his or her parent, legal guardian or other
adult having the care and custody of the minor; or
   (b)   The minor is on an emergency errand directed by a parent, legal
guardian or other adult having care and custody of the minor; or
   (c)   The minor is going to or returning directly from his or her place of
lawful employment; or
   (d)   The minor is going to or returning from a medical appointment; or
   (e)   The minor is a student who has permission to leave the school campus
for lunch or school related activity, and has in his or her possession a valid,
school-issued, off-campus permit; or
   (f)   The minor is going to or returning from a compulsory alternative
education program activity; or
   (g)   The minor is attending or, without any detour or stop, going to or
returning from an official school, religious, government-sponsored activity, or
other recreational activity supervised by adults; or
   (h)   The minor is attending or, without any detour or stop, going to or
returning from an event or activity directly related to the medical condition
of the parent or legal guardian; or
   (i)   The minor is officially enrolled in home schooling; or
   (j)   The minor is exempt by law from compulsory education or compulsory
continuation education; or
   (k)   The minor is authorized to be absent from his or her school pursuant
to the provisions of Cal. Educ. Code § 48205, or any other applicable State or
Federal law.
(§ 1, Ord. 2603, eff. December 7, 1995, as amended by Ord. 2645, eff. December
3, 1997, § 1, Ord. 2688, eff. May 20, 1999)
Sec. 5-7.05. Police services fee for repeat curfew and daytime loitering
violators.
   (a)   Purpose. The City finds and determines that minors who are repeatedly
detained and taken into custody by police personnel for violating curfew and
daytime loitering laws impose an extraordinary burden on Police Department
manpower and resources. Police officers supervising detained minors are
unavailable to carry out police duties in the field, causing decreases in
levels of police protection and public safety in the community. The purpose of
this section is to defray the reasonable costs the City incurs to provide
extraordinary police services to respond to, detain and supervise repeat curfew
and daytime loitering violators.
   (b)   Definitions. As used in this section, the following terms shall have
the following meanings:
      (1)   “Repeat curfew or daytime loitering violator” means any minor: (i)
who has been detained and taken into custody by City police personnel on more
than one (1) occasion in a twelve (12) month period for violating §
5-7.02 or §
5-7.04 of this chapter; and (ii) who has been reprimanded by the San Bernardino
Juvenile Court because the court finds that the minor violated §
5-7.02 or §
5-7.04 of this chapter on more than one (1) occasion in a twelve (12) month
period.
      (2)   “Responsible party” means any parent, legal guardian or other
person in charge or control of a repeat curfew violator.
   (c)   Police services fee established: Debt to City.
      (1)   A responsible party shall be liable for a police services fee
whenever the City’s police personnel respond to, detain and supervise a repeat
curfew or daytime loitering violator. The City Council shall establish the
amount of the police services fee by resolution.
      (2)   The police services fee charged to a responsible party shall be a
debt to the City by the responsible party. Any responsible party owing money to
the City pursuant to this section shall be liable in an action brought by the
City in its own name to recover such amount, including reasonable attorneys’
fees.
   (d)   Billing. The Chief of Police or his or her designee shall notify the
Finance Department in writing of: (i) the name and address of the responsible
party; (ii) the date and time of the initial violation and of the repeat
violation of §
5-7.02 or §
5-7.04 of this chapter; (iii) the names of the police personnel who responded
to, detained and supervised the repeat curfew or daytime loitering violator;
and (iv) the date that the repeat curfew or daytime violator was reprimanded by
the San Bernardino Juvenile Court for the repeat violation. The Finance
Department may adopt administrative procedures for the purposes of implementing
the provisions of this section.
   (e)   Appeal. Any responsible party who receives a bill from the Finance
Department pursuant to this section may within fifteen (15) days after
receiving such bill file a written request with the City Clerk appealing the
bill. The written appeal shall state the grounds for such appeal and the
specific facts and basis for the appeal. The responsible party is deemed to
have received a bill on the third day following the date that the Finance
Department caused the bill to be placed in the United States mail. The City
Manager, or his or her designee, shall review any written appeal filed with the
City Clerk pursuant to this section and shall prepare a written decision on the
appeal within thirty (30) days from the date that the written appeal is
received by the City Clerk. All decisions by the City Manager or his or her
designee shall be final.
(§ 2, Ord. 2603, eff. December 7, 1995, as amended by § 1, Ord. 2688, eff. May
20, 1999)
CHAPTER 8: PINBALL GAMES AND SIMILAR AMUSEMENT MACHINES (REPEALED) *
* Sections 5-8.01 through 5-8.03, codified from Ord. 1446, eff. November 16,
1961, repealed by § 1, Ord. 1895, eff. May 20, 1976.
CHAPTER 9: TRESPASSING
   
5-9.01   Trespasses upon private property prohibited
Sec. 5-9.01. Trespasses upon private property prohibited.
   (a)   Remaining following notice to remove. No person shall remain upon any
private property or business premises after being notified by the owner or
lessee or other person in charge thereof, or a police officer acting at the
request of any of the above, to remove therefrom.
   (b) Entering following notice to keep off and away. No person, without
permission, express or implied, of the owner or lessee or other person in
charge of private property or business premises shall enter upon such private
property or business premises after having been notified by the owner or lessee
or other person in charge thereof, or a police officer acting at the request of
any of the above, to keep off or keep away therefrom.
   (c) Exceptions. This section shall not apply in any of the following
instances:
      (1)   Where its application results in, or is coupled with, an act
prohibited by the Unruh Civil Rights Act, being Cal. Civil Code §§ 51 et seq.,
or any other provision of law relating to prohibited discrimination against any
person on account of color, race, religion, creed, ancestry, or national
origin;
      (2)   Where its application results in, or is coupled with, an act
prohibited by Cal. Penal Code § 365 or any other provision of law relating to
the duties of innkeepers and common carriers;
      (3)   Where its application would result in an interference with, or
inhibition of, peaceful labor picketing or other lawful labor activities;
      (4)   Where its application would result in an interference with, or
inhibition of, any other exercise of a constitutionally protected right of
freedom of speech, such as, but not limited to, peaceful expressions of
political or religious opinions not involving offensive personal conduct; or
      (5)   Where the person who is upon another’s private property or business
premises is there under claim or color of legal right. This exception shall be
applicable to, but not limited to, the following types of situations involving
disputes wherein the participants have available to them practical and
effective civil remedies: marital and post-marital disputes; child custody or
visitation disputes; disputes regarding the title to or rights in real
property; landlord-tenant disputes; disputes between members of the same family
or between persons residing upon the property concerned up until the time of
the dispute; employer- employee disputes; business-type disputes, such as those
between partners; debtor-creditor disputes; and instances wherein the person
claims rights to be present pursuant to an order, decree, or process of a
court.
   (d)   A violation of any provision of this section is a misdemeanor.
(§ 1 , Ord. 1678, eff. December 12, 1967, as amended by § 2, Ord. 1941, eff.
June 2, 1977, § 2, Ord. 3311, eff. September 18, 2025)
CHAPTER 10: WEAPONS
   
5-10.01   Discharging firearms: Permits required
   
5-10.02   Discharging arrows
   
5-10.03   Possession of firearms by minors
Sec. 5-10.01. Discharging firearms: Permits required.
   It shall be unlawful to fire or discharge, or cause to be fired or
discharged, within the City any firearm, rifle, pistol, shotgun, cannon, air
rifle, air gun, BB gun, pellet gun, gas-operated gun, spring gun, or any weapon
designed to discharge any dangerous missile without first obtaining a permit to
do so from the Police Chief; provided, however, the provisions of this section
shall not apply to peace officers when acting in the line of duty, nor shall
this section apply to any person discharging a firearm in lawful self- defense.
(§ 1, Ord. 1667, eff. November 2, 1967)
Sec. 5-10.02. Discharging arrows.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to discharge, release, or shoot any
arrow or shaft from any bow, crossbow, or similar device within the City except
upon a range or area designed for such activity.
(§ 2, Ord. 1667, eff. November 2, 1967)
Sec. 5-10.03. Possession of firearms by minors.
   (a)    Rifles and shotguns. It shall be unlawful and a misdemeanor for any
person under the age of eighteen (18) years to have in his possession, custody,
or control any rifle or shotgun within the City unless he has the written
permission of his parent or guardian to have such firearm or is accompanied by
his parent or guardian while he has such firearm in his possession, custody, or
control.
   (b)   Other weapons. It shall be unlawful and a misdemeanor for any person
under the age of eighteen (18) years to have in his possession, custody, or
control within the City any cannon, air rifle, air gun, BB gun, pellet gun,
gas-operated gun, spring gun, or any weapon or device designed to discharge any
dangerous missile except as provided in subsection (a) of this section.
(§§ 3 and 4, Ord. 1667, eff. November 2, 1967, as amended by § 3, Ord. 2150,
eff. November 5, 1981)
CHAPTER 11: MISCELLANEOUS OFFENSES
   
5-11.01   Reserved
   
5-11.02   Public consumption of alcoholic beverages and possession of any open
alcoholic beverage container
   
5-11.03   Minors in poolrooms
   
5-11.04   Trespassing: Injury to public property
Sec. 5-11.01. Reserved.
(§ 4, Ord. 1670, eff. November 22, 1967; repealed by § 2, Ord. 2334, eff.
February 6, 1986)
Sec. 5-11.02. Public consumption of alcoholic beverages and possession of any
open alcoholic beverage container.
   (a)   As used in this section, “alcoholic beverage” includes alcohol,
spirits, liquor, wine, beer, and every liquid or solid containing alcohol,
spirits, wine, or beer, which contains one-half of one percent (0.5%) or more
of alcohol by volume, and which is fit for beverage purposes either alone or
when diluted, mixed, or combined with other substances.
   (b)   It shall be unlawful for any person to drink an alcoholic beverage in
any City park or other City-owned property or other public place, including,
but not limited to, City-owned or City-leased buildings, parking lots, streets,
alleys, ways, sidewalks, parkways and playgrounds.
   (c)   It shall be unlawful for any person to possess any can, bottle, or
other receptacle containing an alcoholic beverage, as defined in subsection
(a), that has been opened, or had its seal broken, or the contents of which
have been partially removed, in any City park or other City-owned property or
other public place, including, but not limited to, City-owned or City-leased
buildings, parking lots, streets, alleys, ways, sidewalks, parkways and
playgrounds.
   (d)   It shall be unlawful for any person possession any can, bottle, or
other receptacle containing an alcoholic beverage, as defined in subsection
(a), that has been opened, or had its seal broken, or the contents of which
have been partially removed, to enter or remain on the posted premises of,
including the posted parking lot immediately adjacent to, any retail package
off-sale alcoholic beverage licensee licensed pursuant to Division 9
(commencing with § 23000) of the Business & Professions Code. All licensees
shall comply with the following requirements:
      (1)   All retail package off-sale alcoholic beverage licensees pursuant
to Division 9 (commencing with § 23000) of the Business & Professions Code to
operate in the City shall post the licensed premises permanent signs which
shall include language stating the following: “Possession of any open alcoholic
beverage container in or outside this store is prohibited by law.”
      (2)   Required signs shall be posted such that they are visible to:
         (i)   patrons of the licensee;
         (ii)   patrons using the parking lot immediately adjacent to the
licensed premises; and
         (iii)   persons on any public sidewalk immediately adjacent to the
licensed premises.
      (3)   For purposes of this subsection, “posted premises” shall mean those
premises which are subject to licensure under any retail package off-sale
alcoholic beverage license, and the parking lot immediately adjacent to the
licensed premises which are posted with notice pursuant to subsections (d)(1)
and (d)(2). “Parking lot immediately adjacent to the licensed premises” shall
mean any parking lot which is contiguous to the licensed premises and is
utilized by patrons of the licensed premises, except a private residential
parking lot immediately adjacent to the posted premises.
   (e)   Subsections (b) and (c) of this section shall not apply to persons
attending an event at any City-owned facility or park if the City department
host has obtained permission from the City Manager or his/her designee or a
supporting organization host has obtained a Special Event Permit (“SEP”) from
the City, as applicable, that remains valid through the occurrence of the
event.
      For the purposes of this Section, a supporting organization means non-
profit organizations affiliated with the City of Ontario whose missions are to
support City Departments. Nothing herein shall affect the ability of the City’s
contract operator of The Arena located at 4000 E Ontario Center Parkway to sell
alcohol or for persons to consume alcohol inside The Arena subject to the terms
of the operator agreement and all applicable laws.
   (f)   This section shall not apply when an individual is in possession of an
alcoholic beverage container for the purpose of recycling or other related
activity. Furthermore, this section shall not be deemed to make punishable any
act or acts which are prohibited by any law of the State of California.
   (g)   Any person in violation of this section shall be guilty of an
infraction. Any person in violation of subsections (c), (d)(1), or (d)(2) shall
be guilty of an infraction.
   (h)   Unless otherwise exempted by law, any event occurring in a City-owned
facility, park, or any adjacent area owned or controlled by the City, which
involves the sale of alcoholic beverages must possess a daily alcohol beverage
license issued by the ABC and written approval of the Chief of Police or his/
her designee and must comply with all other applicable laws.
   (i)   Except when hosted by the City of Ontario, all persons that request to
host an event that will allow for the consumption and possession of alcohol at
a City-owned facility or park must also obtain a one (1) day Liquor Liability
Insurance Policy with combined single limits of one million dollars
($1,000,000.00) for bodily injury and property damage, for each occasion,
naming the City as additional named insured, provided, however, that the City
Manager or his/her designee may increase or decrease the required amount of
coverage as warranted by individual circumstances. The Certificate of Insurance
must be on file with the City Manager or his/her designee no later than
seventy-two (72) hours before the start of each event or occasion.
   (j)   Notwithstanding the foregoing, any permit and/or permission issued by
the City that will allow for the consumption and possession of alcohol at a
City-owned facility or park may be modified, suspended, or revoked at any time
by the Chief of Police, or his/her designee without a notice or a hearing in
instances where there exists a breach of the peace or danger to the public
health, safety, or general welfare of the residents, public, or event
participants.
(§ 2, Ord. 1670, eff. November 22, 1967, as amended by § 4, Ord. 2150, eff.
November 5, 1981, § 1, Ord. 2374, eff. December 18, 1986, § 1, Ord. 2594, eff.
September 14, 1995, and § 1, Ord. 2734, eff. April 5, 2001; § 2, Ord. 3260,
eff. October 19, 2023, § 2, Ord. 3311, eff. September 18, 2025)
Sec. 5-11.03. Minors in poolrooms.
   (a)   Visiting. Any person under the age of eighteen (18) years who enters,
visits, or remains in any public billiard parlor or public poolroom without a
parent or guardian shall be guilty of an infraction.
   (b)   Duty of proprietors. Every proprietor or any other person having
charge or control of any public billiard parlor or public poolroom who permits
any person under the age of eighteen (18) years to be or remain in, enter, or
visit such public billiard parlor or public poolroom without a parent or
guardian shall be guilty of an infraction.
   (c)   Carrying packages and messages. Any person, as employer or otherwise,
who sends any person under the age of eighteen (18) years, or permits,
requests, or engages any such minor, to carry any package, letter, note, or
telegraph message to or from any public billiard parlor or public poolroom
shall be guilty of an infraction.
(§ 5, Ord. 1670, eff. November 22, 1967, as amended by § 9, Ord. 2094, eff.
August 14, 1980)
Sec. 5-11.04. Trespassing: Injury to public property.
   It shall be unlawful for any person, except an official employee of the
City, to go upon any public building, reservoir, or other structure belonging
to the City, or to throw any stick, stone, or other missile upon or at any
building, reservoir, or other public property of the City, or in any wise to
trespass upon the public property of the City without permission first obtained
from the official or employee in charge of such property.
(§ 3, Ord. 1670, eff. November 22, 1967)
CHAPTER 12: ABATEMENT AND REMOVAL OF ABANDONED, WRECKED, DISMANTLED, AND
INOPERATIVE VEHICLES
   
5-12.01   Findings and determinations
   
5-12.02   Definitions
   
5-12.03   Exceptions
   
5-12.04   Effect on other laws
   
5-12.05   Administration and enforcement
   
5-12.06   Right of entry of certain persons
   
5-12.07   Administrative costs
   
5-12.08   Authority to abate and remove
   
5-12.09   Notice of intention to abate
   
5-12.10   Hearing; Notice
   
5-12.11   Hearing: Determination
   
5-12.12   Appeal
   
5-12.13   Abatement
   
5-12.14   Notice of abatement to Department of Motor Vehicles
   
5-12.15   Assessment of costs
Sec. 5-12.01. Findings and determinations.
   In addition to and in accordance with the determination made and the
authority granted by the State pursuant to the provisions of Cal. Veh. Code §
22660 to remove abandoned, wrecked, dismantled, or inoperative vehicles, or
parts thereof, as public nuisances, the Council hereby makes the following
findings and declarations:
   The accumulation and storage of abandoned, wrecked, dismantled, or
inoperative vehicles, or parts thereof, on private or public property, not
including highways, is hereby found to create a condition tending to reduce the
value of private property, to promote blight and deterioration, to invite
plundering, to create fire hazards, to constitute an attractive nuisance
creating a hazard to the health and safety of minors, to create a harborage for
rodents and insects, and to be injurious to the health, safety, and general
welfare. Therefore, the presence of an abandoned, wrecked, dismantled, or
inoperative vehicle, or part thereof, on private or public property, not
including highways, except as expressly permitted by the provisions of this
chapter, is hereby declared to constitute a public nuisance which may be abated
as such in accordance with the provisions of this chapter.
(§ 1, Ord. 1684, eff. June 6, 1968)
Sec. 5-12.02. Definitions.
   For the purposes of this chapter, unless otherwise apparent from the
context, certain words and phrases used in this chapter are defined as follows:
   (a)   “Highway” shall mean a way or place of whatever nature, publicly
maintained and open to the use of the public for the purposes of vehicular
travel. “Highway” shall include “street.”
   (b)   “Public property” shall not include “highway.”
   (c)   “Vehicle” shall mean a device by which any person or property may be
propelled, moved, or drawn upon a highway, except a device moved by human power
or used exclusively upon stationary rails or tracks.
   (d)   The term “owner of the land” means the owner of the land on which the
vehicle, or parts thereof, is located as shown on the last equalized assessment
roll.
   (e)   The term “owner of the vehicle” means the last registered owner and
legal owner of record.
(§ 2, Ord. 1684, eff. June 6, 1968, as amended by § 1, Ord. 2554, eff. October
7, 1993)
Sec. 5-12.03. Exceptions.
   The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to:
   (a)   A vehicle, or parts thereof, which is completely enclosed within a
building in a lawful manner where it is not visible from the street or other
public or private property; or
   (b)   A vehicle, or parts thereof, which is stored or parked in a lawful
manner on private property in connection with the business of a licensed
dismantler, licensed vehicle dealer, a junk dealer, or when such storage or
parking is necessary to the operation of a lawfully conducted business or
commercial enterprise.
   The provisions of this section shall not authorize the maintenance of a
public or private nuisance as defined pursuant to provisions of law other than
Chapter 10 of Division 11 of the Vehicle Code of the State (commencing with
Cal. Veh. Code § 22650) and this chapter.
(§ 3, Ord. 1684, eff. June 6, 1968, as amended by § 2, Ord. 2554, eff. October
7, 1993)
Sec. 5-12.04. Effect on other laws.
   The provisions of this chapter are not the exclusive regulations of
abandoned, wrecked, dismantled, or inoperative vehicles within the City. The
provisions of this chapter shall supplement and be in addition to the other
regulatory codes, statutes, and laws heretofore or hereafter enacted by the
City, the State, or any other legal entity or agency having jurisdiction.
(§ 4, Ord. 1684, eff. June 6, 1968)
Sec. 5-12.05. Administration and enforcement.
   Except as otherwise provided in this chapter, the provisions of this chapter
shall be administered and enforced by the Code Enforcement Manager. In the
enforcement of the provisions of this chapter, such officer and his deputies
may with the consent of the property owner, or alternatively with an inspection
warrant (Cal. Code Civ. Proc. §§ 1822.50 et seq.), enter upon private or public
property to examine a vehicle, or parts thereof, or obtain information as to
the identity of a vehicle, and to remove or cause the removal of a vehicle, or
parts thereof, declared to be a nuisance pursuant to the provisions of this
chapter.
(§ 5, Ord. 1684, eff. June 6, 1968, as amended by § 3, Ord. 2554, eff. October
7, 1993)
Sec. 5-12.06. Right of entry of certain persons.
   When the Council has contracted with or granted a franchise to any person,
such person shall be authorized to enter upon private property or public
property to remove or cause the removal of a vehicle, or parts thereof,
declared to be a nuisance pursuant to the provisions of this chapter.
(§ 6, Ord. 1684, eff. June 6, 1968)
Sec. 5-12.07. Administrative costs.
   The Council shall from time to time determine and fix an amount to be
assessed as administrative costs (excluding the actual cost of removal of any
vehicle, or part thereof) for the purposes of administering the provisions of
this chapter.
(§ 7, Ord. 1684, eff. June 6, 1968)
Sec. 5-12.08. Authority to abate and remove.
   Upon discovering the existence of an abandoned, wrecked, dismantled or
inoperative vehicle, or parts thereof on private or public property within the
City, the Code Enforcement Manager shall have the authority to cause the
abatement and removal thereof in accordance with the procedures of this
chapter.
(§ 8, Ord. 1684, eff. June 6, 1968, as amended by § 4, Ord. 2554, eff. October
7, 1993)
Sec. 5-12.09. Notice of intention to abate.
   (a)   A ten (10) day notice of intention to abate and remove the vehicle or
parts thereof as a public nuisance shall be mailed by registered or certified
mail to the owner of the land and the owner of the vehicle, unless the vehicle
or parts thereof is in such condition that identification numbers are not
available to determine ownership. The notice of intention shall be in the form
prescribed by a resolution of the City Council.
   (b)   The requirement that not less than a ten (10) day notice of intention
to abate and remove the vehicle or part thereof as a public nuisance be issued,
unless the property owner and the owner of the vehicle have signed releases
authorizing removal and waiving further interest in the vehicle or part
thereof. However, the notice of intention is not required for removal of a
vehicle or part thereof that is inoperable due to the absence of a motor,
transmission, or wheels and incapable of being towed, is valued at less than
two hundred dollars ($200.00) by a person specified in Cal. Veh. Code § 22855,
and is determined by the local agency to be a public nuisance presenting an
immediate threat to public health or safety, provided that the property owner
has signed a release authorizing removal and waiving further interest in the
vehicle or part thereof. Prior to final disposition under Cal. Veh. Code §
22662 of such a low-valued vehicle or part for which evidence of registration
was recovered pursuant to subdivision Cal. Veh. Code § 22661(a), the local
agency shall provide notice to the registered and legal owners of intent to
dispose of the vehicle or part, and if the vehicle or part is not claimed and
removed within twelve (12) days after the notice is mailed, from a location
specified in Cal. Veh. Code § 22662, final disposition may proceed. No local
agency or contractor thereof shall be liable for damage caused to a vehicle or
part thereof by removal pursuant to this section. This subdivision applies only
to inoperable vehicles located upon a parcel that is (1) zoned for agricultural
use or (2) not improved with a residential structure containing one or more
dwelling units.
(Cal. Veh. Code § 22661(c)) (§ 9, Ord. 1684, eff. June 6, 1968, as amended by §
5, Ord. 2554, eff. October 7, 1993)
Sec. 5-12.10. Hearing; Notice.
   Upon request by the owner of the vehicle or the owner of the land and if
received by the Code Enforcement Manager within the ten (10) days after the
mailing of the notices of intention to abate and remove, the Code Enforcement
Manager shall hold a hearing, which shall be open to the public, on the
question of abatement and removal of the vehicle, or parts thereof as an
abandoned, wrecked, dismantled or inoperative vehicle, and the assessment of
the administrative costs and the cost of removal of the vehicle, or parts of a
vehicle, against the property on which it is located.
   If the owner of the land submits a sworn statement, in writing, denying
responsibility for the presence of the vehicle on his land within the such ten
(10) day period, said statement shall be construed as a request for a hearing
which does not require his presence. Notice of hearing shall be mailed, by
registered or certified mail, at least ten (10) days prior to the date of the
hearing to the owner of the land and to the owner of the vehicle, unless the
vehicle is in such condition that identification numbers are not available to
determine ownership. If such a request for hearing is not received within said
ten (10) days after mailing of the notice of intention to abate and remove, the
City shall have the authority to abate and remove the vehicle or parts thereof
as a public nuisance without holding a hearing.
(§ 10, Ord. 1684, eff. June 6, 1968, as amended by § 6, Ord. 2554, eff. October
7, 1993)
Sec. 5-12.11. Hearing: Determination.
   All hearings under this chapter shall be held before the Code Enforcement
Manager which shall hear all facts and testimony it deems pertinent. Said facts
and testimony may include testimony on the condition of the vehicle, or parts
thereof, and the circumstances concerning its location on the said property,
public or private. The Code Enforcement Manager shall not be limited by the
technical rules of evidence.
   The owner of the land may appear in person at the hearing or present a sworn
statement, in writing, in time for consideration at the hearing, and deny
responsibility for the presence of the vehicle on the land, with his reasons
for such denial.
   The Code Enforcement Manager may impose such conditions and take such other
action as he deems appropriate under the circumstances to carry out the purpose
of this chapter. He may delay the time for removal of the vehicle, or parts
thereof, if in his opinion the circumstances justify it. At the conclusion of
the hearing, the Code Enforcement Manager may find that a vehicle, or parts
thereof, has been abandoned, wrecked, dismantled, or is inoperative on private
or public property and order the same removed from the property as a public
nuisance and disposed of as hereinafter provided and determine the
administrative costs and the cost of removal to be charged against the owner of
the land. The order requiring removal shall include a description of the
vehicle or parts thereof and the correct identification number and license
number of the vehicle if available at the site.
   If it is determined at the hearing that the vehicle was placed on the land
without the consent of the owner of the land and that he has not subsequently
acquiesced in its presence, the Code Enforcement Manager shall not assess the
costs of administration or removal of the vehicle against the property upon
which the vehicle is located or otherwise attempt to collect such costs from
such owner of the land.
   If the owner of the land submits a sworn statement denying responsibility
for the presence of the vehicle on his land but does not appear or if an
interested party makes a written presentation to the Code Enforcement Manager
but does not appear, he shall be notified in writing of the decision.
(§ 11, Ord. 1684, eff. June 6, 1968, as amended by § 7, Ord. 2554, eff. October
7, 1993)
Sec. 5-12.12. Appeal.
   Any interested party may appeal the decision of the Code Enforcement Manager
by filing a written notice of appeal with the said Code Enforcement Manager
within ten (10) days after its decision. Such appeal shall be heard by the City
Council which may affirm, amend or reverse the order or take other action
deemed appropriate.
   The Clerk shall give written notice of the time and place of hearing to the
appellant and those persons specified in §
5-12.09 of this
Chapter 12.
   In conducting the hearing, the City Council shall not be limited by the
technical rules of evidence.
(§ 12, Ord. 1684, eff. June 6, 1968, as amended by § 8, Ord. 2554, eff. October
7, 1993)
Sec. 5-12.13. Abatement.
   Five (5) days after adoption of the order declaring the vehicle or parts
thereof to be a public nuisance, five (5) days from the date of mailing of
notice of the decision if such notice is required by §
5-12.11, or fifteen (15) days after such action of the governing body
authorizing removal following appeal, the vehicle or parts thereof may be
disposed of by removal to a scrap yard or automobile dismantler's yard. After a
vehicle has been removed, it shall not thereafter be reconstructed or made
operable, unless it is a vehicle that qualifies for either horseless carriage
license plates or historical license plates, pursuant to Cal. Veh. Code § 5004,
in which case the vehicle may be reconstructed or made operable.
(§ 13, Ord. 1684, eff. June 6, 1968, as amended by § 9, Ord. 2554, eff. October
7, 1993)
Sec. 5-12.14. Notice of abatement to Department of Motor Vehicles.
   Within five (5) days after the date of removal of the vehicle or parts
thereof, notice shall be given to the Department of Motor Vehicles identifying
the vehicle or parts thereof removed.
   At the same time, there shall be transmitted to the Department of Motor
Vehicles any evidence of registration available, including registration,
certificate of title, and license plates.
(§ 14, Ord. 1684, eff. June 6, 1968, as amended by § 10, Ord. 2554, eff.
October 7, 1993)
Sec. 5-12.15. Assessment of costs.
   If the administration costs and the cost of removal which are charged
against the owner of a parcel of land pursuant to §
5-12.11 of this chapter are not paid within thirty (30) days of the date of the
order or the final disposition of an appeal therefrom, such costs shall be a
special assessment against that parcel of land pursuant to Cal. Gov't Code §
38773.5. Said assessment shall have the same priority as other City taxes.
(§ 11, Ord. 2554, eff. October 7, 1993)
CHAPTER 13: SECURITY PROVISIONS FOR CAR LOTS (REPEALED)
CHAPTER 14: REMOVAL OF IGNITION KEYS FROM UNATTENDED MOTOR VEHICLES
   
5-14.01   Removal of ignition keys
   
5-14.02   Effect on other actions
Sec. 5-14.01. Removal of ignition keys.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to leave a motor vehicle, except a
commercial vehicle, unattended on any street, alley, used car lot, or
unattended parking lot without first stopping the engine and removing the
ignition key from such vehicle.
(§ 1, Ord. 1741, eff. October 15, 1970)
Sec. 5-14.02. Effect on other actions.
   Any violation of the provisions of this chapter shall not mitigate the
offense of stealing such motor vehicle; nor shall such violation be used to
effect a recovery in any civil action for the theft of such motor vehicle, or
the insurance thereon, or for any other bearing on any civil action.
(§ 1, Ord. 1741, eff. October 15, 1970)
CHAPTER 15: YARD SALES
   
5-15.01   Definition
   
5-15.02   Permits: Fees (Repealed)
   
5-15.03   Frequency of sales
   
5-15.04   Signs
   
5-15.05   Exceptions
   
5-15.06   Inspections and enforcement
   
5-15.07   Items that may be sold
   
5-15.08   Location of garage or yard sales
Sec. 5-15.01. Definition.
   For the purposes of this chapter, “garage or yard sale” shall mean any event
where items of personal property owned, utilized, or maintained by the
occupants of the premises, other than a licensed commercial business, are to be
offered for sale to the general public. This shall include garage, patio, and
other similarly conducted sales. The term “garage or yard sale” does not
include rummage sales by non-profit organizations licensed to do business in
the City which obtain a temporary use permit as required by
Title 9, Chapter 1, Article 11 of the Ontario Municipal Code.
(§ 1, Ord. 1770, eff. December 16, 1971, and § 1, Ord. 2924, eff. June 17,
2010)
Sec. 5-15.02. Permits: Fees (Repealed).
(§ 1, Ord. 1770, eff. December 16, 1971, repealed by § 2, Ord. 2924, eff. June
17, 2010)
Sec. 5-15.03. Frequency of sales.
   (a)   The frequency of garage or yard sales in the City shall be limited to
no more than four (4) weekends per calendar year. The Council may by resolution
declare the four (4) weekends in which garage or yard sales may be conducted,
and may consider such factors as inclement weather or garage or yard sale
weekends of neighboring cities, among any other factors the Council deems
relevant. For purposes of this subsection, the term weekend shall mean Friday,
Saturday, and Sunday.
   (b)   Garage or yard sales shall be conducted only between the hours of 7:00
a.m. and 6:00 p.m.
(§ 1, Ord. 1770, eff. December 16, 1971, as amended by Ord. 2063, eff. December
20, 1979, and § 3, Ord. 2924, eff. June 17, 2010)
Sec. 5-15.04. Signs.
   One double-faced sign, not to exceed six (6) square feet in area on any one
side, shall be permitted on the property where such sale is located. Such sign
may be posted only on the days of the sale.
(§ 1, Ord. 1770, eff. December 16, 1971)
Sec. 5-15.05. Exceptions.
   The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to sales of personal property
made under court order or process.
(§ 1, Ord. 1770, eff. December 16, 1971)
Sec. 5-15.06. Inspections and enforcement.
   All personal property to be sold shall be arranged so that fire, police,
health, and other officials may have access at all times during the sale.
Enforcement of the provisions of this chapter shall be by the Police Department
and all officers of the City charged with the enforcement of laws.
(§ 1, Ord. 1770, eff. December 16, 1971)
Sec. 5-15.07. Items that may be sold.
   Only the seller’s personal property may be sold at a garage or yard sale.
New merchandise, or items acquired consigned for the purpose of resale, may not
be sold at a garage or yard sale.
(§ 4, Ord. 2924, eff. June 17, 2010)
Sec. 5-15-08. Location of garage or yard sales.
   Garage or yard sales, as defined in this chapter, are only allowed on
properties owned and permitted for residential use.
(§ 5, Ord. 2924, eff. June 17, 2010)
CHAPTER 16: REGULATION AND LICENSING OF FESTIVALS
   
5-16.01   Definitions
   
5-16.02   Licenses: Required
   
5-16.03   Licenses: Applications
   
5-16.04   Festival plans
   
5-16.05   Processing applications
   
5-16.06   Consideration of applications by the Council
   
5-16.07   Licenses: Issuance: Fees: Nontransferable
   
5-16.08   Licensing conditions
   
5-16.09   Grounds for denial of licenses: Notices of denial
   
5-16.10   Complaints.
   
5-16.11   Revocation of licenses.
   
5-16.12   Notices of revocation.
   
5-16.13   Violations: Remedies of City.
Sec. 5-16.01. Definitions.
   For the purposes of this chapter, unless otherwise apparent from the
context, certain words and phrases used in this chapter are defined as follows:
   (a)   “Festival” shall mean any music festival, dance festival, rock
festival, or similar musical activity likely to attract 5,000 or more people in
any one twenty-four (24) hour period, at which music is provided by paid or
amateur performers or by prerecorded means, and which is held at any place
within the City, and to which members of the public are invited or admitted for
a charge or free of cost.
   “Festival” shall not include any activity conducted by a religious
organization recognized as such by the State and/or by Federal agencies for
religious tax exemption purposes; or any activity conducted by a recognized
governmental agency; or any activity conducted solely for benevolent or
charitable purposes.
   (b)   “City” shall mean the City of Ontario.
   (c)   “City Council” or “Council” shall mean the City Council of the City.
   (d)   “Chief of Police” or “Police Chief” shall mean the Police Chief of the
City.
   (e)   “Fire Chief” shall mean the Fire Chief of the City.
   (f)   “City Clerk” or “Clerk” shall mean the City Clerk of the City.
   (g)   “City Attorney” shall mean the City Attorney of the City.
   (h)   “Building Official” shall mean the Chief Building Official of the
City.
   (i)   “City Traffic Engineer” shall mean the Traffic Engineer of the City.
   (j)   “License Official” shall mean the License Official of the City.
   (k)   “Health Officer” or “County Health Officer” shall mean the County
Health Officer of the County of San Bernardino, California.
(§ 1, Ord. 1784, eff. October 18, 1972)
Sec. 5-16.02. Licenses: Required.
   No person shall operate, maintain, conduct, advertise, or sell or furnish
tickets for an outdoor or indoor festival in the City unless he shall first
obtain a license from the City to operate or conduct such festival.
(§ 1, Ord. 1784, eff. October 18, 1972)
Sec. 5-16.03. Licenses: Applications.
   Applications for licenses to conduct an outdoor festival shall be made in
writing to the City Clerk at least sixty (60) days prior to the time indicated
for the commencement of the planned activity and shall be accompanied by a
nonrefundable application fee of One Hundred Dollars ($100.00) and shall
contain the following information:
   (a)   The name, age, residence, and mailing address of the person making
such application. If the application is made by a partnership, the names and
addresses of the partners shall appear. Where the applicant is a corporation,
the application shall be signed by the president, vice-president, and secretary
of such corporation and shall contain the addresses of such corporate officers,
and a certified copy of the Articles of Incorporation shall be submitted with
the application;
   (b)   A written statement of the kind, character, or type of festival which
the applicant proposes to conduct, operate, or carry on;
   (c)   The address or legal description of the place where the proposed
festival is to be conducted, operated, or carried on. Additionally, the
applicant shall submit proof of ownership of the place where the festival is to
be conducted or a statement signed by the owner of the premises indicating his
consent that the site be used for the proposed festival.
   (d)   The date or dates and the hours during which the festival is to be
conducted;
   (e)   An estimate of the number of customers, spectators, participants, and
other persons expected to attend the festival for each day it is conducted; and
   (f)   At the time of making the application, the applicant shall arrange to
be fingerprinted and photographed by the Police Department.
(§ 1, Ord. 1784, eff. October 18, 1972)
Sec. 5-16.04. Festival plans.
   A detailed written explanation of the applicant's plans to provide security
and fire protection, water supplies and facilities, food supplies and
facilities, sanitation facilities, medical facilities and services, vehicle
parking spaces, vehicle access and on-site traffic control, and, if it is
proposed or expected that spectators or participants will remain at night or
overnight, the arrangements for illuminating the premises and for camping or
similar facilities. The applicant's plans shall include what provisions shall
be made for numbers of spectators in excess of the estimate, provisions for the
cleanup of the premises, and provisions for the removal of rubbish after the
event has concluded.
   A plot plan showing the arrangement of the facilities, including those for
parking, egress, and ingress, shall be submitted with such application.
(§ 1, Ord. 1784, eff. October 18, 1972)
Sec. 5-16.05. Processing applications.
   Upon the receipt of a complete application and the application fee, the City
Clerk shall set the application for a public hearing at a regular meeting of
the Council, not less than fifteen (15) days nor more than forty-five (45) days
thereafter, and shall give not less than ten (10) days' written notice thereof
to the applicant. The City Clerk shall promptly give notice of such hearing and
copies of the application to the Police Chief and the Fire Chief or their
designee, the County Health Officer, the City Development Director, Parks
Superintendent, Risk Manager, and Traffic Engineer, who shall investigate the
application and report in writing to the Council not later than the hearing,
with appropriate recommendations related to their official functions as to
granting a license and the conditions thereof.
(§ 1, Ord. 1784, eff. October 18, 1972)
Sec. 5-16.06. Consideration of applications by the Council.
   Based upon the testimony of the witnesses and evidence presented at such
hearing, including the reports of said department management, the Council shall
take appropriate action to grant the license, deny the license, or set
conditions and/or provide security which assures conditions will be met before
a license may be granted. If conditions are imposed by the Council, the
applicant shall furnish proof to the City Clerk that all conditions have been
met before the license may be issued by the City Clerk.
(§ 1, Ord. 1784, eff. October 18, 1972)
Sec. 5-16.07. Licenses: Issuance: Fees: Nontransferable.
   When the City Clerk certifies that conditions have been met, the License
Official shall issue a license specifying the name and address of the license,
the kind of festival licensed, and the number of days operation is authorized
based on receipt of the following: payment of Five Thousand Dollars ($5,000.00)
per day of operation, plus twenty-five cents ($0.25) per person per day of
operation, based on an estimate submitted at least seven (7) days prior to the
date of such festival. If the applicant underestimates attendance, he shall pay
fifty cents ($0.50) per person for the number exceeding the estimate for each
day of operation. The licensee shall keep such license posted upon the premises
at which the festival is conducted. No license issued pursuant to the
provisions of this chapter shall be transferable or removed to another
location.
(§ 1, Ord. 1784, eff. October 18, 1972, as amended by § 1, Ord. 1835, eff. July
5, 1974)
Sec. 5-16.08. Licensing conditions.
   At the hearing required pursuant to the provisions of §
5-16.05 of this chapter, the Council may establish conditions which shall be
met prior to the issuance of any license pursuant to the provisions of this
chapter, except that the Council may take a matter under submission before
determining which conditions shall be imposed. Where the Council takes a matter
under submission, written notice of any conditions imposed as prerequisite to
the issuance of a license shall be mailed to the applicant within fifteen (15)
days after the original hearing. The conditions which may be imposed by the
Council pursuant to the City's general public powers for the protection of the
health, safety, and property of local residents and persons attending festivals
in the City are as follows:
   (a)   Police protection. Every license shall employ at his own expense
police protection. The number, location, and type of officers shall be
determined and specified by the Police Chief or his designee to provide for the
preservation of order and the protection of property in and around the place of
the festival. Funds to employ the specified number of law enforcement officers
at the current hourly salary rate for the Police Department shall be deposited
with the City at least ten (10) days prior to the specified date the activity
is to occur. A minimum of one police officer for every 500 persons expected to
be in attendance shall be required.
   Where the Police Chief or his designee specifies the employment of off-duty
peace officers to meet the requirements of this chapter, such peace officers
shall be under the complete direction and control of the Police Chief or his
designee. Before his license is issued, the Police Chief or his designee shall
be satisfied that the requisite number of peace officers will be provided at
all times of operations, plus any specified time prior to and following the
event.
   (b)   Food concessions. Where the proposed festival is to be held a
substantial distance from public eating places, food handling places, or like
establishments, the applicant shall be required to demonstrate that food will
be available at the premises for each day of operation to adequately feed the
number of persons expected to be in attendance. Concessionaires shall be
licensed and operate under a valid Health Department permit pursuant to local
laws and State laws. Every license shall provide at least one flush-type water
closet and lavatory for each sex in a closed facility for employees of each
food concession or operation within the enclosure area of such food operation
unless otherwise approved by the Health Officer. Under no circumstances shall
the Health Officer allow such flush-type water closets and lavatories to be
located more than fifty (50) feet from the food concession or operation. All
lavatories required in conjunction with food concessions and food operations
shall be provided with hot and cold water under pressure which shall be
dispensed by an approved type mixing faucet.
   All sewage, sink waste, and waste water from water closets, lavatories, and
sinks operated in connection with food concessions or food operations shall be
disposed of to a public sewer or a sewage disposal system approved by the
County Health Officer and the Chief Building Official.
   (c)   Sanitation facilities. Every license shall provide at least one
enclosed flush-type water closet facility marked “Men” and one such facility
marked “Women” on the premises of a festival on the basis of one flush-type
water closet for each forty (40) males and one for each twenty (20) females
expected to be in attendance. Urinals may be substituted for the required
flush-type water closets for men on the ratio of one urinal and one flush-type
water closet per sixty (60) males.
   Lavatories provided with cold water under pressure, soap, and paper towels
shall be provided on the basis of one lavatory for each seventy-five (75)
persons expected to be in attendance.
   Where flush-type water closets cannot be made available for the persons in
attendance, the Council may allow the use of portable chemical toilets. Such
chemical toilets shall meet the approval of the County Health Officer before
any license may be issued. Chemical toilets shall be emptied and recharged at
the licensee's expense as necessary pursuant to procedures established by the
County Health Officer.
   The requirement for flush-type water closets for food concessions, food
operations, and for the use of employees may not be waived.
   Every licensee shall be required to furnish at least one trash can with
thirty-six (36) gallon capacity with a tight-fitting lid for each twenty-five
(25) persons expected to be in attendance, an adequate supply of plastic bag
liners to fit the trash receptacles shall be provided, and each container shall
at all times have a plastic beg liner inserted, and, when full, it shall be
tied and removed and a new plastic bag liner inserted. The pickup and removal
of refuse, trash, garbage and rubbish shall be at least once a day and more
often if required by the Health Officer. A signed contract with a licensed
refuse collector shall be submitted to the Health Officer, and a copy of such
contract shall be filed with the Health Officer. The removal of all trash and
refuse shall be at the license's expense.
   (d)   Medical facilities. Where a proposed festival is expected to attract a
large number of persons for a site located a substantial distance from adequate
existing treatment facilities, the applicant shall be required to provide
emergency medical treatment facilities on the premises of the festival. Where
the proposed festival is located close to adequate existing facilities, the
applicant shall provide as required by the Health Officer, emergency treatment
facilities on the premises of the festival.
   The location of such facilities, the number of doctors, psychiatrists,
psychologists, nurses, and other aides needed to staff such facilities, and the
quantity of medical supplies, drugs, ambulances, and other equipment which
shall be on the site shall be approved by the County Health Officer prior to
the issuance of any license pursuant to the provisions of this chapter. The
County Health Officer shall calculate the need for medical services based on
the number of persons expected to attend the festival, their expected age
group, the duration of events planned, and the possibility of exposure to
inclement weather and outdoor elements.
   Traffic lanes and other adequate space shall be designated and kept open for
access and travel for ambulance, helicopter, and other emergency vehicles to
transport patients or staff to appropriate on-site and off-site treatment
facilities.
   (e)   Parking areas. Every licensee shall provide adequate parking spaces
for persons attending the festival by motor vehicle. Persons desiring to
operate or conduct a festival may be called upon to provide a separate parking
space for every two (2) persons expected to attend the festival by motor
vehicle. Such parking areas shall be clearly marked. The Traffic Engineer along
with a Police Department Representative shall approve an applicant's “parking
plan” before a license shall be issued.
   (f)   Access and parking control. Every licensee shall provide adequate
ingress and egress to the festival premises and parking areas therefor.
Necessary roads, driveways, and entrance ways shall exist to insure the orderly
flow of traffic into the premises from a highway or road which is a part of the
County System of Highways or which is a highway maintained by the State. A
special access way for fire equipment, ambulances, and other emergency vehicles
may be required. The Traffic Engineer along with a Police Department
Representative shall approve the licensee's plan for ingress and egress before
a license shall be issued. Additionally, any applicant may be required to show
that traffic guards are under his employ to insure orderly traffic movement and
relieve traffic congestion in the vicinity of the festival areas.
   (g)   Hours of operation. All festivals which are subject to license
pursuant to the provisions of this chapter shall close and cease operations
continuously between the hours of 2:00 a.m. and 6:00 a.m. of each and every
day, unless a variance is granted by the Council.
   (h)   Illumination. Every licensee planning to conduct a festival after
dark, or planning to allow persons who attend the festival to remain on the
premises after dark, shall provide electrical illumination to insure that those
areas which are occupied are lighted at all times. The Chief Building Official
shall approve an applicant's lighting plan as a prerequisite to the issuance of
a license pursuant to the provisions of this chapter.
   A licensee may be required to illuminate specific areas on the premises in
accordance with the following scale of lighting intensity:
 
Illumination                       Watts/Square Feet
Open areas reserved for spectators 0.50
Stage areas                        5.00
Parking overnight areas            0.25
Restroom and concession areas      1.00
 
   (i)   Overnight camping facilities. Every licensee authorized to allow
persons who attend the festival to remain on the premises overnight shall
provide camping facilities and overnight areas that meet the requirements of
California Code of Regulations for mobile home parks, special occupancy trailer
parks, and camp grounds, including travel trailer parks, recreational trailer
parks, temporary trailer parks, incidental camping areas, and tent camps. Such
areas and facilities shall be approved by the County Health Officer and the
Chief Building Official prior to the issuance of any license.
   (j)   Bonds. Any licensee may be called upon to post an indemnity bond and/
or a performance bond in favor of the City in connection with the operation of
a festival. Bonds required by the provisions of this chapter shall be approved
by the City Attorney prior to the issuance of a license. An applicant may be
required to submit a surety bond written by a corporate bonding company,
authorized to do business in the State by the Department of Insurance in an
amount determined by the Council. Such bond shall indemnify the City, its
agents, officers, servants, and employees, and the Council against any and all
loss, injury, and damage of any nature whatsoever arising out of, or in any way
connected with, such festival and shall indemnify against loss, injury, and
damage to both persons and property. Additionally, the City may demand that the
applicant provide a corporate surety bond written by a corporate bonding
company, authorized to do business in the State, indemnifying the City and the
owners of property adjoining the festival site for any costs necessitated for
cleaning up and/or removing debris, trash, or other waste from, in, and around
the premises. Such bond shall be in an amount determined by the Council.
   (k)   Fire protection. Every licensee shall provide, at his own expense,
adequate fire protection as determined by the Fire Department. If the event is
located in a hazardous fire area, a suitable number of fire guards shall be
employed by the licensee who shall be approved by the Fire Chief or his
designee of the responsible fire protection agency or agencies. Flammable
vegetation and other fire hazards shall be removed in a manner and in such
quantity as determined by the Fire Chief or his designee. First aid fire
extinguishment equipment shall be provided as directed by the Fire Chief or his
designee.
   (l)   Financial statements. Each license shall be required to provide a
financial statement to give assurance of the ability of the promoters and/or
applicants to meet the conditions of the permit.
   (m)   Communications. The licensee shall be required to establish a
communication system for public use where ordinary communications are not
available.
   (n)   Miscellaneous. Any applicant may be required to meet any other
condition prior to receiving a license to conduct a festival, which condition
is reasonably calculated as necessary to protect the health, welfare, and
property of local residents and persons attending a festival.
   (o)   Variances. Unless otherwise prohibited, the Council may, after
reasonable inquiry and with just cause, grant a variance to any of the
provisions of this chapter.
(§ 1, Ord. 1784, eff. October 18, 1972)
Sec. 5-16.09. Grounds for denial of licenses: Notices of denial.
   After holding the required public hearing, the Council may deny the issuance
of license if the Council finds any of the following:
   (a)   That the applicant fails to meet the conditions imposed pursuant to
the provisions of this chapter;
   (b)   That the proposed festival will be conducted in a manner and/or
location not meeting the health, zoning, fire, or building and safety standards
established by the laws of the City or the laws of the State;
   (c)   That the applicant has knowingly made a false, misleading, or
fraudulent statement of material fact in the application for the license or in
any other document required pursuant to the provisions of this chapter;
   (d)   That the applicant, his employees, agents, or any person connected or
associated with the applicant as partner, director, officer, stockholder,
associate, or manager has previously conducted the type of festival being
applied for which resulted in the creation of a public or private nuisance; and
   (e)   That the applicant, his employees, agents, or any person associated
with the applicant as partner, director, officer, stockholder, associate, or
manager has been connected in a court of competent jurisdiction, by final
judgment, of:
      (1)   An offense involving the presentation, exhibition, or performance
of an obscene production, motion picture, or play or of selling obscene matter;
      (2)   An offense involving lewd conduct;
      (3)   An offense involving the use of force and violence upon the person
of another;
      (4)   An offense involving misconduct with children; or
      (5)   A felony offense.
   Where the application is denied, the City Clerk shall mail to the applicant
written notice of the denial within fourteen (14) days of such action, which
notice shall include a statement of the reasons the application was denied.
(§ 1, Ord. 1784, eff. October 18, 1972)
Sec. 5-16.10. Complaints.
   Any person may file a complaint with the City Clerk or may petition the
Council to conduct a hearing concerning the revocation of the license of any
licensee. The City Clerk shall notice the petition for hearing in accordance
with the provisions of §
5-16.12 of this chapter.
(§ 1, Ord. 1784, eff. October 18, 1972)
Sec. 5-16.11. Revocation of licenses.
   The Council or, in the absence of a quorum of the Council, the Police Chief
shall have the power to revoke and reinstate any license upon suitable
conditions when the following causes exist:
   (a)   The licensee fails, neglects, or refuses to pay to the Business
License Department the fee prescribed by the provisions of this chapter;
   (b)   The licensee or his employees or agents fail, neglect, or refuse to
fulfill any or all of the conditions imposed pursuant to the provisions of this
chapter;
   (c)   The licensee allows the festival to be conducted in a manner which
violates any law or regulation established by the laws of the City or the laws
of the State;
   (d)   The licensee allows the festival to be conducted in a disorderly
manner or knowingly allows any person to remain on the premises of the festival
while under the influence of intoxicating liquor or any narcotic or dangerous
drug; or
   (e)   The licensee or his employees or agents are convicted of any of the
offenses set forth in §
5-16.09 of this chapter.
(§ 1, Ord. 1784, eff. October 18, 1972)
Sec. 5-16.12. Notices of revocation.
   If notice of revocation is given, the licensee shall be entitled to a
hearing. The City Clerk shall give written notice setting forth the causes for
revocation, and shall state the time and place at which the matter of
revocation will be heard before the Council. Such notice shall be mailed not
later than ten (10) days prior to the date set for the hearing.
(§ 1, Ord. 1784, eff. October 18, 1972)
Sec. 5-16.13. Violations: Remedies of City.
   It shall be unlawful for any license, employee, agent, or person associated
with said license to do any of the following:
   (a)   To conduct or operate a festival without first procuring a license to
do so;
   (b)   To sell tickets to a festival without a license first having been
obtained;
   (c)   To operate, conduct, or carry on any festival in such a manner as to
create a public or private nuisance;
   (d)   To exhibit, show, or conduct within such place of festival any
obscene, indecent, vulgar, or lewd exhibition, show, play, entertainment, or
exhibit no matter by what name designated;
   (e)   To allow any person on the premises of the licensed festival to cause
or create a disturbance in, around, or near any place of festival by offensive
or disorderly conduct;
   (f)   To allow any person to consume, sell, or be in possession of
intoxicating liquor while in a place of a festival except where such
consumption or possession is expressly authorized under the provisions of this
chapter and under the laws of the State; or
   (g)   To allow any person at the licensed festival to use, sell, or be in
possession of any narcotic or dangerous drug while in, around, or near a place
of the festival.
   Any of the violations set forth in this section shall constitute a criminal
act and shall be punishable pursuant to the laws of the City and the laws of
the State. It is provided, however, that the City retains any and all civil
remedies, including the right of civil injunction, for the prevention of such
violations and for the recovery of money damages therefor.
(§ 1, Ord. 1784, eff. October 18, 1972)
CHAPTER 17: PROHIBITION AGAINST CERTAIN OBNOXIOUS NUDE CONDUCT (REPEALED)
CHAPTER 18: BINGO FOR CHARITY
   
5-18.01   Legislative authorization
   
5-18.02   Bingo authorized
   
5-18.03   Qualified applicants: Applications for permits
   
5-18.04   Permits: Applications: Verification
   
5-18.05   Annual permits
   
5-18.06   Permits: Conditions
Sec. 5-18.01. Legislative authorization.
   This chapter is adopted pursuant to the provisions of Cal. Const. Art. IV, §
19 as implemented by Cal. Penal Code § 326.5.
(§ 1, Ord. 1947, eff. July 7, 1977, as amended by § 1, Ord. 2918, eff. February
11, 2010)
Sec. 5-18.02. Bingo authorized.
   Bingo, as defined in Cal. Penal Code § 326.05(o), may be lawfully played in
the City pursuant to the provisions of Cal. Penal Code § 326.5 and this chapter
and not otherwise. This chapter does not authorize or prohibit remote caller
bingo as governed by Cal. Penal Code §§ 326.3 and 326.4 and
Chapter 18A of Title 5 of this Code.
(§ 1, Ord. 1947, eff. July 7, 1977, as amended by §1, Ord. 2918, eff. February
11, 2010)
Sec. 5-18.03. Qualified applicants: Applications for permits.
   (a)   The following organizations are qualified to apply to the City Manager
or designee for a permit to operate a bingo game if the receipts of those games
are used only for charitable purposes:
      (1)   An organization exempt from the payment of the bank and corporation
tax by Cal. Rev. & Tax. Code §§ 23701, 23701a, 23701b, 23701d, 23701e, 23701f,
23701g, 23701k and 23701w; and
      (2)   A mobile home park association of a mobile home park which is
situated in the City; and
      (3)   Senior citizen organizations; and
      (4)   Charitable organizations affiliated with a school district.
   (b)   Such application shall be in a form prescribed by the City Manager or
designee and shall be accompanied by a nonrefundable filing fee in an amount
determined by resolution of the Council from time to time. The application
shall also be accompanied by:
      (1)   A certificate issued by the Franchise Tax Board of the State
certifying that the applicant is exempted from the payment of the bank and
corporation tax by Cal. Rev. & Tax. Code § 23701d.
      (2)   Such additional evidence as the City Manager or designee determines
is necessary to verify that the applicant is a duly organized mobile home park
association of a mobile home park situated in the City.
      (3)   Any other information reasonably necessary to permit the City
Manager or designee to determine that the bingo operation and games will be
conducted in compliance with this chapter and all applicable State laws and
regulations.
(§ 1, Ord. 1947, eff. July 7, 1977, as amended by § 1, Ord. 2096, eff.
September 18, 1980, and § 1, Ord. 2918, eff. February 11, 2010)
Sec. 5-18.04. Permits: Applications: Verification.
   The permit shall not be issued until the City Manager or designee has
verified the facts stated in the application and determined that the applicant
is qualified.
(§ 1, Ord. 1947, eff. July 7, 1977, as amended by § 1, Ord. 2918, eff. February
11, 2010)
Sec. 5-18.05. Annual permits.
   Any permit issued pursuant to this chapter shall be valid until the end of
the calendar year, at which time the permit shall expire. A new permit shall
only be obtained upon filing a new application and upon the payment of the
permit fee. The fact that a permit has been issued to an applicant creates no
vested right on the part of the permittee to continue to play bingo. The
Council expressly reserves the right to amend or repeal this chapter at any
time. If this chapter is repealed, all permits issued pursuant to this chapter
shall cease to be effective for any purpose on the effective date of the
repealing legislation.
(§ 1, Ord. 1947, eff. July 7, 1977, as amended by § 1, Ord. 2918, eff. February
11, 2010)
Sec. 5-18.06. Permits: Conditions.
   (a)   Any permit issued pursuant to this chapter shall be subject to the
conditions contained in Cal. Penal Code § 326.5, and each permittee shall
comply with all applicable State and local laws and regulations.
   (b)   In addition to the foregoing conditions, each permit issued pursuant
to this chapter shall be subject to the following additional conditions:
      (1)   Bingo games may not be conducted by any permittee on more than two
(2) days during any week, except that a permittee may hold one additional game,
at its election, in each calendar quarter. No game shall be permitted or
conducted after 12:00 midnight.
      (2)   The organization to which a permit to operate a bingo game is
issued pursuant to this chapter shall be responsible to see that the conditions
contained in this chapter and the provisions of Cal. Penal Code § 326.5 are
complied with by the organization and its officers and members. Any violation
of one or more of said conditions or provisions shall constitute cause for the
revocation of the organization’s permit by the Council. If requested to do so
by the organization, the Council shall hold a public hearing before revoking
any permit issued pursuant to this chapter.
(§ 1, Ord. 1947, eff. July 7, 1977, as amended by § 1, Ord. 2022, eff. November
2, 1978, § 1, Ord. 2079, eff. April 17, 1980, §2, Ord. 2096, eff. September 18,
1980, § 1, Ord. 2540, eff. March 4, 1993, and § 1, Ord. 2918, eff. February 11,
2010)
CHAPTER 18A: REMOTE CALLER BINGO
   
5-18A.01   Legislation authorization
   
5-18A.02   Remote caller bingo authorized
   
5-18A.03   Qualified applicants
   
5-18A.04   Application approval: Verification
   
5-18A.05   Annual approval
   
5-18A.06   Permits: Conditions
Sec. 5-18A.01. Legislative authorization.
   This chapter is adopted pursuant to the provisions of Cal. Const. Art. IV, §
19 as implemented by Cal. Penal Code §§ 326.3 and 326.4.
(§ 2, Ord. 2918, eff. February 11, 2010)
Sec. 5-18A.02. Remote caller bingo authorized.
   Remote caller bingo, as defined in Cal. Penal Code § 326.3(u)(1), may be
lawfully played in the City pursuant to the provisions of §§ 326.3 and 326.4 of
the Cal. Penal Code, and this chapter, and not otherwise.
(§ 2, Ord. 2918, eff. February 11, 2010)
Sec. 5-18A.03. Qualified applicants.
   (a)   Any organization eligible to receive a traditional bingo permit issued
pursuant to
Chapter 18 of Title 5 of this Code may request authorization to conduct remote
caller bingo games if:
      (1)   The organization possesses a valid traditional bingo permit issued
pursuant to
Chapter 18 of Title 5 of this Code; and
      (2)   The organization has been incorporated or in existence for three
(3) years or more.
   (b)   The request shall be in a form prescribed by the City Manager or
designee and shall be submitted at the same time as an application for a
traditional bingo permit pursuant to §
5-18.03. The request shall be accompanied by any information reasonably
necessary to permit the City Manager or designee to determine that the proposed
remote caller bingo operation and games will be conducted in compliance with
this chapter and all applicable state laws and regulations.
   (c)   Notwithstanding anything to the contrary in subsection (b), any
organization possessing a valid traditional bingo permit issued pursuant to
Chapter 18 of Title 5 of this Code may submit a request for authorization to
conduct remote caller bingo games at any time. However, such requests shall be
accompanied by a nonrefundable filing fee in an amount determined by resolution
of the Council from time to time. The request shall also be accompanied by any
information reasonably necessary to permit the City Manager or designee to
determine that the proposed remote caller bingo operation and games will be
conducted in compliance with this chapter and all applicable state laws and
regulations.
(§ 2, Ord. 2918, eff. February 11, 2010)
Sec. 5-18A.04. Application approval: Verification.
   A request for permission to conduct remote caller bingo shall not be granted
until the City Manager or designee has verified the facts stated in the
application and determined that the applicant is qualified. In the event the
City Manager or designee grants the approval, he or she shall provide written
documentation of the decision that shall be incorporated into or attached to
the applicant's traditional bingo permit issued pursuant to
Chapter 18 of Title 5 of this Code.
(§ 2, Ord. 2918, eff. February 11, 2010)
Sec. 5-18A.05. Annual approval.
   Any remote caller bingo approval granted pursuant to this chapter shall be
valid until the end of the calendar year or the expiration of the traditional
bingo permit that the approval was incorporated into or attached to, which is
earlier. A new approval shall only be obtained upon filing a new application.
The fact that an approval has been granted to creates no vested right on the
part of the permittee to continue to offer remote caller bingo for play. The
Council expressly reserves the right to amend or repeal this chapter at any
time. If this chapter is repealed, all approvals granted pursuant to this
chapter shall cease to be effective for any purpose on the effective date of
the repealing legislation.
(§ 2, Ord. 2918, eff. February 11, 2010)
Sec. 5-18A.06. Permits: Conditions.
   (a)   Any approval granted pursuant to this chapter shall be subject to the
conditions contained in Cal. Penal Code §§ 326.3 and 326.4, and each permittee
shall comply with all applicable state and local laws and regulation.
   (b)   Each approval granted pursuant to this chapter shall be subject to the
following additional conditions:
      (1)   Bingo games shall not be conducted by any permittee on more than
two days during any week, except that a permittee may hold one additional game,
at its election, in each calendar quarter.
      (2)   The permittee shall maintain a valid traditional bingo permit
issued pursuant to
Chapter 18 of Title 5 of this Code.
      (3)   The organization is responsible for ensuring that the conditions of
this chapter and Cal. Penal Code §§ 326.3 and 326.4 are complied with by the
organization and its officers and members. A violation of any one or more of
those conditions or provisions shall constitute cause for the revocation of the
organization’s approval or traditional bingo permit issued pursuant to
Chapter 18 of Title 5 of this Code. Any revocation shall be conducted pursuant
to §
5-18.06.
(§ 2, Ord. 2918, eff. February 11, 2010)
CHAPTER 19: RETAIL GROCERY ITEM PRICE MARKING *
*
Chapter 19 effective only through June 19, 1982: extended by Ord. 2133 duly
adopted by the Council.
   
5-19.01   Definitions
   
5-19.02   Item pricing required
   
5-19.03   Exceptions
   
5-19.04   Violations: Penalties
Sec. 5-19.01. Definitions.
   For the purposes of this chapter, unless otherwise apparent from the
context, certain words and phrases used in this chapter are defined as follows:
   (a)   “Consumer commodity” shall mean:
      (1)   Food, including all material, whether solid, liquid, or mixed, and
whether simple or compound, which is used or intended for consumption by human
beings or domestic animals normally kept as household pets, and all substances
or ingredients added to any such material for any purpose, but shall not
include individual packages of cigarettes or individual cigars;
      (2)   Paper and plastic products, such as, but not limited to, napkins,
facial tissues, toilet tissues, foil wrapping, plastic wrapping, paper
toweling, and disposable plates and cups;
      (3)   Detergents, soaps, and other cleaning agents; and
      (4)   Pharmaceuticals, including non-prescription drugs, bandages, female
hygiene products, and toiletries.
   (b)   “Grocery department” shall mean an area within a general retail
merchandise store which is engaged primarily in the retail sale of packaged
food rather than food prepared for immediate consumption on or off the
premises.
   (c)   “Grocery store” shall mean a store engaged primarily in the retail
sale of packaged food, rather than food prepared for consumption on the
premises.
   (d)   “Sale item or special” shall mean any consumer commodity offered in
good faith for a period of seven (7) days or less, on sale at a price below the
normal price that item is usually sold for in that grocery store or grocery
department.
   (e)   “Liquor store” shall mean a store with an off-sale liquor license, as
defined by State law, engaged primarily in the sale of liquor items.
(§ 1, Ord. 2086, eff. June 19, 1980)
Sec. 5-19.02. Item pricing required.
   Except as otherwise provided in this chapter, every person owning,
operating, or managing a retail grocery store, a grocery department within a
general retail merchandise store, or a liquor store shall cause to have a
clearly readable price indicated on each consumer commodity offered for sale.
(§ 1, Ord. 2086, eff. June 19, 1980)
Sec. 5-19.03. Exceptions.
   The provisions of §
5-19.02 of this chapter shall not apply to any of the following:
   (a)   Any unpackaged fresh food produce;
   (b)   Any consumer commodity which is under three (3) cubic inches in size,
weighs less than three (3) ounces, and is priced under thirty cents ($0.30);
   (c)   Any consumer commodity offered as a sale item or as a special;
   (d)   Any business which has as its only regular employees the owner
thereof, or the parent, spouse, or child of such owner, or, in addition
thereto, not more than two (2) other regular employees;
   (e)   Identical items within a multi-item package;
   (f)   Items sold through a vending machine;
   (g)   Any consumer commodity, not including packaged produce, which was not
generally item priced as of January 1, 1977, as determined by the State
Department of Food and Agriculture;
   (h)   One test store per grocery store chain or ownership, designated as
such by a grocery store chain or ownership from among its stores which are
currently utilizing automatic check-out systems; and
   (i)   Such further exceptions as may be determined by the Council by
resolution.
(§ 1, Ord. 2086, eff. June 19, 1980)
Sec. 5-19.04. Violations: Penalties.
   Any person violating any provision of this chapter shall be guilty of an
infraction and, upon conviction thereof, shall be punishable by:
   (a)   A fine of not more than Fifty Dollars ($50.00) for the first violation
of any provision;
   (b)   A fine of not more than One Hundred Dollars ($100.00) for a second
violation of the same provision within one year; and
   (c)   A fine of not more than Two Hundred and Fifty Dollars ($250.00) for
each additional violation of the same provision within one year.
(§ 1, Ord. 2086, eff. June 19, 1980)
CHAPTER 20: PICTURE ARCADES
   
5-20.01   Definitions
   
5-20.02   Interior design requirements
   
5-20.03   Violations: Misdemeanors
   
5-20.04   Existing picture arcades: Compliance date
Sec. 5-20.01. Definitions.
   (a)   As used in this chapter, “picture arcade” shall mean any place to
which the public is admitted wherein one (1) or more film- or video-viewing
devices are maintained.
   (b)   As used in this chapter, “film- or video-viewing device” shall mean
any electrical or mechanical device which projects or displays any film or
video tape or reproduction, the temporary use of which is contingent upon the
payment of some consideration.
   (c)   As used in this chapter, “person” shall include an individual, firm,
partnership, joint venture, association, estate, trust, receiver or a
syndicate.
   (d)   As used in this chapter, “viewing area” shall mean the area where a
patron or customer would ordinarily be positioned while watching a film- or
video-viewing device.
(§ 1, Ord. 2253, eff. December 1, 1983, as amended by § 1, Ord. 2372, eff.
December 4, 1986)
Sec. 5-20.02. Interior design requirements.
   No person, either as owner or lessee, or as employee, agent, director, or
officer of owner or lessee, shall operate or maintain any picture arcade unless
all viewing areas are visible from a continuous viewing aisle and are not
obscured by any curtain, door, wall or other enclosure.
(§ 1, Ord. 2253, eff. December 1, 1983, as amended by § 2, Ord. 2372, eff.
December 4, 1986)
Sec. 5-20.03. Violations: Misdemeanors.
   Any person violating any of the provisions of §
5-20.02 of this Code shall be guilty of a misdemeanor.
(§ 1, Ord. 2253, eff. December 1, 1983)
Sec. 5-20.04. Existing picture arcades: Compliance date.
   Picture arcades which were lawfully in existence in the City on October 21,
1986, shall have until March 1, 1987, to be brought into compliance with the
interior design requirements of §
5-20.02 of this Code.
(§ 1, Ord. 2253, eff. December 1, 1983, as amended by § 3, Ord. 2372, eff.
December 4, 1986)
CHAPTER 21: MOBILE HOME RENT REGULATIONS (REPEALED)
CHAPTER 22: PROPERTY APPEARANCE - NUISANCE 
   
5-22.01   Definitions
   
5-22.02   Maintenance of property
   
5-22.03   Abatement
   
5-22.04   Notice of violation
   
5-22.05   Hearing and determination
   
5-22.06   Record of cost of abatement
   
5-22.07   Assessment of costs
   
5-22.08   Violations
   
5-22.09   Recordation of notice of violation
   
5-22.10   Emergency action to abate an imminent hazard
Sec. 5-22.01. Definitions.
   For the purpose of this chapter, unless otherwise apparent from the context,
certain words and phrases used herein are defined as follows:
   (a)   “Nuisance” means anything which is injurious to health, or is indecent
or offensive to the senses, or an obstruction to the free use of property so as
to interfere with the comfortable enjoyment of life or property, or unlawfully
obstructs the free passage or use in the customary manner of any public park,
street, sidewalk, alleyway, highway or other public easement is a nuisance.
   (b)   “Nuisance vegetation” means weeds and wild grasses, such as those
commonly known as foxtails, tumbleweeds, devil thorns, puncture vines,
horehound gourd vines, and other similar grasses and weeds.
   (c)   “Owner” means any person in possession and also the person(s) shown as
owner(s) on the last equalized property tax assessment rolls.
   (d)   “Public nuisance” means one which affects at the same time an entire
community or neighborhood, or any considerable number of persons, although the
extent of the annoyance of damage inflicted upon individuals may be unequal.
   (e)   “Trash containers” means any container such as trash bags, boxes or
bins used to store trash, rubbish or other such refuse matter that meets the
requirements of §
6-3.11(c) of the Municipal Code and is placed at a collection point.
   (f)   “Yard” means a tract of ground adjacent to, surrounding, or surrounded
by a building or group of buildings.
(§ 3, Ord. 3046, eff. April 14, 2016)
Sec. 5-22.02. Maintenance of property.
   It is a public nuisance for any person owning, leasing, occupying or having
charge of any premises in this City to maintain such premises in such manner
that any of the following conditions are found to exist thereon:
   (a)   Land, topography, geology or configuration of which, whether in
natural state or as a result of grading operations, excavation or fill, causes
erosion, subsidence or surface water drainage problems of such magnitude to be
injurious or potentially injurious to the public health, safety and welfare or
to adjacent properties;
   (b)   Buildings which are abandoned, partially destroyed or permitted to
remain unreasonably in a state of partial construction;
   (c)   The failure to close, by such means as will protect against entry
without the use of substantial force, all doorways, windows and other openings
leading into vacant structures;
   (d)   Paint deterioration upon buildings, causing dry rot and warping or
lack of weather protection;
   (e)   Broken windows constituting a hazardous condition, or inviting
trespassers and malicious mischief, or constituting a condition tending to
depreciate the aesthetic and property values of surrounding properties;
   (f)   Overgrown vegetation:
      (1)   Likely to harbor rats, vermin and other vectors;
      (2)   Constituting unsightly appearance;
      (3)   Having a tendency to depreciate the aesthetic and property values
of surrounding properties; or
      (4)   Causing a fire hazard;
   (g)   Dead, decayed, diseased or hazardous trees, and other nuisance
vegetation:
      (1)   Constituting unsightly appearance;
      (2)   Creating fire hazards or health problems dangerous to public safety
and welfare; or
      (3)   Having a tendency to depreciate the aesthetic and property values
of surrounding properties;
   (h)   Wrecked or otherwise disabled or abandoned vehicles, except in cases
of emergency and in no event for a period longer than five (5) days, and
motors, equipment, and automotive parts or accessories stored anywhere other
than within a fully enclosed space, carport, garage, or approved automobile
wrecking yard;
   (i)   Vehicles, trailers, recreational vehicles, and boats kept or stored in
yard areas, other than on paved driveways installed in accordance with the
City’s land use and development standards, where they are not screened from
streets or highways;
   (j)   The existence of rubbish, tin cans, or other waste matter of any type
upon any alley, sidewalk or vacant lot within the City;
   (k)   Accessible conditions dangerous to children, including:
      (1)   Abandoned and broken equipment;
      (2)   Refrigerators or freezers with latching doors;
      (3)   Unprotected and/or hazardous pools, ponds and excavations; or
      (4)   Neglected machinery;
   (l)   Broken or discarded furniture and household equipment on the premises
for unreasonable periods and visible from the street or neighboring properties,
and having a tendency to depreciate the aesthetic and property values of
surrounding properties;
   (m)   Boxes, lumber, trash, rubbish and other debris either inside or
outside buildings and visible from public streets or neighboring properties for
unreasonable periods, and having a tendency to depreciate the aesthetic and
property values of surrounding properties;
   (n)   The accumulation of rubbish, litter or debris in vestibules, doorways
or the adjoining sidewalks of commercial or industrial buildings;
   (o)   Trash containers stored in front or side yards and visible from public
streets except when placed in places of collection at the time permitted;
   (p)   Keeping of property with a lack of adequate landscaping or ground
cover sufficient to prevent blowing dust and erosion;
   (q)   Any device, decoration, design, graffiti, fence structure, clothes
line, or vegetation, which is unsightly by reason of its condition or its
inappropriate location;
   (r)   The outside storage of building materials, machinery, or other
material or equipment used in or for a business on any lot in any residential
district, except during construction on the lot;
   (s)   The maintenance of signs and/or sign structures relating to uses no
longer conducted, or products no longer sold on vacant commercial, industrial,
or institutional buildings more than forty- five (45) days after such building
becomes vacant;
   (t)   The maintenance of any structure in a state of substantial
deterioration, such as peeling paint on a facade, broken windows, roofs in
disrepair, damaged porches, broken steps, or other such deterioration or
disrepair not otherwise constituting a violation, and which is visible from a
public right-of-way or neighboring properties, where such condition would have
a tendency to depreciate the aesthetic and property values of surrounding
properties;
   (u)   The substantial lack of maintenance of grounds within the City, on
which structures exist, where the grounds are visible by the public from a
public right-of-way or neighboring properties, where such condition would have
a tendency to depreciate the aesthetic and property values of surrounding
properties;
   (v)   Property maintained (in relation to others) so as to establish a
prevalence of depreciated values, impaired investment, and social and economic
maladjustments that the capacity to generate taxes is reduced and tax receipts
from such particular area are inadequate for the cost of public services
rendered therein;
   (w)   The maintenance of any yard, including any parkway as defined in §
7-3.03, which is visible from the public right-of-way without live and healthy
grass and/or landscaping, or the failure to adequately irrigate such yard or
parkway. If such yard or parkway is so maintained, the City may, pursuant to
this chapter, abate such conditions and collect the costs thereof by any
reasonable method, including the installation and maintenance of healthy grass
and/or landscaping and/or an irrigation sprinkler system, as well as the
continued utilization of such irrigation sprinkler system;
   (x)   The maintenance of any vacant lot without live and healthy grass,
landscaping, or screening combined with perimeter landscaping, where such lot
is adjacent to an improved sidewalk and/or parkway;
   (y)   The existence of solid waste such as excessive animal feces or human
waste of any kind;
   (z)   The presence of any abandoned shopping cart, to the extent not
otherwise remedied by law.
   (aa)   Any condition that violates the requirements or provisions of this
Code, any code adopted by reference by this Code, or any condition of any
permit, license, or other entitlement issued pursuant to this Code.
(§ 3, Ord. 3046, eff. April 14, 2016, § 7, Ord. 3230, eff. January 19, 2023)
Sec. 5-22.03. Abatement.
   All or any part of premises found, as provided herein, to constitute a
public nuisance, shall be abated by rehabilitation, demolition or repair, or
any other reasonable means pursuant to the procedures set forth in this
chapter. The procedures set forth herein shall not be exclusive, and shall not
in any manner limit or restrict the City from enforcing other City ordinances,
or abating public nuisances in any other manner provided by law.
(§ 3, Ord. 3046, eff. April 14, 2016)
Sec. 5-22.04. Notice of violation.
   (a)   If the Code Enforcement Director, or his or her designee, after
investigation, believes that one (1) or more public nuisances exist on premises
within the City, the Code Enforcement Director, or his or her designee, shall
cause to be served upon the owner, lessee, occupant or person having charge of
the affected premises, a Notice of Violation. The Notice of Violation shall (i)
list the conditions constituting a public nuisance, (ii) order the owner,
lessee, occupant or person having charge of the affected premises to abate the
nuisance or nuisances listed in the Notice of Violation, (iii) provide notice
of the right to appeal the Notice of Violation under §
5-22.05, (iv) provide notice that the City may record the Notice of Violation
with the San Bernardino County Recorder's Office against the premises if the
nuisance is not fully abated or corrected (with all required approvals, permits
and inspections), as determined by the City, within the given deadline, and (v)
provide notice of the City's election to recover attorneys' fees in accordance
with §
5-22.06(c), if sought. The Notice of Violation shall provide a reasonable time
in which the owner, lessee, occupant or person having charge of the premises
may abate the nuisance or nuisances cited in the Notice of Violation.
   (b)   Service of the Notice of Violation shall be made upon the owner,
lessee, occupant or person having charge of the affected premises pursuant to
divisions (b) or (c) of §
5-22.07 (Assessment of Costs).
   (c)   Any property owner, lessee, occupant, or person having charge of the
affected premises, shall have the right to have any such premises
rehabilitated, or to have the cited nuisance or nuisances abated in accordance
with the Notice of Violation, at his or her own expense, provided the same is
done prior to the expiration of the abatement period set forth in the Notice of
Violation. Upon such abatement in full, proceedings under this chapter shall
terminate.
   (d)   To the extent such nuisance is not completely abated by the owner,
lessee, occupant, or person having charge of the affected premises, as directed
within the designated period of abatement, the Code Enforcement Director, or
his or her designee, is authorized and directed to cause the same to be abated
by City forces or private contract in any reasonable manner; and the Code
Enforcement Director, or his or her designee, is expressly authorized to enter
the affected premises for such purpose. Upon request of the designated
official, other City departments shall cooperate fully and shall render all
reasonable assistance in abating any such nuisance.
(§ 3, Ord. 3046, eff. April 14, 2016, § 7, Ord. 3230, eff. January 19, 2023)
Sec. 5-22.05. Hearing and determination.
   (a)   Upon request by the owner, lessee, occupant, or person having of the
affected premises and if received by the Code Enforcement Director within ten
(10) days after mailing of the Notice of Violation, the Code Enforcement
Director or his or her designee shall hold a hearing, which shall be open to
the public. The Code Enforcement Director or his or her designee shall hear and
consider objections and/or protests from any owner, lessee, occupant, person
having charge of the affected premises, or other interested persons relative to
the served Notice of Violation.
   (b)   The Code Enforcement Director, or his or her designee, shall hear and
receive all relevant evidence and testimony relative to the alleged public
nuisance and shall consider methods to abate such nuisance. This hearing may be
continued from time to time.
   (c)   Upon or after the conclusion of the hearing, the Code Enforcement
Director, or his or her designee, shall, based upon the evidence presented at
the hearing, determine whether the affected premises, or any part thereof, as
maintained, constitute a public nuisance as defined herein.
(§ 3, Ord. 3046, eff. April 14, 2016)
Sec. 5-22.06. Record of cost of abatement.
   (a)   The Code Enforcement Director, or his or her designee, shall keep an
account of the cost (including incidental expenses) of abating such nuisance of
each separate lot or parcel of land where the work is done, and shall prepare
an itemized account showing the cost of abatement, including any salvage value
relating thereto.
   (b)   The Code Enforcement Director shall serve on the owner, lessee,
occupant or person in charge of the affected premises a copy of the itemized
account pursuant to §
5-22.07 (Assessment of Costs). Such service shall notify the recipient that
failure to pay the amount listed in the account within thirty (30) days of
receipt by the recipient shall, upon a determination by the City Manager, or
his or her designee, constitute a personal obligation of the recipient and may
be collected by a lien on the affected premises or may be collected as a
special assessment against the affected premises.
   (c)   “Incidental expenses” include, but are not limited to, the actual
expenses and costs of the City in abating the public nuisance, including the
preparation of the Notice of Violation, specifications and contracts,
inspecting the work, attorneys’ fees and costs, conducting the hearing pursuant
to §
5-22.05 (Hearing and Determination), and other costs associated with carrying
out the provisions of this chapter. The recovery of attorneys’ fees and costs
shall extend to any prevailing party, including the City. Attorneys’ fees and
costs, may be recovered by a prevailing party only in those proceedings in
which the City has notified the owner, lessee, occupant or person having charge
of the affected premises, in the Notice of Violation, that the City intends to
seek recovery of its attorneys’ fees and costs. In no event shall an award of
attorneys’ fees and costs to a prevailing party exceed the amount of reasonable
attorneys’ fees incurred by the City in the proceeding.
(§ 3, Ord. 3046, eff. April 14, 2016)
Sec. 5-22.07. Assessment of costs.
   (a)   To the extent the Code Enforcement Director, or his or her designee,
determines that the public nuisance or nuisances cited in the Notice of
Violation existed on the affected premises, and the cost of abatement of such
nuisance or nuisances was reasonable, the Code Enforcement Director, or his or
her designee, shall make a written order setting forth these findings and
ordering that, if such costs are not paid within a specified period, the owner,
lessee, occupant, or other person having charge of the affected premises, shall
be personally liable for such costs. Upon resolution of the City Council, such
costs shall be collected by:
      (1)   A lien on the affected premises pursuant to California Government
Code § 38773.1; or
      (2)   A special assessment against the affected premises pursuant to
California Government Code § 38773.5.
   (b)   If the City chooses to collect its abatement costs through a lien on
the affected premises, the notices to the owner of the affected premises
required by this chapter shall be served in the same manner as summons in a
civil action pursuant to Code of Civil Procedure Part 2, Title 5, Chapter 4,
Article 3 (commencing with § 415.10). If the owner of record of the parcel of
land on which the nuisance is maintained, based on the last equalized
assessment roll or the supplemental roll, whichever is more current, after
diligent search cannot be found, notices to the owner may be served by posting
a copy thereof in a conspicuous place upon the affected premises for a period
of ten (10) days, and publication thereof in a newspaper of general
circulation, published in San Bernardino County pursuant to California
Government Code § 6062. The lien shall be recorded in the San Bernardino County
Recorder’s Office, and from the date of recording, shall have the force,
effect, and priority of a judgment lien. The lien shall specify the amount of
the lien, the name of the City as the agency on whose behalf the lien is filed,
the date of the Notice of Violation and order of the City Council, the street
address, legal description and assessor’s parcel number of the affected
premises on which the lien is imposed, and the name and address of the recorded
owner of the affected premises. In the event that the lien is discharged,
released, or satisfied, either through payment or foreclosure, notice of the
discharge containing the information specified in the preceding sentence shall
be recorded by the City. The lien and the release of the lien shall be indexed
in the grantor-grantee index. The lien may be foreclosed by an action brought
by the City for a monetary judgment.
   (c)   If the City chooses to collect its abatement costs through a special
assessment, the notices required by this chapter shall be provided to the owner
by certified mail, as determined from the County Assessor’s or County
Recorder’s records. Notice of the special assessment, and requests for a
hearing regarding the special assessment, shall be in accordance with §
1-4.05 (Appeal Hearing for Special Assessments) of this Municipal Code.
      The special assessment shall be collected at the same time and in the
same manner as ordinary City taxes are collected, and shall be subject to the
same penalties, and the same procedure and sale in case of delinquency as
provided for ordinary City taxes. All laws applicable to the levy, collection
and enforcement of City taxes shall be applicable to the special assessment. If
any real property to which the cost of abatement relates has been transferred
or conveyed to a bona fide purchaser for value, or if a lien of a bona fide
encumbrance for value has been created and attaches thereon, prior to the date
on which the first installment of the taxes would become delinquent, then the
cost of abatement shall not result in a lien against the real property, but
instead shall be transferred to the unsecured roll for collection. The City may
conduct a sale of vacant residential developed property for which the payment
of such assessment made pursuant to this subdivision is delinquent. Notices or
instruments relating to the abatement proceeding or special assessment may be
recorded.
   (d)   All other notices required by this chapter shall be delivered by first
class US Mail, postage prepaid to the recipient thereof.
(§ 3, Ord. 3046, eff. April 14, 2016, § 7, Ord. 3230, eff. January 19, 2023)
Sec. 5-22.08. Violations.
   (a)   The owner, lessee, occupant, or other person having charge of any such
buildings or premises who maintains any public nuisance, as defined in §
5-22.01(a) and (d) of this chapter, or who neglects to comply with the Notice
of Violation pursuant to § 5-22.04 (Notice of Violation) of this chapter, is
guilty of an infraction.
   (b)   Any occupant or lessee in possession of any such building or structure
who refuses to vacate the building or structure, in accordance with an order
given as herein provided, is guilty of an infraction.
   (c)   Any person who removes any notice or order posted as herein required
for the purpose of interfering with the enforcement of these provisions shall
be guilty of an infraction.
   (d)   No person shall obstruct, impede, or interfere with any representative
of the City Council, or any representative of a City department, or with any
person who owns or holds any estate or interest in a building that has been
ordered to be vacated, repaired, rehabilitated, or demolished and removed, or
with any person to whom any such building has been lawfully sold pursuant to
these provisions whenever any such representative of the City Council,
representative of the City, purchaser or person having any interest or estate
in such building is engaged in vacating, repairing, rehabilitating, or
demolishing and removing any such building pursuant to these provisions, or in
performing any necessary act preliminary to or incidental to such work as
herein authorized or directed. It is a defense to prosecution under this
division (d) that the alleged obstruction or interference consisted of
constitutionally protected speech only.
   (e)   Any prevailing party in an action to abate a public nuisance shall be
entitled to attorneys’ fees and costs, to the extent such attorneys’ fees and
costs do not exceed the reasonable attorneys’ fees and costs incurred by the
City. The City may limit recovery of attorneys’ fees and costs by the
prevailing party to those individual actions which the City elects, at the
initiation of that individual action, to seek recovery of its own attorneys’
fees and costs.
   (f)   Upon entry of a second or subsequent civil or criminal judgment within
a two- (2-)year period finding that an owner of property is responsible for a
public nuisance, except for conditions abated pursuant to California Health &
Safety Code § 17980, the owner shall be liable to the City for treble the costs
of the abatement.
(§ 3, Ord. 3046, eff. April 14, 2016)
Sec. 5-22.09. Recordation of Notice of Violation.
   (a)   If a violation has not been fully abated or corrected, as determined
by the City, within the deadline set forth in a Notice of Violation, or within
the deadline provided in a decision on an appeal of a Notice of Violation in
the event of an appeal, then the City, in its sole discretion, may record the
Notice of Violation with the San Bernardino County Recorder's Office against
said premises.
   (b)   The City shall record a Notice of Release of Notice of Violation with
the San Bernardino County Recorder's Office within 10 business days of its
determination that a violation or a public nuisance has been fully abated or
corrected with all required City approvals, permits, licenses and the passage
of all City required inspections.
(§ 7, Ord. 3230, eff. January 19, 2023)
Sec. 5-22.10. Emergency Action to Abate an Imminent Hazard.
   (a)   Notwithstanding any provision of this Code to the contrary, an
enforcement official may cause a public nuisance to be summarily abated if it
is determined that the nuisance creates an imminent hazard to a person or
persons, or to other real or personal property. Prior to abating the nuisance,
the City may attempt to notify a responsible person of the imminent hazard and
request its abatement by said person. The enforcement official may, in his or
her discretion, dispense with an attempt of prior notification of a responsible
person if the nature or severity of the hazard justifies such inaction.
   (b)   Within 10 business days, or as soon as reasonably possible thereafter,
following emergency actions of City Personnel to abate an imminent hazard, the
City shall serve any responsible person with a Notice of Emergency Abatement of
an Imminent Hazard. The notice shall contain a brief description of the
condition(s) and reasons why it constitutes an imminent hazard, the law
prohibiting or pertaining to the imminent hazard, and the actions the City took
to abate the imminent hazard. A Notice of Emergency Abatement may be appealed
in the same manner as a Notice of Violation in accordance with the provisions
of §
5-22.05. The City shall be entitled to recover its fees and costs for the
abatement of an imminent hazard. In such instances, the City shall follow the
procedures set forth in this Chapter.
(§ 7, Ord. 3230, eff. January 19, 2023)
CHAPTER 23: CAMPING AND STORAGE OF PERSONAL PROPERTY
   
5-23.01   Purpose
   
5-23.02   Definitions
   
5-23.03   Unlawful camping
   
5-23.04   Storage of personal property
   
5-23.05   Use of vehicle for human habitation
   
5-23.06   Urination or defecation in public view
   
5-23.07   Enforcement
Sec. 5-23.01. Purpose.
   The public streets and areas within the City should be readily accessible
and available to residents and the public at large. The use of these areas for
camping purposes or storage of personal property interferes with the rights of
others to use the areas for which they were intended. The purpose of this
chapter is to maintain public streets and areas within the City in a clean and
accessible condition.
(§ 1, Ord. 2601, eff. December 7, 1995, § 4, Ord. 3311, eff. September 18,
2025)
Sec. 5-23.02. Definitions.
   Unless the particular provisions or the context otherwise requires, the
definitions contained in this section shall govern the construction, meaning,
and application of words and phrases used in this chapter.
   (a)   "Camp" means to place, pitch, or occupy camp facilities; to live
temporarily in a camp facility or outdoors; or to use camp paraphernalia for
the purpose of temporary or permanent human habitation.
   (b)   "Camp facilities" include but are not limited to tents, huts,
vehicles, vehicle camping outfits, or temporary shelter.
   (c)   "Camp paraphernalia" includes but is not limited to bedrolls,
tarpaulins, cots, beds, sleeping bags, hammocks, or cooking facilities and
similar equipment.
   (d)   "Establish" means setting up or moving equipment, supplies, or
materials on to public or private property to "camp" or operate camp
facilities.
   (e)   "Maintain" means keeping or permitting equipment, supplies, or
materials to remain on public or private property.
   (f)   "Operate" means participating or assisting in establishing or
maintaining a camp or camp facility.
   (g)   "Personal property" means any and all tangible items including but not
limited to goods, materials, merchandise, camp paraphernalia, luggage,
backpack, books, clothing, documents, household goods, and medication.
   (h)   "Private property" means all privately owned property.
   (i)   "Public property" means all public property, including but not limited
to streets, sidewalks, alleys, improved or unimproved land, and parks owned by
a public agency and/or open to public access.
   (j)   “Recreational vehicle” or "RV" means a motorhome, travel trailer,
truck camper, camping trailer, or other vehicle or trailer with or without
motive power designed or altered for human habitation for recreational,
emergency, or other human occupancy. "Recreational vehicle" specifically
includes but is not limited to: a "recreational vehicle" as defined by
California Health and Safety Code Section 18010; a "truck camper" as defined by
Health and Safety Code Section 18013.4; a "camp trailer" as defined in
California Vehicle Code Section 242; a "camper" as defined in California
Vehicle Code Section 243; a "fifth-wheel travel trailer" as defined in
California Vehicle Code Section 324; a "house car" as defined by California
Vehicle Code Section 362; a "trailer coach" as defined in California Vehicle
Code Section 635; a van camper; or a van conversion.
   (k)   "Store" means to put aside or accumulate for use when needed, to put
for safekeeping, or to place or leave in a location.
(§ 1, Ord. 2601, eff. December 7, 1995, as amended by § 1, Ord. 2923, eff. June
3, 2010, § 4, Ord. 3311, eff. September 18, 2025)
Sec. 5-23.03. Unlawful camping.
   (a)   It is unlawful and a public nuisance for any person to camp;
establish, maintain, allow, operate, or occupy camp facilities; or use camp
paraphernalia in the following areas:
      (1)   Any public property, public or private street, or right-of-way
including sidewalks, bus stops, and public landscaping;
      (2)   Any parking lot, yard, building setback, vacant land, open space,
park, embankment, or any other area open to, accessible to, or controlled by
the public (improved or unimproved);
      (3)   In, on, under, or adjacent to any structure not intended for human
occupancy;
      (4)   In, on, under, or adjacent to a parked vehicle on any public or
private property including but not limited to an automobile, bus, truck,
camper, trailer, or recreational vehicle.
   (b)   The prohibition on camping in this section shall not apply to the
following:   
      (1)   Camping on residential private property with consent of the
property owner; and where such use does not violate any provision of this Code
or state law, does not create or permit a public nuisance, and where such use
is not within view of the public right-of-way;
      (2)   Camping where specifically permitted within City-approved
campgrounds or facilities;
      (3)   Camping in connection with a special event as authorized by the
City.
   (c)   The exceptions contained herein do not apply where:
      (1)   Camping is conducted in such a manner as to create inadequate
sanitation or other public nuisance;
      (2)   Camping is of such frequency, intensity, or duration as to
constitute a use of land prohibited by zoning regulations;
      (3)   Camping would be prohibited under any other provision of this Code;
and
      (4)   Any fee, charge, or other monetary consideration is collected for
the privilege of camping or for any services or the use of any facilities
related thereto, other than at City-approved campgrounds or facilities.
   (d)   Nothing in this chapter is intended to prohibit or make unlawful
activities of a property owner or lawful tenant of private property that are
incidental to the lawful and authorized use of private property for residential
or other approved and legal purposes. Nothing herein is intended to prohibit or
make unlawful activities of a property owner or other lawful tenant if such
activities are expressly authorized by the City's zoning ordinance, other
ordinances, or regulations.
(§ 1, Ord. 2601, eff. December 7, 1995, as amended by § 2, Ord. 2923, eff. June
3, 2010, § 4, Ord. 3311, eff. September 18, 2025)
Sec. 5-23.04. Storage of personal property.
   It is unlawful and a public nuisance for any person to store personal
property in any of the following areas, except as otherwise approved by the
City Manager or designee or as permitted by this Code or state law:
   (a)   Any public property, public or private street, or right-of-way
including sidewalks, bus stops, and public landscaping; or
   (b)   Any parking lot, yard, building setback, vacant land, open space,
park, or any other area open to, accessible to, or controlled by the public
(improved or unimproved).
(§ 1, Ord. 2601, eff. December 7, 1995, § 4, Ord. 3311, eff. September 18,
2025)
Sec. 5-23.05. Use of vehicle for human habitation.
   It is unlawful for any person to use any motor vehicle or recreational
vehicle for human habitation on or in any public or private street, alley,
parking lot, or any public or privately owned property which is held open for
public use. For purposes of this section, evidence of "human habitation" shall
include but not be limited to, observations that the vehicle is being used for
living, sleeping, cooking, or bathing purposes. Sleeping in or occupying a
parked vehicle for longer than thirty (30) minutes, consecutively or in the
aggregate, between the hours of 11:00 p.m. and 5:00 a.m. shall constitute prima
facie evidence the vehicle is being used for human habitation
(§ 4, Ord. 3311, eff. September 18, 2025)
Sec. 5-23.06. Urination or defecation in public view.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to urinate or defecate or dump any fecal
matter on public or private property in an area exposed to the public view or
on any public street, sidewalk, alley, park, or any other space except in a
restroom or other facility designed for such purpose.
(§ 4, Ord. 3311, eff. September 18, 2025)
Sec. 5-23.07. Enforcement.
   (a)   Each person shall be deemed guilty of a separate offense for each and
every day, or portion thereof, during which any violation of or failure to
comply with any of the provisions of this chapter is committed, continued or
permitted by such person, and each instance shall be deemed punishable.
   (b)   The provisions of this chapter shall not be construed as permitting
conduct not proscribed herein and shall not affect the enforceability of any
other applicable provisions of law.
   (c)   The City may enforce any violation of this chapter by any and all
means available by law including but not limited to a restraining order,
preliminary or permanent injunction, and criminal or administrative
enforcement.
   (d)   These remedies are intended to be cumulative and may be used in
conjunction with or in lieu of each other remedy.
(§ 4, Ord. 3311, eff. September 18, 2025)
CHAPTER 24: REGULATION OF PUBLIC LODGING FACILITIES
   
5-24.01   Definitions
   
5-24.02   Register required
   
5-24.03   Inspection of register
   
5-24.04   Violations: Penalties
Sec. 5-24.01. Definitions.
   For purposes of this chapter, unless otherwise apparent from the context,
certain words and phrases used herein are defined as follows:
   (a)   “Public lodging facility” means any hotel, motel or residence inn as
the same are or may hereinafter be defined in
Article 2 of Chapter 1 of Title 9 of this code.
   (b)   “Operator” means any person engaged in the management or operation of
a public lodging facility within the City.
(§ 1, Ord. 2607, eff. February 1, 1996, as amended by § 1, Ord. 2955, eff.
August 4, 2012)
Sec. 5-24.02. Register required.
   Every operator of any public lodging facility in the City shall at all times
keep and maintain a register, computerized or handwritten, wherein all guest
names are recorded upon their procurement of a room. The operator shall verify
the identity of the person procuring the room with a valid driver’s license or
other reliable photo identification and shall record the driver’s license
number or identification number and the state which issued the identification
next to the person’s signature. The register shall also show the date and time
the room was procured, the home address of each guest or person renting or
occupying a room or rooms, and the make, year, and license number of the
vehicle of such person, and the state in which such vehicle is licensed. Until
all of the aforesaid entries have been made in such register, no guest shall be
permitted to occupy any room in such public lodging facility. The operator of
such facility, or his or her agent, shall record opposite such name or names so
registered the number of each room assigned to and occupied by each such guest.
(§ 1, Ord. 2607, eff. February 1, 1996, as amended by § 1, Ord. 2955, eff.
August 4, 2012)
Sec. 5-24.03. Inspection of register.
   The register shall be kept in a conspicuous place in the public lodging
facility and shall at all times be open to inspection by any police officer and
by any designated representative of the City.
(§ 1, Ord. 2607, eff. February 1, 1996, as amended by § 1, Ord. 2955, eff.
August 4, 2012)
Sec. 5-24.04. Violations: Penalties.
   It shall be unlawful for any owner, operator or manager of a hotel or motel
in the City to permit any violation of any provision of this chapter or to fail
to comply with any requirement of this chapter. Any owner, operator or manager
violating any such provision or failing to comply with any such requirement of
this chapter shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. Any owner, operator or manager
convicted of a misdemeanor pursuant to the provisions of this chapter shall be
punishable as provided in §
1-2.01 of this Code.
(§ 1, Ord. 2607, eff. February 1, 1996, as amended by § 1, Ord. 2955, eff.
August 4, 2012)
CHAPTER 25: SHOPPING CART REGULATIONS
   
5-25.01   Findings, purpose, and applicability
   
5-25.02   Definitions
   
5-25.03   Exemption
   
5-25.04   Mandatory plan to prevent cart removal
   
5-25.05   Abandoned cart prevention plan timeline and approval process
   
5-25.06   Penalties for failing to submit an abandoned cart prevention plan
   
5-25.07   Notification for retrieval of abandoned carts
   
5-25.08   Administrative costs and fines.
   
5-25.09   Disposition of carts after thirty (30) days
   
5-25.10   Unmarked shopping carts: Public nuisance
   
5-25.11   Unmarked shopping carts: Destruction
Sec. 5-25.01. Findings, purpose and applicability.
   Abandoned shopping carts constitute a nuisance, create potential hazards to
the health and safety of the public, and interfere with pedestrian and
vehicular traffic within the City of Ontario. The accumulation of wrecked,
dismantled, and abandoned shopping carts on public or private property also
tends to create conditions that reduce property values, promoting blight and
deterioration in the City. The purpose of this chapter is to provide
regulations pertaining to abandoned shopping carts, unmarked shopping carts,
and to provide a requirement for a mandatory plan to prevent cart removal. This
chapter is not intended to duplicate state law or regulate any matters
pertaining to shopping carts which are the subject of state law. To the extent
any provision of this chapter is determined to be preempted by state law, it
shall be deemed severed from all other provisions of this chapter and such
other provisions shall remain in full force and effect. The provisions of this
chapter are applicable to any business entity that provides shopping carts for
customer use.
(§ 1, Ord. 2759, eff. August 15, 2002, § 3, Ord. 3305, eff. June 19, 2025)
Sec. 5-25.02. Definitions.
   (a)   “Abandoned cart” shall mean any cart that has been removed without
written permission of the owner, or on-duty manager from the premises of the
business establishment, regardless of whether it has been left on either
private or public property. This provision shall not apply to carts that are
removed for the purpose of repair or maintenance.
   (b)   “Cart” shall mean a basket that is mounted on wheels or similar device
provided by a business establishment for use by a customer for the purpose of
transporting goods of any kind, including, but not limited to, grocery store
shopping carts.
   (c)   “Director” shall mean the City’s Community Improvement Director or
other employee designated by the City Manager to enforce or carry out the
provisions of this chapter.
   (d)   “Owner” shall mean any person or entity, who in connection with the
conduct of a business, owns, possesses, or makes any cart available to
customers or the public. For the purposes of this chapter, “owner” shall also
include the owner's on-site or designated agent or retailer that provides the
carts for use by its customers.
   (e)   “Premises” shall mean the entire area owned and utilized by the
business establishment that provides carts for use by customers, including any
parking lot or other property provided by the owner for customer parking.
   (f)   “Unmarked cart” shall mean any cart as defined by this chapter that is
not identified and marked pursuant to Cal. Bus. & Prof. Code § 22435.1.
(§ 1, Ord. 2759, eff. August 15, 2002, § 3, Ord. 3305, eff. June 19, 2025)
Sec. 5-25.03. Exemption.
   (a)   Request for exemption. An owner may submit a request to the Director
for an exemption from the requirements of §§
5-25.05 through
5-25.07. Owners seeking to obtain or renew an exemption under this section
shall apply to the Director on an annual basis.
   (b)   Eligibility. Any owner that enters into a contract with a retrieval
service to provide for the retrieval of abandoned carts, individually or as
part of a consortium of businesses, that is satisfactory to the City.
   (c)   Grounds for denial. A request for an exemption under this section may
be denied on the following grounds:
      (1)   The proposed retrieval service or contract is deemed unsatisfactory
by the City.
      (2)   Within the twelve (12) month period immediately preceding the date
of the request, the City has provided the owner with written notification on
three (3) or more separate occasions of the location of an abandoned cart
identified as belonging to the owner.
      (3)   The owner fails to provide all information required by the City.
   (d)   Obligation to submit abandoned cart prevention plan following
exemption denial. Any owner whose request for an exemption, pursuant to this
section, is denied by the City shall, within sixty (60) days of the date of the
denial notification, submit an abandoned cart prevention plan to the Director
pursuant to §
5-25.05.
   (e)   Timing of subsequent exemption requests. An owner may reapply for an
exemption under this chapter no sooner than the later of:
      (1)   One (1) year from the date of approval of a prior exemption; or
      (2)   One (1) year from the date upon which the Director approves an
abandoned cart prevention plan submitted by the owner in accordance with §
5-25.05.
   (f)   Transfer for ownership. Any exemption granted hereunder shall become
null and void upon any transfer of ownership of the subject business.
(§ 1, Ord. 2759, eff. August 15, 2002, § 3, Ord. 3305, eff. June 19, 2025)
Sec. 5-25.04. Mandatory plan to prevent cart removal.
   Every owner shall develop and implement a specific plan to prevent customers
from removing carts from the business premises. The plan must include the
following elements:
   (a)   Required signs on carts. Every cart owned or provided by any business
establishment in the City must have a sign permanently affixed to it that
contains all of the following information:
      (1)   Identifies the owner of the cart or the name of the business
establishment, or both;
      (2)   Notifies the public of the procedure to be utilized for authorized
removal of the cart from the business premises;
      (3)   Notifies the public that the unauthorized removal of the cart from
the premises or parking area of the retail establishment, or the unauthorized
possession of the cart, is a violation of state law; and
      (4)   Lists a valid telephone number to contact to report the location of
the abandoned cart or lists an address for returning the cart to the owner or
business establishment.
   (b)   Required signs on property. Signs shall be placed in pertinent places
near door exits and near parking lot exists that notify customers that cart
removal is prohibited and constitutes a violation of state and local law.
   (c)   Physical measures. Specific physical measures to prevent cart removal
from the business premises. These measures may include disabling devices on all
carts, posting of a security guard to deter and stop customers who attempt to
remove carts from the premises, bollards and chains around business premises to
prevent cart removal, security deposits required for the use of all carts, or
the rental or sale of carts that can be temporarily or permanently used for
transport of purchases.
   (d)   Employee training. The owner shall establish an annual employee
training program to educate new and existing employees on the prevention
measures specified in the abandoned cart prevention plan submitted to the City.
The owner must provide the City with details outlining the training program.
(§ 1, Ord. 2759, eff. August 15, 2002, § 3, Ord. 3305, eff. June 19, 2025)
Sec. 5-25.05. Abandoned cart prevention plan timeline and approval process.
   (a)   An abandoned cart prevention plan shall be submitted to the Director
for approval within sixty (60) days of the adoption of this chapter, or within
sixty (60) days prior to the owner’s initial application for a business license
or renewal application for a business license under
Title 3, Chapter 1 of this code; or within sixty (60) days following a denial
for a request for an exemption pursuant to §
5-25.03.
   (b)   The Director may require modifications to an abandoned cart prevention
plan based on any of the following grounds:
      (1)   Implementation of the plan would violate one or more of the
provisions of this code.
      (2)   The plan fails to include the information required by this chapter.
      (3)   The plan is insufficient or inadequate to prevent the unauthorized
removal of carts from the business establishment.
      (4)   The plan fails to address any special or unique conditions to the
geographical location of the business establishment as such conditions relate
to unauthorized cart removal prevention.
   (c)   The abandoned cart prevention plan shall be implemented within thirty
(30) days of Director approval and shall remain in effect until such time as:
      (1)   The owner submits a renewed prevention plan with a business license
renewal application under
Title 3, Chapter 1 of this code, and that renewed prevention plan is approved
by the Director; or
      (2)   The owner requests an exemption under §
5-25.03 of this code and such request is approved by the Director.
   (d)   Any modifications required by the Director to an abandoned cart
prevention plan must be implemented within thirty (30) days of notification to
the owner.
(§ 1, Ord. 2759, eff. August 15, 2002, § 3, Ord. 3305, eff. June 19, 2025)
Sec. 5-25.06. Penalties for failing to submit an abandoned cart prevention
plan.
   Any owner that fails to submit a proposed abandoned cart prevention plan to
the City, implement the approved plan measures, or make any required
modifications to the plan within the time frames specified in this chapter
shall be subject to a One Thousand Dollar ($1,000) civil penalty, plus an
additional penalty for Fifty Dollars ($50) for each day of noncompliance.
(§ 1, Ord. 2759, eff. August 15, 2002, § 3, Ord. 3305, eff. June 19, 2025)
Sec. 5-25.07. Notification for retrieval of abandoned carts.
   Pursuant to Cal. Bus. & Prof. Code § 22435.7, the City shall notify the
owner of any abandoned carts owned or used by the business establishment that
have been located within the City of Ontario within twenty-four (24) hours of
impoundment. The owner shall have three (3) business days from the date the
notification is given to retrieve carts from the City.
(§ 1, Ord. 2759, eff. August 15, 2002)
Sec. 5-25.08. Administrative costs and fines.
   Pursuant to Cal. Bus. & Prof. Code § 22435.7, any owner that fails to
retrieve its abandoned cart(s) within three (3) business days after receiving
notice from the City, shall pay the City's administrative costs for retrieving
the cart(s) and providing the notification to the owner. Any owner who fails to
retrieve abandoned carts in accordance with this chapter in excess of three (3)
times during a six (6) month period, shall be subject to a Fifty Dollar ($50)
fine for each occurrence. An occurrence includes all carts owned by the 0wner
that are impounded by the City in a one-day period.
(§ 1, Ord. 2759, eff. August 15, 2002)
Sec. 5-25.09. Disposition of carts after thirty (30) days.
   Pursuant to State law, any cart not reclaimed from the City within thirty
(30) days after notification to the owner shall be sold or otherwise disposed
of by the City.
(§ 1, Ord. 2759, eff. August 15, 2002)
Sec. 5-25.10. Unmarked shopping carts: Public nuisance.
   Any unmarked shopping cart is hereby declared to be a public nuisance if:
   (a)   It is left unattended on a public right-of-way or other public
property;
   (b)   It is left unattended on any private property at a location that will
impede emergency services;
   (c)   It is left unattended on the front or side setback of any private
property without the owner's or occupant's permission; or
   (d)   It is left on private property where it may be viewed from the public
right-of-way or adjacent properties for more than twenty-four (24) hours after
the occupant, if any, and the owner of the property has received written notice
that if the shopping cart is not removed from public view, it will be impounded
by the City and may be sold or otherwise disposed of by the City.
(§ 1, Ord. 2759, eff. August 15, 2002)
Sec. 5-25.11. Unmarked shopping carts: Destruction.
   Any carts found to be unmarked as defined by this chapter and has been
impounded by the City shall be destroyed without any further notice other than
as specified in §
5-25.10(d).
(§ 1, Ord. 2759, eff. August 15, 2002)
CHAPTER 26: TEMPORARY STREET CLOSURES DUE TO CONTINUING CRIMINAL ACTIVITY
   
5-26.01   Findings and purpose
   
5-26.02   Definitions
   
5-26.03   Identification of designated streets
   
5-26.04   Temporary street closure; violation
   
5-26.05   Police services fee for violations of temporary street closures
   
5-26.06   Citation of persons violating temporary street closures; removal and
storage of vehicle; release of stored vehicle; liability for towing and storage
fees
   
5-26.07   Spectators prohibited at speed contests or exhibitions
Sec. 5-26.01. Findings and purpose.
   (a)   Certain streets within the City have been subject to continuing and
escalating nighttime street racing over the past two years. Such street racing
constitutes a nuisance, creates potential hazards to the health and safety of
the public, and interferes with pedestrian and vehicular traffic within the
City. The illegal races occur on a regular basis in the industrial or warehouse
zones of the City. Hundreds of people have been found to form illicit “tracks”
along Broad Street and Long Street. Those gathered often block the streets and
sidewalks to form the racetrack area, place bets and generally encourage, aid
and abet the racing process.
   (b)   Street racers accelerate to extremely high speeds without regard to
oncoming traffic, pedestrians, or vehicles parked and moving nearby. The racers
move quickly from street to street, racing for several heats and then often
moving on to another street upon the arrival of a police unit. Calls for police
service, traffic accidents, and property crimes have increased dramatically
since 1998; and two murders have also occurred which were motivated by unpaid
street racing bets.
   (c)   This chapter is adopted pursuant to the authority granted by Cal. Veh.
Code § 21101.4 which allows local authorities to adopt rules and regulations
for temporary street closures due to serious and continual criminal activity on
portions of the streets recommended for closure.
   (d)   The Council's findings, based upon the recommendation of the Ontario
Police Chief in regard to the Cal. Veh. Code § 21101.4 criteria, are as stated
in §§
5-26.02 through
5-26.06.
(§ 1, Ord. 2713, eff. June 1, 2000)
Sec. 5-26.02. Definitions.
   (a)   "Designated Streets" shall mean those streets which the City Council
determines by resolution to meet the criteria identified in Cal. Veh. Code §
21101.4.
   (b)   "Street race" shall mean any unlawful speed contest, as defined by
Cal. Veh. Code § 23109, whether or not the race is attended by persons other
than the drivers racing vehicles on city streets.
   (c)   "Temporary street closure" shall mean closure for not more than 18
months, pursuant to Cal. Veh. Code § 21101.4(b) (subject to extension) of the
abovementioned streets from the hours of 11:00 p.m. on Friday night to 6:00
a.m. Saturday morning, and 11:00 p.m. Saturday night to 6:00 a.m. Sunday
morning.
   (d)   "Violator" shall mean the responsible party for a juvenile violator of
this chapter or an adult violator of this chapter.
(§ 1, Ord. 2713, eff. June 1, 2000)
Sec. 5-26.03. Identification of designated streets.
   (a)   Upon the recommendation of the Police Chief, the City Council may from
time to time adopt a resolution identifying streets where there are continuing
activities that warrant closure of a street in accordance with Cal. Veh. Code §
21101.4.
   (b)   Prior to adopting a resolution identifying designated streets for
temporary closure, the City Council shall make the following findings:
      (1)   Serious and continuing criminal activity exists on designated
streets within the City which are recommended for temporary closure on weekends
between the hours of 11:00 p.m. Friday night and 6:00 a.m. Saturday morning,
and 11:00 p.m. Saturday night and 6:00 a.m. Sunday morning.
      (2)   The designated streets have not been designated as through highways
or arterial streets;
      (3)   Vehicular or pedestrian traffic on the designated streets
contributes to the criminal activity of nighttime street racing; and
      (4)   The temporary closure of the designated streets will not
substantially adversely affect traffic flow, safety down the adjacent streets
or in the surrounding neighborhoods, the operation of emergency vehicles,
performance of municipal or public utility services, or the delivery of freight
by commercial vehicles in the area of the highway posed to be temporarily
closed.
(§ 1, Ord. 2713, eff. June 1, 2000)
Sec. 5-26.04. Temporary street closure; violation.
   (a)   Vehicles parked on the designated streets during the time of temporary
closure shall be towed pursuant to Cal. Veh. Code § 22651(n).
   (b)   Signs giving notice of the temporary closure shall be posted prior to
enforcement of this section, pursuant to Cal. Veh. Code § 21103. Such signs
shall be posted at all entrances to the closed streets. Signs at street
entrances shall advise that a street is temporarily closed to vehicles and
pedestrians; signs shall further advise that the closed street is a tow-away
zone, that violators will be cited for a misdemeanor offense, that violators
are subject to arrest, and that the maximum penalty is a One Thousand Dollar
($1,000) fine and six (6) months in jail.
   (c)   With the exception of commercial vehicles making deliveries to and
from commercial properties adjacent to the designated streets and individuals
employed by businesses adjacent to the designated streets and showing
identification, no person shall drive, stop, or park a vehicle, or be a
pedestrian on a designated street, including the adjacent sidewalk, that has
been temporarily closed pursuant to Cal. Veh. Code § 21101.4(b). All
individuals violating the temporary street closure of the designated streets
are subject to arrest. Violation of this section constitutes a misdemeanor with
a fine of One Thousand Dollars ($1,000) per violation. This chapter shall be
operative for eighteen (18) months, pursuant to Cal. Veh. Code § 21101.4(b),
subject to extension by the City Council.
(§ 1, Ord. 2713, eff. June 1, 2000, as amended by § 2, Ord. 2753, eff. February
14, 2002)
Sec. 5-26.05. Police services fee for violations of temporary street closures.
   (a)   Purpose. The City finds and determines that persons who are detained
and taken into custody by police personnel for violating temporary street
closures at the designated streets impose an extraordinary burden on Police
Department staffing and resources. Police officers supervising detained
violators are unavailable to carry out police duties in the field, causing
decreases in levels of police protection and public safety in the community.
The purpose of this section is to defray the reasonable costs the City incurs
to provide extraordinary police services to respond to, detain and supervise
violators of temporary street closures.
   (b)   Police services fee established; debt to City.
      (1)   The violator of the temporary street closure shall be liable for a
police services fee whenever the City's police personnel respond to, detain and
supervise a violator of temporary street closures. The City Council shall
establish the amount of the police services fee by resolution.
      (2)   The police services fee charged to the violator of the temporary
street closure shall be a debt to the City by the violator. Any violator owing
to the City pursuant to this section shall be liable in an action brought by
the City in its own name to recover such amount, including reasonable
attorneys' fees.
   (c)   Billing. The Chief of Police or his or her designee shall notify the
Finance Department in writing of (i) the names and addresses of the violator,
(ii) the date and time of the violation of §
5-26.04 of this chapter, (iii) the names of the police personnel who responded
to, detained and supervised the violator, and (iv) the date that the violator
was reprimanded by the San Bernardino Juvenile Court for the violation (if
applicable). The Finance Department may adopt administrative procedures for the
purposes of enforcing the provisions of this section.
   (d)   Appeal. Any violator who receives a bill from the Finance Department
pursuant to this section may, within fifteen (15) days after receiving such
bill, file a written request with the City Clerk appealing the bill. The
written appeal shall state the grounds for such appeal and the specific facts
and basis for the appeal. The violator is deemed to have received a bill on the
third day following the date that the Finance Department caused the bill to be
placed in the United States mail. The City Manager, or his or her designee,
shall review any written appeal filed with the City Clerk pursuant to this
section and shall prepare a written decision on the appeal within thirty (30)
days from the date that the written appeal is received by the City Clerk. All
decisions by the City Manager, or his or her designee, shall be final.
(§ 1, Ord. 2713, eff. June 1, 2000)
Sec. 5-26.06. Citation of persons violating temporary street closures; removal
and storage of vehicle; release of stored vehicle; liability for towing and
storage fees.
   (a)   Whenever a peace officer determines that a person was violating the
temporary street closure, as described in §
5-26.04 of this Code, the peace officer may immediately cite that person and
may cause the removal and storage of the motor vehicle used by that person. A
motor vehicle may not be stored for more than 30 days.
   (b)   The registered and legal owner of the vehicle that is removed and
seized under subdivision (a) or their agent shall be provided with the
opportunity for a storage hearing to determine the validity of the storage.
   (c)   (1)   An impounding agency shall release the motor vehicle to the
registered owner or his or her agent prior to the conclusion of the impoundment
period described in subdivision (a) under any of the following circumstances:
         (i)   If the vehicle is a stolen vehicle.
         (ii)   If the person is alleged to have been parked on designated
streets during the time of temporary closure, as described in §
5-26.04 of this Code, was not authorized by the registered owner of the motor
vehicle to operate the motor vehicle at the time of the commission of the
offense.
         (iii)   If the legal owner or registered owner of the vehicle is a
rental car agency.
         (iv)   If, prior to the conclusion of the impoundment period, a
citation or notice is dismissed, criminal charges are not filed by the City
Attorney because of lack of evidence, or the charges are otherwise dismissed by
the court.
      (2)   A vehicle shall be released pursuant to this subdivision only if
the registered owner or his or her agent presents a currently valid driver's
license to operate the vehicle and proof of current vehicle registration, or if
ordered by a court.
   (d)   A vehicle stored or impounded under subdivision (a) shall be released
to the legal owner of the vehicle or the legal owner's agent on or before the
30th day of impoundment if all of the following conditions are met:
      (1)   The legal owner is a motor vehicle dealer, bank, credit union,
acceptance corporation, or other licensed financial institution legally
operating in this state, or is another person, not the registered owner,
holding a security interest in the vehicle.
      (2)   The legal owner or the legal owner's agent pays all towing and
storage fees related to the impoundment of the vehicle. No lien sale processing
fee shall be charged to a legal owner who redeems the vehicle on or before the
15th day of impoundment.
      (3)   The legal owner or the legal owner's agent presents foreclosure
documents or an affidavit of repossession of the vehicle.
   (e)   (1)   The registered owner or his or her agent is responsible for all
towing and storage charges related to the impoundment, and any administrative
charges authorized by law.
      (2)   Notwithstanding paragraph (1), if the violator was not authorized
by the registered owner of the motor vehicle to operate the motor vehicle at
the time of the commission of the offense, the court shall order the convicted
person to reimburse the registered owner for any towing and storage charges
related to the impoundment, and any administrative charges authorized by law
and incurred by the registered owner to obtain possession of the vehicle,
unless the court finds that the person convicted does not have the ability to
pay all or part of these charges.
      (3)   If the vehicle is a rental vehicle, the rental car agency may
require the person to whom the vehicle is rented to pay all towing and storage
charges related to the impoundment and any administrative charges authorized by
law that were incurred by the rental car agency in connection with obtaining
possession of the vehicle.
      (4)   The owner shall not be liable for any towing and storage charges
related to the impoundment if acquittal or dismissal occurs.
      (5)   The vehicle shall not be sold prior to the defendant's conviction.
      (6)   The impounding agency is responsible for the actual costs incurred
by the towing agency as a result of the impoundment should the registered owner
be absolved of liability for those charges pursuant to §
5-26.04 of this Code. Notwithstanding this provision, nothing shall prohibit
impounding agencies from making prior payment arrangements to satisfy this
requirement.
   (f)   Any period in which the vehicle is subjected to storage under this
section shall be included as part of the period of impoundment ordered by the
court.
(§ 1, Ord. 2713, eff. June 1, 2000)
Sec. 5-26.07. Spectators prohibited at speed contests or exhibitions.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to be knowingly present, as a spectator,
at any motor vehicle speed contest or exhibition conducted on a public street
for the purpose of watching such speed contest or exhibition as it progresses
or for watching preparations being made for such a speed contest or exhibition.
Violations of this section shall be a misdemeanor. The City Attorney, City
Prosecutor, or District Attorney shall have the authority to prosecute any
violation of this section as an infraction in the interests of justice.
Additionally, the court may determine that the offense is an infraction in
which the case shall proceed as if the defendant has been arraigned on an
infraction complaint.
(§ 2, Ord. 2749, eff. December 6, 2001)
CHAPTER 27: SEIZURE AND FORFEITURE OF VEHICLES USED TO SOLICIT PROSTITUTION,
ACQUIRE OR ATTEMPT TO ACQUIRE CONTROLLED SUBSTANCES (REPEALED) *
* Sections 5-27.01 through 5-27.14, codified from Ord. 2744, eff. October 4,
2001, as amended by Ord. 2748, eff. November 15, 2001, repealed by § 1, Ord.
2890, eff. May 1, 2008.
CHAPTER 28: SEIZURE AND FORFEITURE OF VEHICLES USED TO PARTICIPATE IN MOTOR
VEHICLE SPEED CONTESTS (REPEALED) *
* Sections 5-28.01 through 5-28.14, codified from Ord. 2781, eff. August 14,
2003, repealed by § 2, Ord. 2890, eff. May 1, 2008.
CHAPTER 29: NOISE
   
5-29.01   Declaration of findings and policy
   
5-29.02   Definitions
   
5-29.03   Designated noise zones
   
5-29.04   Exterior noise standards
   
5-29.05   Interior noise standards
   
5-29.06   Exemptions
   
5-29.07   Loud and disturbing noise
   
5-29.08   Real property maintenance noise regulations
   
5-29.09   Construction activity noise regulations
   
5-29.10   Other public agency exceptions
   
5-29.11   Schools, day care centers, churches, libraries, museums, health care
institutions; Special provisions
   
5-29.12   Sound amplifying equipment
   
5-29.13   Amplified sound
   
5-29.14   Motor vehicles
   
5-29.15   Noise level measurement
   
5-29.16   Prima facie violation
   
5-29.17   Penalty
   
5-29.18   Enforcement and administration
   
5-29.19   City Manager waiver
   
5-29.20   Noise abatement program
Sec. 5-29.01. Declaration of findings and policy.
   It is hereby found and declared that:
   (a)   The making and creation of excessive, unnecessary or unusually loud
noises within the limits of the City is a condition that has existed for some
time, however, the extent and volume of such noises is increasing;
   (b)   The making, creation or maintenance of such excessive, unnecessary,
unnatural or unusually loud noises that are prolonged, unusual and unnatural in
their time, place and use affect and are a detriment to public health, comfort,
convenience, safety, welfare and prosperity of the residents of the City; and
   (c)   The necessity in the public interest for the provisions and
prohibitions hereinafter contained and enacted, is declared as a matter of
legislative determination and public policy, and it is further declared that
the provisions and prohibitions hereinafter contained and enacted are in
pursuance of and for the purpose of securing and promoting the public health,
comfort, convenience, safety, welfare and prosperity and the peace and quiet of
the residents of the City.
(§ 2, Ord. 2888, eff. March 6, 2008)
Sec. 5-29.02. Definitions.
   As used in this chapter, specific words and phrases are defined as follows:
   (a)   "Ambient noise level" shall mean the all-encompassing noise level
associated with a given environment and is a composite of sounds from all
sources, excluding the alleged offensive noise or excessive sound, at the
location and approximate time at which a comparison with the alleged offensive
noise is to be made.
   (b)   "Applicable (noise) zone" shall mean the noise zone category based on
the actual use of the property, provided that the actual use is a legal use in
the City.
   (c)   "A-weighted sound level" shall mean the sound pressure level in
decibels (dBAs) as measured with a sound level meter using the A-weighted
filter network (scale) at slow response and at a pressure of twenty (20)
micropascals. The A-weighted filter de-emphasizes the very low and a very high
frequency component of sound in a manner similar to the response of the human
ear, and is a numerical method of rating human judgment of loudness.
   (d)   "Decibel (dBA)" shall mean a unit for measuring the amplitude of a
sound, equal to twenty (20) times the logarithm to the base ten (10) of the
ratio of pressure of the sound measured to the reference pressure of twenty
(20) micropascals.
   (e)   "Equivalent sound or noise level (Leq)" shall mean the International
Electrotechnical Commission (IEC) 60804 Standard for measurement, or the most
recent revision thereof, for the sound level corresponding to a steady state
noise level over a given sample period with the same amount of acoustic energy
as the actual time varying noise level or the energy average noise level during
the sample period. The measurement period for the purposes of this chapter is
fifteen (15) minutes.
   (f)   "Impulsive noise" shall mean a noise of short duration usually less
than one (1) second and of high intensity, with an abrupt onset and rapid
decay. Such objectionable noises may also be repetitive.
   (g)   "Intrusive noise" shall mean that noise that intrudes over and above
the ambient noise at a given location. The relative intrusiveness of a sound
depends upon its amplitude, duration, frequency, time of occurrence and tonal
information content, as well as the prevailing ambient noise level.
   (h)   "Maintenance" shall mean the upkeep, repair or preservation of
existing property or structures.
   (i)   "Noise" shall mean any unwanted sound or sound that is undesirable
because it interferes with speech and hearing, or is intense enough to damage
hearing or is otherwise annoying.
   (j)   "Noise level (sound level)" shall mean the weighted sound pressure
level obtained by use of a sound level meter having a standard frequency filter
for attenuating part of the sound spectrum. For purposes of this chapter, all
noise levels (sound levels) shall be A-weighted sound pressure level.
   (k)   "Noise (sound) level meter" shall mean an instrument, including a
microphone, an amplifier, an output meter and frequency weighting networks for
the measurement and determination of noise and sound levels. For the purposes
of this chapter, the sound level meter must meet the International
Electrotechnical Commission (IEC) 60651 and 60804 Standards, or the most recent
revisions thereof, for Type 1 sound level meters or an instrument and the
associated recording and analyzing equipment that will provide equivalent data.
(§ 2, Ord. 2888, eff. March 6, 2008)
Sec. 5-29.03. Designated noise zones.
   The properties hereinafter described shall be assigned to the following
noise zones:
 
Noise Zone I:   All single-family residential properties;
Noise Zone II:  All multi-family residential properties and mobile home parks;
Noise Zone III: All commercial property;
Noise Zone IV:  The residential portion of mixed use properties;
Noise Zone V:   All manufacturing or industrial properties and all other uses.
 
   The actual use of the property, and not necessarily its zoning designation,
shall be the determining factor in establishing whether a property is in Noise
Zone I, II, III, IV or V, provided that the actual use is a legal use within
the applicable zone.
(§ 2, Ord. 2888, eff. March 6, 2008)
Sec. 5-29.04. Exterior noise standards.
   (a)   The following exterior noise standards, unless otherwise specifically
indicated, shall apply to all properties within a designated noise zone.
 
Allowable Exterior Noise Level (1)   Allowed Equivalent Noise Level, Leq. (2)
Noise Zone Type of Land Use          7 a.m. to 10 p.m. 10 p.m. to 7 a.m.
I          Single-Family Residential 65 dBA            45 dBA
II         Multi-Family Residential, 65 dBA            50 dBA
           Mobile Home Parks
III        Commercial Property       65 dBA            60 dBA
IV         Residential Portion of    70 dBA            70 dBA
           Mixed Use
V          Manufacturing and         70 dBA            70 dBA
           Industrial, Other Uses
 
      (1)   If the ambient noise level exceeds the resulting standard, the
ambient noise level shall be the standard.
      (2)   Measurements for compliance are made on the affected property
pursuant to §
5-29.15.
   (b)   It is unlawful for any person at any location within the incorporated
area of the City to create noise, or to allow the creation of any noise on
property owned, leased, occupied or otherwise controlled by such person, which
noise causes the noise level, when measured at any location on any other
property, to exceed either of the following:
      (1)   The noise standard for the applicable zone for any fifteen-minute
(15) period; and
      (2)   A maximum instantaneous (single instance) noise level equal to the
value of the noise standard plus twenty (20) dBA for any period of time
(measured using A-weighted slow response).
   (c)   In the event the ambient noise level exceeds the noise standard, the
maximum allowable noise level under such category shall be increased to reflect
the maximum ambient noise level.
   (d)   The Noise Zone IV standard shall apply to that portion of residential
property falling within one hundred (100) feet of a commercial property or use,
if the noise originates from that commercial property or use.
   (e)   If the measurement location is on a boundary between two (2) different
noise zones, the lower noise level standard applicable to the noise zone shall
apply.
(§ 2, Ord. 2888, eff. March 6, 2008)
Sec. 5-29.05. Interior noise standards.
   (a)   The following interior noise standards, unless otherwise specifically
indicated, shall apply to all properties within a designated noise zone.
 
Allowable Interior Noise Level (1)   Allowed Equivalent Noise Level, Leq. (2)
Noise Zone Type of Land Use          7 a.m. to 10 p.m. 10 p.m. to 7 a.m.
I          Single-Family Residential 45 dBA            40 dBA
II         Multi-Family Residential, 45 dBA            40 dBA
           Mobile Home Parks
IV         Residential Portion of    45 dBA            40 dBA
           Mixed Use
 
      (1)   If the ambient noise level exceeds the resulting standard, the
ambient noise level shall be the standard.
      (2)   Measurements for compliance are made on the affected property
pursuant to §
5-29.15.
   (b)   It is unlawful for any person at any location within the incorporated
area of the City to create noise, or to allow the creation of any noise on
property owned, leased, occupied or otherwise controlled by such person, which
noise causes the noise level, when measured at any location on any other
property, to exceed either of the following:
      (1)   The noise standard for the applicable zone for any fifteen-minute
(15) period;
      (2)   A maximum instantaneous (single instance) noise level equal to the
value of the noise standard plus twenty (20) dBA for any period of time
(measured using A-weighted slow response).
   (c)   In the event the ambient noise level exceeds the noise standard, the
maximum allowable noise level under such category shall be increased to reflect
the maximum ambient noise level.
   (d)   The Noise Zone IV standard shall apply to that portion of residential
property falling within one hundred (100) feet of a commercial property or use,
if the noise originates from that commercial property or use.
   (e)   If the measurement location is on a boundary between two (2) different
noise zones, the lower noise level standard applicable to the noise zone shall
apply.
(§ 2, Ord. 2888, eff. March 6, 2008)
Sec. 5-29.06. Exemptions.
   The following activities shall be exempted from the provisions of this
chapter:
   (a)   Any activity conducted on public property, or on private property with
the consent of the owner, by any public entity or its officers, employees,
representatives, agents, subcontractors, permittees, licensees or lessees that
the public entity has authorized are exempt from the provisions of this
chapter. This includes, without limitation, sporting and recreational
activities that are sponsored, co-sponsored, permitted or allowed by the City
or any school district within the City's jurisdictional boundaries. This also
includes, without limitation, occasional outdoor gatherings, public dances,
shows or sporting and entertainment events, provided such events are conducted
pursuant to an approval, authorization, contract, lease, permit or sublease by
the appropriate public entity, specifically the planning commission or City
Council;
   (b)   Occasional outdoor gatherings, public dances, show, sporting and
entertainment events, provided said events are conducted pursuant to a permit
or license issued by the appropriate jurisdiction relative to the staging of
said events;
   (c)   Any mechanical device, apparatus or equipment used, related to or
connected with emergency machinery, vehicle, work or warning alarm or bell,
provided the sounding of any bell or alarm on any building or motor vehicle
shall terminate its operation within forty-five (45) minutes in any hour of its
being activated;
   (d)   Noise sources associated with construction, repair, remodeling,
demolition or grading of any real property. Such activities shall instead be
subject to the provisions of §
5-29.09;
   (e)   Noise sources associated with construction, repair, remodeling,
demolition or grading of public rights-of-way or during authorized seismic
surveys;
   (f)   All mechanical devices, apparatus or equipment associated with
agriculture operations provided that:
      (1)   Operations do not take place between 8:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m.;
      (2)   Such operations and equipment are utilized for the protection or
salvage of agricultural crops during periods of potential or actual frost
damage or other adverse weather conditions; or
      (3)   Such operations and equipment are associated with agricultural pest
control through pesticide application, provided the application is made in
accordance with permits issued by or regulations enforced by the California
Department of Agriculture;
   (g)   Noise sources associated with the maintenance of real property. Such
activities shall instead be subject to the provisions of §
5-29.08;
   (h)   Any activity to the extent regulation thereof has been preempted by
state or federal law;
   (i)   Any noise sources associated with people and/or music associated with
a party at a residential property. Such noise shall be subject to the
provisions of OMC §
5-29.07;
   (j)   Any noise source emanating from an ice cream truck within the City.
Such noise shall be subject to the provisions of OMC §
4-18.04;
   (k)   Any noise sources associated with barking dogs or other intermittent
noises made by animals on any properly within the City. Such noise shall be
subject to the provisions of OMC
Chapter 1, Title 6;
   (l)   Noise sources related to uses approved by a permit or development
agreement adopted prior to the date of adoption of this chapter and that
contains acoustic or noise standard conditions of approval. This exemption
shall only be applicable during the effective period of the City-approved
permit or development agreement.
(§ 2, Ord. 2888, eff. March 6, 2008)
Sec. 5-29.07. Loud and disturbing noise.
   (a)   It is unlawful for any person or property owner within the City to
make, cause or allow to be made any loud, excessive, impulsive or intrusive
noise, disturbance or commotion that disturbs the peace or quiet of any area or
that causes discomfort or annoyance to any reasonable person of normal
sensitivities in the area, after a Police or Code Enforcement Officer has first
requested that the person or property owner cease and desist from making such
noise. The types of loud, disturbing, excessive, impulsive or intrusive noise
may include, but shall not be limited to, yelling, shouting, hooting,
whistling, singing, playing a musical instrument, or emitting or transmitting
any loud music or noise from any mechanical or electrical sound making or
sound-amplifying device.
   (b)   The factors, standards, and conditions that may be considered in
determining whether a violation of the provisions of this section has been
committed, included, but not limited to, the following:
      (1)   The level of the noise;
      (2)   The level and intensity of the background (ambient) noise, if any;
      (3)   The proximity of the noise to residential or commercial sleeping
areas;
      (4)   The nature and zoning of the area within which the noise emanates;
      (5)   The density of inhabitation of the area within which the noise
emanates;
      (6)   The time of day and night the noise occurs;
      (7)   The duration of the noise;
      (8)   Whether the noise is constant, recurrent or intermittent;
      (9)   Whether the noise is produced by a commercial or noncommercial
activity; and
      (10)   Whether the use is lawful under the provisions of Title 5 of this
Code and whether the noise is one that could reasonably be expected from the
activity or allowed use.
(§ 2, Ord. 2888, eff. March 6, 2008)
Sec. 5-29.08. Real property maintenance noise regulations.
   (a)   No person, while engaged in maintenance of real property, shall
operate any tool, equipment or machine in a manner that produces loud noise
that disturbs a person of normal sensitivity who works or resides in the
vicinity, or a Police or Code Enforcement Officer, except between the hours of
8:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m.
   (b)   Trimming or pruning that requires the use of chainsaws or mulching
machines shall only be allowed between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m. on
a weekday and between the hours of 9:00 a.m. and 5:00 p.m. on Saturday or
Sunday.
   (c)   The use of electrical or gasoline powered blowers, such as commonly
used by gardeners or other persons for cleaning lawns, yards, driveways,
gutters and other property shall only be allowed between the hours of 8:00 a.m.
and 6:00 p.m. on a weekday and between the hours of 9:00 a.m. and 5:00 p.m. on
Saturday or Sunday.
   (d)   No landowner, gardener, property maintenance service, contractor,
subcontractor or employer shall permit or allow any person or persons working
under his or her direction or control to operate any tool, equipment or machine
in violation of the provisions of this section.
   (e)   Exceptions. The provisions of this section shall not apply to the
following:
      (1)   Emergency property maintenance required by the building official;
      (2)   The maintenance, repair or improvement of any public work or
facility by public employees, by any person or persons acting pursuant to a
public works contract, or by any person or persons performing such work or
pursuant to the direction of, or on behalf of, any public agency; provided,
however, this exception shall not apply to the City, or its employees,
contractors or agents, unless:
         (i)   The City Manager or department head determines that the
maintenance, repair or improvement is immediately necessary to maintain public
service,
         (ii)   The maintenance, repair or improvement is of a nature that
cannot feasibly be conducted during normal business hours, or
         (iii)   The City Council has approved project specifications, contract
provisions, or an environmental document that specifically authorizes
maintenance during hours of the day that would otherwise be prohibited pursuant
to this section; and
      (3)   Any maintenance that complies with the noise limits specified in §
5-29.04.
(§ 2, Ord. 2888, eff. March 6, 2008)
Sec. 5-29.09. Construction activity noise regulations.
   (a)   No person, while engaged in construction, remodeling, digging,
grading, demolition or any other related building activity, shall operate any
tool, equipment or machine in a manner that produces loud noise that disturbs a
person of normal sensitivity who works or resides in the vicinity, or a Police
or Code Enforcement Officer, on any weekday except between the hours of 7:00
a.m. and 6:00 p.m. or on Saturday or Sunday between the hours of 9:00 a.m. and
6:00 p.m.
   (b)   No landowner, construction company owner, contractor, subcontractor,
or employer shall permit or allow any person or persons working under their
direction and control to operate any tool, equipment or machine in violation of
the provisions of this section.
   (c)   Exceptions.
      (1)   The provisions of this section shall not apply to emergency
construction work performed by a private party when authorized by the City
Manager or his or her designee;
      (2)   The maintenance, repair or improvement of any public work or
facility by public employees, by any person or persons acting pursuant to a
public works contract, or by any person or persons performing such work or
pursuant to the direction of, or on behalf of, any public agency; provided,
however, this exception shall not apply to the City, or its employees,
contractors or agents, unless:
         (i)   The City Manager or a department head determines that the
maintenance, repair or improvement is immediately necessary to maintain public
services,
         (ii)   The maintenance, repair or improvement is of a nature that
cannot feasibly be conducted during normal business hours, or
         (iii)   The City Council has approved project specifications, contract
provisions, or an environmental document that specifically authorizes
construction during hours of the day that would otherwise be prohibited
pursuant to this section; and
      (3)   Any construction that complies with the noise limits specified in
§§
5-29.04 or
5-29.05.
(§ 2, Ord. 2888, eff. March 6, 2008)
Sec. 5-29.10. Other public agency exceptions.
   The provisions of this chapter shall not be construed to prohibit any work
at different hours by or under the direction of any other public agency or
public or private utility companies in cases of necessity or emergency.
(§ 2, Ord. 2888, eff. March 6, 2008)
Sec. 5-29.11. Schools, day care centers, churches, libraries, museums, health
care institutions; Special provisions.
   It is unlawful for any person to create any noise that causes the outdoor
noise level at any school, day care center, hospital or similar health care
institution, church, library or museum while the same is in use, to exceed the
noise standards specified in §
5-29.04 prescribed for the assigned Noise Zone I.
(§ 2, Ord. 2888, eff. March 6, 2008)
Sec. 5-29.12. Sound amplifying equipment.
   Loudspeakers, sound amplifiers, public address systems or similar devices
used to amplify sounds shall be subject to the provisions of §
5-29.13. Such sound amplifying equipment shall not be construed to include
electronic devices, including but not limited to, radios, tape players, tape
recorders, compact disc players, MP3 players, electric keyboards, music
synthesizers, record players or televisions, which are designed and operated
for personal use, or used entirely within a building and are not designed or
used to convey the human voice, music or any other sound to an audience outside
such building, or which are used in vehicles and heard only by occupants of the
vehicle in which installed.
(§ 2, Ord. 2888, eff. March 6, 2008)
Sec. 5-29.13. Amplified sound.
   (a)   The City Council enacts the following legislation for the sole purpose
of securing and promoting the public health, comfort, safety and welfare for
its citizenry. While recognizing that the use of sound amplifying equipment may
be entitled to certain protection by the constitutional rights of freedom of
speech and assembly, the City Council finds that in order to protect the public
safety and the correlative rights of the citizens of this community to privacy
and freedom from public nuisance of loud and unnecessary noise, reasonable
regulation of the time, place and manner of the use of amplifying equipment is
necessary. In no event shall approval or authorization required herein be
withheld by reason of the constitutionally protected content of any material
proposed to be broadcast through amplifying equipment.
   (b)   It is unlawful for any person, other than personnel of law enforcement
or governmental agencies, to install, use or operate a loudspeaker or sound
amplifying device in a fixed or movable position or mounted upon any vehicle
within the City for the purpose of giving instructions, directions, talks,
addresses or lectures to any persons or assemblages of persons in or upon any
street, alley, sidewalk, park, place or public property without a permit to do
so from the Police Chief or his or her designee. Notwithstanding any other
provision of this chapter, the provisions of this section shall also apply to
the use of sound amplifying equipment upon public or private property when used
in connection with outdoor or indoor public or private events, whether or not
admission is charged or food or beverages are sold, when such activity is to be
attended by more than one hundred (100) persons and the noise emanating from
the event will be audible at the property plane, or in the case of a street
dance or concert on the nearest residential property. Those activities listed
in §
5-29.06(a) are exempt from the requirements of this section.
   (c)   The Police Chief or his or her designee is authorized to approve and
issue permits under this section.
   (d)   An application for a permit required by this section shall be filed
with the Police Chief at least sixteen (16) days and no more than one hundred
twenty (120) days prior to the date on which the sound amplifying equipment is
intended to be used. Applications for events covered by the First Amendment of
the United States Constitution are exempt from the time requirements of this
section if it is shown that circumstances require a shorter filing period and
the event will not constitute an unsafe condition. The application shall
contain the following information:
      (1)   The name, address and telephone number of both the owner and the
user of the sound amplifying equipment;
      (2)   The license number, if a sound truck is to be used;
      (3)   A general description of the sound amplifying equipment which is to
be used;
      (4)   Whether sound amplifying equipment will be used for commercial or
noncommercial purpose;
      (5)   The dates and times upon and within which, and the streets or
property over or upon which, the equipment is proposed to be operated;
      (6)   The name or names of one (1) or more persons who will be present
during the conduct of any activities for which registration is sought and who
will have authority to reduce the volume of any sound amplifying equipment
during the course of the activities if required pursuant to this chapter and,
otherwise, to insure compliance with the provisions of this chapter;
      (7)   A statement by the applicant that he or she is willing and able to
comply with the provisions of this chapter and the conditions of the permit;
and
      (8)   A sketch of the area or facilities within which the activities are
to be conducted, with approximate dimensions and illustration of the location
and orientation of all sound-amplifying equipment.
   (e)   The Police Chief shall deny the permit application or revoke any
permit if the chief finds any of the following:
      (1)   The application contains materially false or intentionally
misleading information;
      (2)   The use of sound amplifying equipment at an event or activity
proposed will be located in or upon a premises, building or structure that is
hazardous to the health or safety of the employees or patrons of the premises,
business, activity, or event, or the general public, under the standards
established by the Uniform Building or Fire Codes, or other applicable codes,
as set forth in OMC Titles 4 and 8;
      (3)   The use of sound amplifying equipment at an event or activity
proposed in or upon a premises, building or structure that lacks adequate on-
site parking for participants attending the proposed event or activity under
the applicable standards set forth in OMC Title 9;
      (4)   The conditions of any motor vehicle movement are such that, in his
or her opinion, the use of the equipment would constitute an unreasonable
interference with traffic safety;
      (5)   The conditions of pedestrian movement are such that the use of the
equipment would constitute a detriment to traffic safety;
      (6)   The application submitted by the applicant reveals that the
applicant would violate the provisions of this section or any other provision
of federal, state and/or local law;
      (7)   The applicant is unwilling or unable to comply with the provisions
of this chapter or any conditions imposed upon any permit issued;
      (8)   There had already been a permitted event at the intended location,
or within a two hundred (200) yard radius of the intended location and the
prior permitted event was located on residentially zoned property or on a
street, alley, public parking lot or neighborhood park within three (3) months
prior to the intended event. Community parks are exempt from this subsection
(8); or
      (9)   The applicant or location has had previous violations within the
past calendar year, and in the judgment of the Police Chief, issuance would be
contrary to the intent of this section.
   (f)   In determining whether the use of the equipment would constitute an
unreasonable interference with or detriment to traffic safety, the Police Chief
shall consider, but shall not necessarily be limited to:
      (1)   The volumes, patterns and speed of vehicular and pedestrian traffic
in the proposed area of use;
      (2)   The relationship of the proposed use of equipment and potential
impacts upon traffic patterns;
      (3)   Availability of sufficient room for the operation of the equipment
without significantly interfering with the traffic patterns;
      (4)   Proximity to schools, playgrounds and similar facilities where use
of such equipment might attract children into traffic patterns; or
      (5)   Proximity to busy intersections or other potentially hazardous
conditions where use of such equipment might constitute a hazard by reason of
its tendency to distract drivers of vehicles or pedestrians.
   (g)   Issuance or denial.
      (1)   If the application is approved, the Police Chief shall return an
approved copy of the application to the applicant and shall issue a permit. The
permit shall constitute permission for the use of the sound amplifying
equipment as requested.
      (2)   Any application filed shall be either approved or disapproved
within five (5) days of the filing thereof.
      (3)   If the application is disapproved, the Police Chief shall return a
disapproved copy forthwith to the applicant with a written statement on the
reason for disapproval.
         (i)   Any person aggrieved by a decision of the Police Chief or his or
her designee may file an appeal to the City Manager. A complete and proper
appeal shall be filed with the City Clerk within ten (10) calendar days of the
action that is the subject of the appeal. If the applicant fails to file an
appeal within the ten (10) day filing period provided herein, denial shall take
effect immediately upon expiration of such filing period. All appeals shall be
in writing and shall contain the following information: (a) name(s) of the
person filing the appeal, (b) a brief statement in ordinary and concise
language of the relief sought, and (c) the signatures of all parties named as
appellants and their mailing addresses. After receiving the appeal, the City
Clerk shall immediately forward the matter to the City Manager for handling.
         (ii)   The City Manager shall, upon receipt of the appeal, set the
matter for hearing before the City Manager or a hearing officer. Any hearing
officer shall be a licensed attorney or recognized mediator designated by the
City Manager. The hearing shall be set for not more than ten (10) calendar days
after the receipt of the appeal unless a longer time is requested or consented
to by the appellant. Notice of such hearing shall be given in writing and
mailed at least five (5) calendar days prior to the date of the hearing, by
U.S. mail, with a proof of service attached, addressed to the address listed on
the permit application, or the written appeal if different from the permit
application. The notice shall state the grounds of the complaint or reason for
the denial and shall state the time and place where such hearing will be held.
         (iii)   The City Manager or hearing officer shall, within ten (10)
calendar days following the conclusion of the hearing, make a written finding
and decision, which shall be delivered to the City and the appellant by first
class mail. Notwithstanding any provision in this Code, the decision of the
City Manager or hearing officer shall be the final administrative decision of
the City. Any party dissatisfied with the decision of the City Manager or
hearing officer may seek review of such decision under the provisions of Code
Civil Procedure, §§ 1094.5 and 1094.8, as amended from time to time.
   (h)   In addition to any other provisions of this Code, the use of sound-
amplifying equipment and sound trucks in the City shall be subject to the
following regulations:
      (1)   The only sounds permitted are music and human speech;
      (2)   Sound shall not be emitted within one hundred (100) yards of
hospitals, churches, schools and City Hall;
      (3)   The volume of sound shall be controlled so that it will not be
audible for a distance in excess of one hundred (100) feet from the sound
amplifying equipment or sound truck, and so that the volume is not unreasonably
loud, raucous, jarring, disturbing or a nuisance to persons within the range of
allowed audibility; or
      (4)   The sound amplifying equipment or sound truck shall not be used
between the hours of 8:00 p.m. and 8:00 a.m.
(§ 2, Ord. 2888, eff. March 6, 2008)
Sec. 5-29.14. Motor vehicles.
   The use of any motor vehicle in such a condition as to create excessive,
impulsive or intrusive noises is prohibited. The discharge into the open air of
the exhaust of any internal combustion engine, stationary or mounted on wheels,
motorboat or motor vehicle, including motor cycle, whether or not discharged
through a muffler or other similar device, which discharge creates excessive,
unusual, impulsive or intrusive noise is prohibited. Motor vehicles shall
comply with the noise regulations of the California Vehicle Code.
(§ 2, Ord. 2888, eff. March 6, 2008)
Sec. 5-29.15. Noise level measurement.
   (a)   The location selected for measuring exterior noise levels in a
residential area shall be at any part of a private yard, patio, deck or balcony
normally used for human activity and identified by the owner or, if occupied by
someone other than the owner, the occupant of the affected property as
suspected of exceeding the noise level standard. This location may be the
closest point in the private yard or patio, or on the deck or balcony, to the
noise source, but should not be located in nonhuman activity areas such as
trash container storage areas, planter beds, above or contacting a property
line fence, or other areas not normally used as part of the yard, patio, deck
or balcony. The location selected for measuring exterior noise levels in a
nonresidential area shall be at the closest point to the noise source. The
measurement microphone height shall be five (5) feet above finish elevation or,
in the case of a deck or balcony, the measurement microphone height shall be
five (5) feet above the finished floor level.
   (b)   The location selected for measuring interior noise levels shall be
made within the affected residential unit. The measurements shall be made at a
point at least four (4) feet from the wall, ceiling or floor, or within the
frame of a window opening, nearest the noise source. The measurements shall be
made with windows in an open position.
   (c)   Any decibel measurement made pursuant to the provisions of this
chapter shall be measured in decibels (dBAs) as measured with a sound level
meter using the A-weighted sound pressure level.
(§ 2, Ord. 2888, eff. March 6, 2008)
Sec. 5-29.16. Prima facie violation.
   Any noise exceeding the noise level standard as specified in §§
5-29.04 and
5-29.05, shall be deemed to be prima facie evidence of a violation of the
provisions of this chapter.
(§ 2, Ord. 2888, eff. March 6, 2008)
Sec. 5-29.17. Penalty.
   (a)   Any person who negligently or knowingly violates any provision of this
chapter shall be guilty of an infraction and upon conviction shall be
punishable by a fine specified in OMC §
1-2.01. Each day a violation occurs shall constitute a separate offense and
shall be punishable as such.
   (b)   Any person who negligently or knowingly violates any provision of this
chapter may also be subject to fine(s) specified in the administrative citation
schedule of fines set forth in OMC §
1-5.04. The manner of issuing administrative citations shall comply with all
the procedures specified in OMC
Chapter 5, Title 1.
   (c)   As an additional remedy, the operation or maintenance of any device,
instrument, vehicle or machinery in violation of any provisions of this
chapter, which operation or maintenance causes or creates sound levels
exceeding the allowable standards as specified in this chapter, shall be deemed
and is declared to be a public nuisance and may be subject to abatement by a
restraining order or injunction issued by a court of competent jurisdiction.
   (d)   Any violation of this chapter is declared to be a public nuisance and
may be abated in accordance with law. The expense of enforcing this chapter is
declared to be public nuisance and may be by resolution of the City Council
declared to be a lien and special assessment against the property on which such
nuisance is maintained, and any such charge shall also be a personal obligation
of the property owner.
(§ 2, Ord. 2888, eff. March 6, 2008)
Sec. 5-29.18. Enforcement and administration.
   (a)   It shall be the responsibility of Police or Code Enforcement Officers
to enforce the provisions of this chapter and to perform all other functions
required by this chapter. Such duties shall include, but not be limited to
investigating potential violations, issuing warning notices and citations, and
providing evidence to the City prosecutor for legal action.
   (b)   For violations of §
5-29.07, Police or Code Enforcement Officers shall obtain a declaration under
penalty of perjury from two (2) declarants living in separate households within
a sixty (60) day period stating in detail all of the following:
      (1)   That the declarant is a resident of a residential neighborhood
located within two hundred (200) yards of the noise source; and
      (2)   Within the past month declarant has heard noise for substantially
long periods to the extreme annoyance of the declarant.
      (3)   Declarations from two (2) declarants are required to prove a
violation of §
5-29.07, but are not required to prove that a person has violated any other
provision of this chapter.
(§ 2, Ord. 2888, eff. March 6, 2008)
Sec. 5-29.19. City Manager waiver.
   The City Manager is authorized to grant a temporary waiver to the provisions
of this chapter for a period of time necessary to correct the violations of
this chapter, if such temporary waiver would be in the public interest and
there is no feasible and prudent alternative to the activity, or the method of
conducting the activity, for which the temporary waiver is sought. This time
period may include a commitment to a program that includes placing necessary
orders and entering into necessary contracts within thirty (30) days for repair
or installation.
(§ 2, Ord. 2888, eff. March 6, 2008)
Sec. 5-29.20. Noise abatement program.
   (a)   In circumstances where adopted community-wide noise standards and
policies prove impractical in controlling noise generated from a specific
source, the City Council may establish a noise abatement program that
recognizes the characteristics of the noise source and affected property and
that incorporates specialized mitigation measures.
   (b)   Noise abatement programs shall set forth in detail the approved terms,
conditions and requirements for achieving maximum compliance with noise
standards and policies. Said terms, conditions and requirements may include,
but shall not be limited to, limitations, restrictions, or prohibitions on
operating hours, location of operations, and the types of equipment.
(§ 2, Ord. 2888, eff. March 6, 2008)
CHAPTER 30: ABANDONED PROPERTY REGISTRATION
   
5-30.01   Purpose
   
5-30.02   Definitions
   
5-30.03   Recordation of transfer of loan/deed of trust/assignment of rents
   
5-30.04   Registration requirements
   
5-30.05   Management and maintenance requirements
   
5-30.06   Security requirements
   
5-30.07   Additional authority
   
5-30.08   Fees
   
5-30.09   Enforcement
   
5-30.10   Violations and penalties
   
5-30.11   Other remedies
Sec. 5-30.01. Purpose.
   The purpose of this section is to establish an abandoned property
registration program as a mechanism to protect neighborhoods from becoming
blighted through the lack of adequate maintenance and security of abandoned
properties.
(§ 1, Ord. 2904, eff. June 5, 2009)
Sec. 5-30.02. Definitions.
   The following definitions apply in this section:
   (a)   “Abandoned property” means real property that is vacant and either:
(1) the subject of a current Notice of Default; (2) the subject of a current
notice of trustee’s sale; (3) the subject of a tax assessors lien sale; (4) the
subject of a foreclosure sale where the title was retained by the beneficiary
of a deed of trust involved in the foreclosure; (5) has been transferred under
a deed in lieu of foreclosure; or (6) the property has been surrendered or
deserted in contemplation or threat of foreclosure.
   (b)   “Accessible property” means any real property that is freely
accessible, including any property that is accessible through a compromised or
breached gate, fence, wall or similar structure.
   (c)    “Accessible structure” means a structure or building that is
unsecured or breached in such a way as to allow access to the interior space by
unauthorized persons.
   (d)    “Agreement for sale” means any agreement or written instrument that
provides that title to property shall be transferred or conveyed from one
person to another person.
   (e)   “Assignment of rents” means a written instrument that transfers the
beneficial interest under a deed of trust from one person to another person.
   (f)   “Beneficiary” means the beneficiary (either original beneficiary or
the assignee) under a note secured by a deed of trust.
   (g)   “Buyer” means any person who agrees to transfer anything of value in
consideration for property described in an agreement for sale, as defined in
this section.
   (h)   “Code Enforcement Director” shall mean any individual or his/her
designee responsible for the day to day management of the Code Enforcement
Department.
   (i)   “Dangerous building” means any building or structure that is in
violation of any condition referenced in the Uniform Code for Abatement of
Dangerous Building, as adopted by §
8-11.01.
   (j)   “Day” means a calendar day.
   (k)   “Deed of trust” means any instrument, including any deed of trust or
mortgage, by which legal title to real property, or any interest therein, is
transferred to a trustee as security for a real estate loan, including, without
limitation, any and all subsequent deeds of trust, i.e. 2nd trust deed, 3rd
trust deed, and the like.
   (l)   “Deed in lieu of foreclosure” means a document that transfers legal
title to a property from the trustor to the trustee, upon consent of the
beneficiary of the deed of trust.
   (m)   “Default” means the failure to fulfill a contractual obligation,
whether monetary or otherwise.
   (n)   “Distressed” means real property that is under a current notice of
default or notice of trustee’s sale, or pending tax assessor’s lien sale or has
been foreclosed upon by the trustee or has been conveyed to the beneficiary or
trustee by way of a deed in lieu of foreclosure, but which is lawfully
occupied.
   (o)   “Enforcement Officer” shall mean any individual employed, or otherwise
charged, by the City of Ontario to enforce codes, ordinances, mandates,
regulations, or laws adopted by City Council or other regulatory bodies.
   (p)   “Evidence of vacancy” means any condition that, on its own, or
combined with other conditions present, would lead a reasonable person to
believe that the property is vacant. Such conditions include, but are not
limited to, overgrown or dead vegetation, accumulation of newspapers,
circulars, flyers or mail, past due utility notices or disconnected utilities,
accumulation of trash, junk or debris, the absence of window coverings such as
curtains, blinds or shutters, the absence of furnishings or personal items
consistent with residential habitation, statements by neighbors, passersby,
delivery agents, government employees that the property is vacant.
   (q)   “Foreclosure” means the process by which a property, placed as
security for a loan, is sold to satisfy the debt if the trustor defaults.
   (r)   “Local” means the area within forty (40) miles of the subject
property.
   (s)   “Neighborhood standard” means those conditions that are present on a
simple majority of other properties within a three hundred (300) foot radius of
the subject property. A property that is the subject of a neighborhood standard
comparison, or any other abandoned property within the three hundred (300) foot
radius, shall not be counted toward the simple majority.
   (t)   “Notice of default” or “notice of trustee’s sale” means a notice that
a default has occurred under a deed of trust and that the beneficiary intends
to proceed with a trustee’s sale or other similar remedies authorized by law.
   (u)   “Out of area” means the area in excess of forty (40) miles from the
subject property.
   (v)   “Owner” means any person having a legal title in any real property.
   (w)   “Owner of record” means the person having recorded title to the
property as shown in the San Bernardino County Recorder’s Office.
   (x)   “Person” shall have the meaning set forth in §
1-3.13.
   (y)   “Property” means any unimproved or improved real property, or portion
thereof, situated in the City and includes the buildings or structures located
on the property.
   (z)   “Responsible party” means the person having actual control of the
property at any given time, including the owner of record, the beneficiary, the
trustee, the servicing company, or real estate agent acting, or any other party
acting on behalf of the owner of record, beneficiary, or trustee.
   (aa)   “Securing” or its variants means such measures as may be directed by
the Code Enforcement Director or his or her designee that assist in rendering
the property inaccessible to unauthorized persons, including, but not limited
to, the repairing of fences and walls, chaining or pad-locking of gates, and
the repair or boarding of door, window or other openings to a minimum of the
current HUD securing standards at the time the boarding is completed or
required.
   (ab)   “Trustee” means the person holding a deed of trust on a property.
   (ac)   “Trustor” means a borrower under a deed of trust, who deeds the legal
title to a property over to a trustee as security for the payment of a debt.
   (ad)   “Vacant” means a building or structure that is not legally occupied.
(§ 1, Ord. 2904, eff. June 5, 2009)
Sec. 5-30.03. Recordation of transfer of loan/deed of trust/assignment of
rents.
   Within ten (10) days following the purchase or transfer of a loan or any
deed of trust secured by abandoned property, the new beneficiary and trustee
shall both record, with the San Bernardino County Recorder’s Office, an
assignment of rents that lists the names of the beneficiary and trustee, and
the mailing address and contact phone number of the new beneficiary and trustee
responsible for receiving payments associated with the deed of trust.
(§ 1, Ord. 2904, eff. June 5, 2009)
Sec. 5-30.04. Registration requirements.
   (a)   Any beneficiary and trustee under a deed of trust, or their designee,
on abandoned property located within the City of Ontario shall perform an
inspection of the property that is the security for the deed of trust, upon
default by the trustor, prior to recording a notice of default with the San
Bernardino County Recorder’s Office. If the property is found to be vacant or
shows evidence of vacancy, the beneficiary and trustee shall, within ten (10)
days following the inspection, register the property with the Code Enforcement
Director on forms provided by the City.
   (b)   Any distressed property shall be inspected by the beneficiary and
trustee, or their designee, at least monthly until either: 1) the trustor or
other party remedies the default, or 2) it is found to be vacant or shows
evidence of vacancy, at which time it is deemed abandoned, and the trustee
shall, within ten (10) days following the required inspection, register the
property with the Code Enforcement Director on forms provided by the City.
   (c)   The registration shall contain the names of the beneficiary and
trustee, the street address of the beneficiary and trustee (no P.O. boxes), a
direct contact name, facsimile and phone numbers for the beneficiary and
trustee and, in the case of an out of area beneficiary or trustee, the local
property management company responsible for the security, maintenance and
marketing of the subject property.
   (d)   At the time of registration, the beneficiary and trustee shall
concurrently file a statement of intent which will include: 1) the expected
period of vacancy; 2) a plan for regular maintenance during the period of
vacancy; and 3) a timeline for the lawful occupancy, rehabilitation or
demolition of the subject property.
   (e)   An annual registration fee for the beneficiary and trustee shall
accompany the registration form. Registration fees will not be prorated. The
fee and registration shall be valid for the calendar year, or remaining portion
of the calendar year, in which the registration was initially required.
Subsequent registrations and fees are due January 1 of each year and must be
received by the Code Enforcement Director no later than January 31 of the year
due. The amount of the registration fee shall be set by resolution of the City
Council.
   (f)   Anytime after the property is determined to be vacant and if there are
any changes to ownership, whether recorded or not, or if the loan is
transferred to another beneficiary, trustee or owner (“responsible party”); the
responsible party shall re-register the property with the City. The re-
registration must occur within ten (10) days of the change. A re-registration
fee will be assessed. The amount of the re-registration fee shall be set by
resolution of the City Council.
   (g)   Properties shall remain under the annual registration requirement and
the security and maintenance standards of this section as long as they remain
abandoned or distressed.
   (h)   Any person that has registered a property under this chapter must
report in writing any change of information contained in the registration
within ten (10) days following the change.
(§ 1, Ord. 2904, eff. June 5, 2009)
Sec. 5-30.05. Management and maintenance requirements.
   (a)   The beneficiary and trustee of the subject property shall obtain a
local property management company to inspect the property on a weekly basis to
monitor the property for compliance with this chapter.
   (b)   Abandoned or distressed properties shall be, in comparison to the
neighborhood standard, kept free of weeds, dry brush, dead vegetation, trash,
junk, debris, building materials, any accumulation of newspapers, circulars,
flyers, notices (except those required by federal, state or local law),
discarded personal items, including, but not limited to, inoperable or
abandoned vehicles, furniture, clothing, large and small appliances, printed
material or any other items that give the appearance that the property is
abandoned or distressed.
   (c)   The abandoned or distressed property shall be maintained free of
graffiti, tagging or similar markings by removal or painting over with an
exterior grade paint that matches the color of the exterior of the structure.
   (d)   Visible front and side yards shall be landscaped and maintained to the
neighborhood standard existing at the time registration was required.
      (1)   Required landscaping includes, but is not limited to, grass, ground
covers, bushes, shrubs, hedges or similar plantings, decorative rock or bark or
artificial turf or sod designed specifically designed for residential
installation.
      (2)   Required landscaping does not include weeds, gravel, broken
concrete, asphalt, decomposed granite, plastic sheeting, mulch, indoor-outdoor
carpet or any similar material.
      (3)   Required maintenance includes, but is not limited to regular
watering, irrigation, cutting, pruning and mowing of required landscape and
removal of all trimmings.
   (e)   Pools and spas shall be kept in working order so the water remains
clear and free of pollutants and debris to prevent pools and spas from becoming
a breeding ground for mosquitoes and other vectors, or drained and kept dry. In
either case properties with pools or spas must comply with the minimum security
fencing requirements of the State of California.
   (f)   Adherence to this section does not relieve the beneficiary, trustee
and owner of any obligations set forth in any other code or law, covenants
conditions and restrictions, or any home owners association rules and
regulations that may apply to the property.
(§ 1, Ord. 2904, eff. June 5, 2009)
Sec. 5-30.06. Security requirements.
   (a)   Abandoned or distressed properties shall be maintained in a secure
manner so as not to be accessible to unauthorized persons. Secure manner
includes, but is not limited to, the closure and locking of windows, doors
(walk-through, sliding and garage) gates and any other opening of such size
that it may allow a child to access the interior of the property and or
structure(s). In the case of broken windows, securing means the reglazing or
boarding of the window. Any boards used must be painted to match the existing
color of the building.
   (b)   If any abandoned property is owned by a corporation or out of area
beneficiary, trustee or owner, a local property management company shall be
contracted to perform weekly inspections to verify that the requirements of
this chapter, and any other applicable laws, are being met.
   (c)   The abandoned property shall be posted with the name and a twenty-four
(24) hour contact phone number of the local property management company. The
posting shall be no less than 18" x 24" and shall be of a font that is legible
from a distance of forty-five (45) feet and shall contain along with the name
and twenty-four (24) hour contact number, the words “THIS PROPERTY MANAGED BY”
and “TO REPORT PROBLEMS OR CONCERNS CALL”. The posting shall be placed on the
interior of a window facing the street to the front of the property so it is
visible from the street, or secured to the exterior of the building or
structure facing the street to the front of the property so it is visible from
the street, or if no such area exists, on a stake of sufficient size to support
the posting in a location that is visual from the street to the front of the
property but not readily accessible to vandals. Exterior posting must be
constructed of, and printed with, weather resistant materials.
(§ 1, Ord. 2904, eff. June 5, 2009)
Sec. 5-30.07. Additional authority.
   In addition to the enforcement remedies established in Chapters
1-2 and
5-22, the Code Enforcement Director shall have the authority to require the
beneficiary, trustee or owner, or any combination thereof, to implement
additional maintenance and security measures, including but not limited to,
securing any and all door, window or other openings, installing additional
security lighting, increasing on-site inspection frequency, employment of an
on-site security guard, or other measures as may be reasonably required to
arrest the decline of the abandoned or distressed property.
(§ 1, Ord. 2904, eff. June 5, 2009)
Sec. 5-30.08. Fees.
   The fee for registering or re-registering a property subject to this chapter
shall be set from time to time by resolution of the City Council.
(§ 1, Ord. 2904, eff. June 5, 2009)
Sec. 5-30.09. Enforcement.
   Violations of this chapter may by enforced as allowed in Chapters
1-2 and
5-22, or State law, including, but not limited to, the appointment of a
receiver or an injunction in order to ensure compliance with this chapter.
(§ 1, Ord. 2904, eff. June 5, 2009)
Sec. 5-30.10. Violations and penalties.
   Violations of this chapter shall be treated as a strict liability offense
regardless of intent. Any person that violates any portion of this chapter
shall be subject to enforcement and fines as provided in Chapter 1.2 or as
provided by State law.
(§ 1, Ord. 2904, eff. June 5, 2009)
Sec. 5-30.11. Other remedies.
   The rights and remedies provided in this chapter are cumulative and in
addition to any other rights and remedies provided by law.
(§ 1, Ord. 2904, eff. June 5, 2009)
CHAPTER 31: SIDEWALK VENDING
   
5-31.01   Purpose; findings
   
5-31.02   Definitions
   
5-31.03   Permit required
   
5-31.04   Stationary sidewalk vending locations and standards
   
5-31.05   Sidewalk vending in parks
   
5-31.06   Roaming sidewalk vending
   
5-31.07   Penalties
Sec. 5-31.01. Purpose; findings.
   The City Council finds that the vending of prepared or pre-packaged foods,
goods, and/or wares at semi-permanent locations on public sidewalks and rights-
of-way may pose unsafe conditions and special dangers to the public health,
safety, and welfare of residents and visitors. The purpose of this chapter is
to implement regulations on both roaming and stationary sidewalk vending that
protect the public health, safety, and welfare of the community while complying
with the requirements of general state law, as amended from time to time, to
promote safe vending practices, prevent safety, traffic, and health hazards,
and preserve the public peace, safety, and welfare of the community. The
activities of sidewalk vendors, who set up stands on sidewalks or move from
place to place as a roaming vendor, have the potential for vendors to engage in
illegal activities, including but not limited to the sale of illegal substances
or merchandise and the sale of counterfeit products, and many sidewalk vendors
sell products which are targeted towards and purchased by children, which
necessitates background checks for vendors to assure that any past
improprieties are disclosed to the permitting authority and in order to ensure
the safety of residents and the merchantability of products sold by vendors
without fixed places of business. The activities of sidewalk vendors also have
the potential to cause injury to persons or property by the manner in which
they are sited, or by their movement on sidewalks that are otherwise used by
the traditionalactivities of pedestrians and vehicles on adjacent streets for
access, transport, delivery of merchandise to local businesses, exercise and
related activities. As sidewalk vending activities have significant potential
to be physically incompatible with the general public's traditional use of
sidewalks, reasonable regulations, including siting restrictions, are necessary
to protect the public health, safety and welfare to ensure sidewalks are safe
and passable, especially for pedestrians and the physically disabled.
(§ 3, Ord. 3123, eff. December 18, 2018, as amended by § 2, Ord. 3146, eff.
December 19, 2019)
Sec. 5-31.02. Definitions.
   For purposes of this chapter, the following definitions apply:
   (a)   "Certified farmers' market" means a location operated in accordance
with Chapter 10.5 (commencing with Section 47000) of Division 17 of the Food
and Agricultural Code and any regulations adopted pursuant to that chapter.
   (b)   "City" means the City of Ontario.
   (c)   "Park" means a public park owned by a governmental entity.
   (d)   "Roaming sidewalk vendor or vending" means a sidewalk vendor who moves
from place to place and stops only to complete a transaction.
   (e)   "Sidewalk vendor or vending" means a person who sells, offers to sell,
or takes orders for food or merchandise, or operates, engages in, or carries on
a food or merchandise vending business, from a pushcart, stand, display, pedal-
driven cart, wagon, showcase, rack, or other nonmotorized conveyance, or from
one's person, upon, or directed towards pedestrians upon, a public sidewalk or
other pedestrian path.
   (f)   "Stationary sidewalk vendor or vending" means a sidewalk vendor who
vends from a fixed location.
   (g)   "Swap meet" means a location operated in accordance with Article 6
(commencing with Section 21660) of Chapter 9 of Division 8 of the Business and
Professions Code, and any regulations adopted pursuant to that article.
   (h)   "Temporary event permit" means a permit issued by the City of Ontario
for temporary uses (i.e. special event permits, temporary use permits, film
permits, or park reservations).
   (i)   "Downtown" means non-residential areas bounded to the west by N. Palm
Avenue, to the north by G Street, to the east by N. Lemon Avenue, and to the
south by Emporia Street.
   (j)   "Event Day" means the calendar day of any concert, trade show,
conference, sporting event, or any other event potentially attracting large
numbers of persons and vehicles to the venue.
(§ 3, Ord. 3123, eff. December 18, 2018, as amended by § 2, Ord. 3146, eff.
December 19, 2019)
Sec. 5-31.03. Permit required.
   (a)   Except as provided in subsection (b) below, it is unlawful for any
person to engage in the business of sidewalk vendor or vending, or to go from
door to door or home to house or street to street for the purpose, direct or
indirect, and whether or not the same is the sole purpose, of vending, without
first obtaining a permit and paying the applicable fees as provided in this
chapter.
   (b)   The persons and entities listed below shall not be required to obtain
the sidewalk vendor permit required by subsection (a) above, however, nothing
in this subsection (b) shall relieve those persons and entities listed below
from any other provision of this Chapter or Code, including, but not limited
to, the provisions of Chapter 1 of Title 3 related to Business Licensing
Regulations.
      (1)   Persons soliciting orders from, or selling to, retail dealers for
use, or for resale or to manufacturers for processing;
      (2)   Public agencies, such as federal, state or local agencies supported
by tax funds;
      (3)   Any person operating a regular delivery route from a non-fixed
location with deliveries not less than once a week for newspapers, dairy
products, or for laundry or dry-cleaning services;
      (4)   Persons delivering or soliciting for a newspaper of general
circulation;
      (5)   Licensed real estate persons;
      (6)   Persons solely distributing literature, writings or merchandise
which seek to inform or persuade the listener to support particular causes or
particular views on economic, political or social issues;
      (7)   Persons solely soliciting signatures for referenda, recall,
initiative, candidates for public office or similar electoral processes; and
      (8)   Persons soliciting funds for any religious, patriotic,
philanthropic, social service, environmental, fraternal, or charitable
purposes.
   (c)   The "Executive Director of Finance or their designee" shall prescribe
the forms and procedures for applications for a permit under this chapter. The
forms shall indicate the fee for the application, the fee for the permit and
the insurance requirements of this chapter, if any. The application shall be
verified and shall set forth:
      (1)   The full name, current mailing address and phone number of the
applicant;
      (2)   A brief description of the nature of the business and the goods to
be sold;
      (3)   If the vendor is an agent of an individual, company, partnership,
or corporation, the name and address of the employer and the name and address
of any local or State office or manager, together with credentials establishing
the exact relationship:
      (4)   The proposed operating hours of the applicant;
      (5)   A general description of the location or area the sidewalk vendor
intends to operate;
      (6)   Evidence that the applicant has their photograph and fingerprints
on file with the Police Department; and
      (7)   A statement as to whether the applicant has been convicted of any
crime, misdemeanor, or violation of any municipal law, the nature of the
offense, and the punishment or penalty assessed therefor.
      (8)   Other information the "Executive Director of Finance or their
designee" deems necessary to process the application.
   (d)   The "Executive Director of Finance or their designee" shall refer the
completed application for the permit required by this chapter to the
appropriate City officials for investigation and report as necessary. The
"Executive Director of Finance or their designee" shall issue or deny the
permit within thirty (30) days following such investigation and reports. Each
permit so issued shall state on the face thereof the date of expiration.
   (e)   A permit may be denied and/or revoked by the "Executive Director of
Finance or their designee" on the following grounds:
      (1)   The applicant, employee or agent has been convicted of a felony or
misdemeanor involving bodily injury to persons, theft, fraud or
misrepresentation;
      (2)   The applicant has violated the provisions of this chapter or any
other provision of this Code;
      (3)   The applicant's permit has been previously revoked as provided in
this chapter; or
      (4)   The applicant has provided false information on the permit
application.
      (5)    The applicant has failed to pay the application permit fee.
   (f)   The "Executive Director of Finance or their designee" shall notify the
applicant of the denial by depositing written notice of such decision in the
first-class U.S. mail, postage prepaid, addressed to the applicant, not later
than ten (10) days following the date of such decision. A notice of denial of
an application must contain a statement of the facts upon which the denial is
based and must contain a statement of the appeal procedure contained in
subsection (k) below.
   (g)   All permits issued under this chapter shall be in the form of an
identification card, which shall include a photo of the permittee, in a format
prescribed by the "Executive Director of Finance or their designee".
   (h)   Every sidewalk vendor issued a permit shall display the same on their
person and provide the same on request to any person or persons they deal with,
to any police officer or to any designated City official. It shall be unlawful
for any person other than the permittee to use or wear any permit issued under
the provisions of this chapter.
   (i)   All applications for permits under the provisions of this chapter
shall be accompanied by an application fee as may be set from time to time by
the City Council. No application fee paid under this chapter shall be refunded.
All original permits and renewals granted under this chapter shall also require
a fee as may be set from time to time by the City Council. All permits issued
under the provisions of this chapter shall be valid for up to two (2) years
depending on the City’s internal administrative processing schedule. A permit
may be renewed by the timely payment of a renewal fee prior to the expiration
of the permit as may be set from time to time by the City Council. All permits
shall cease and terminate thirty (30) days after the default of payment. Any
permit that has terminated pursuant to this chapter shall require the filing of
a new application for a permit under this chapter. Such fees shall be
established by resolution of the City Council.
   (j)   Whenever it is shown that any person to whom a permit has been issued
has caused, permitted, aided, abetted, suffered or concealed a violation any of
the provisions of this chapter four (4) o more times within one (1) year, the
"Executive Director of Finance or their designee" shall immediately suspend the
permit and give the permit holder a written notice in person or by mail of the
suspension. The notice must contain a statement of the facts upon which the
"Executive Director of Finance or their designee" has acted in suspending the
permit. The notice must contain a statement of the appeal procedure contained
in subsection (k) below.
   (k)   Any person aggrieved by the determination of the "Executive Director
of Finance or their designee" to deny the issuance of a permit or to suspend or
revoke a permit may appeal such decision to the City Manager or their designee.
Such appeal shall be taken by filing a written notice of appeal with the City
Clerk within ten (10) days of the date of the decision to deny or revoke and
shall set forth the grounds for the appeal. A failure to file a timely appeal
shall render the decision to deny, suspend, or revoke a permit final. The City
Manager or their designee shall set a time and place for a hearing on the
appeal within ten (10) days of the filing of the appeal. The determination of
the City Manager or their designee following the hearing shall be in writing
and shall be sent to the permit holder. The decision of the City Manager or
their designee shall be final and conclusive.
(§ 2, Ord. 3146. eff. December 19, 2019, as amended by § 2, Ord. 3201, eff.
February 17, 2022)
Sec. 5-31.04. Stationary sidewalk vending locations and standards.
   (a)   Stationary sidewalk vendors shall be prohibited from operating or
establishing in any residential zone of the City.
   (b)   Stationary sidewalk vendors may operate in non-residential zones of
the City, including mixed use zones, provided they meet the following:
      (1)   The sidewalk vendor can set up vending operations while still
leaving a minimum of thirty-six inches (36") of accessible path of travel,
without obstruction, along the public sidewalk or public pathway; and
      (2)   The sidewalk vendor maintains the vending area in a clean, orderly,
and sanitary condition; and
      (3)   The sidewalk vendor location does not block entrances to buildings,
driveways, parking spaces or building windows; and
      (4)   No vending shall occur within ten (10) feet of a fire hydrant, fire
escape, bus stop, loading zone, handicapped parking space or access ramp, fire
station driveway, or police station driveway; and
      (5)   No tables, chairs, fences, shade structures, other site furniture,
or any freestanding signs shall be permitted in conjunction with the vendors'
vending activities; and
      (6)   The vendor shall not attach or use any water lines, electrical
lines, or gas lines during vending operations; and
      (7)   Exterior storage or display of refuse, equipment, materials, goods,
wares, or merchandise associated with the vendor is prohibited; and
      (8)   No vending shall occur within five hundred (500) feet of a
certified farmers' market, a swap meet, construction-related street or lane
closure, filming location, the Ontario International Airport, or an event held
pursuant to a temporary event permit; and
      (9)   No vending shall occur within five hundred (500) feet of the City-
owned arena located at 4000 East Ontario Center Parkway, Ontario, CA 91764, the
Ontario Convention Center, or Ontario Town Square on event days; and
      (10)   No vending shall occur in downtown commercial areas where there is
a likelihood of overcrowding on the sidewalk or overcrowding of parking, such
as, but not limited to with the potential of causing pedestrian and traffic
safety issues; and
      (11)   No vending shall occur within a corner cutoff area. A corner
cutoff area is that area at all intersecting and intercepting streets or
highways. The cutoff line shall be in a horizontal plane, making an angle of
forty-five (45) degrees with the side, front, or rear property line, as the
case may be. It shall pass through the points located on both sides and front
or rear property lines at a distance of thirty (30) feet from the intersection
of such lines at the corner of a street or highway; and
      (12)   No vending shall occur within five hundred (500) feet of any
school; any postsecondary educational facility attended by secondary pupils; or
any private kindergarten, elementary, or secondary school facility; and
      (13)   No vending shall occur within three (3) feet of any street lights,
edges of tree wells, parking meters, or above-ground utility structures; and
      (14)   No vending shall occur within two (2) feet of any existing
subsurface utility box, valve, or vault; and
      (15)   No vending shall occur within twenty (20) feet of another vendor;
and
      (16)   No vending shall occur within three (3) feet of bus stop
locations, red curbs, or at locations where there are existing above-ground
amenities such as newsstands or street furniture, including but not limited to
benches and bike racks; and
      (17)   No vending shall occur in public streets, roadways, medians,
pedestrian islands, parking lots, alleys, or bikeways; and
      (18)   No vending shall occur within twenty (20) feet of the entrance way
to any building, store, theater, movie house, house of worship, or place of
public assembly.
(§ 3, Ord. 3123, eff. December 18, 2018, as amended by § 2, Ord. 3146, eff.
December 19, 2019)
Sec. 5-31.05. Sidewalk vending in parks.
   (a)   Sidewalk vending of food or merchandise by stationary vendors shall be
prohibited in any City park with a concession stand operated by a vendor under
exclusive contract with the City selling similar food or merchandise.
   (b)   Sidewalk vendors may operate in parks provided they meet the
following:
      (1)   For stationary sidewalk vending, the sidewalk vendor can set up
vending operations while still leaving a minimum of thirty-six inches (36") of
accessible path of travel, without obstruction, along the public sidewalk or
public pathway; and
      (2)   The sidewalk vendor shall cease operations one (1) hour prior to
the close of the park; and
      (3)   The sidewalk vendor maintains the vending area in a clean, orderly,
and sanitary condition; and
      (4)   The sidewalk vendor location does not block entrances to buildings,
driveways, parking spaces, or building windows; and
      (5)   No vending shall occur within the immediate vicinity of an event
held pursuant to a temporary event permit; and
      (6)   No vending shall occur within a corner cutoff area. A corner cutoff
area is that area at all intersecting and intercepting streets or highways. The
cutoff line shall be in a horizontal plane, making an angle of forty five (45)
degrees with the side, front, or rear property line, as the case may be. It
shall pass through the points located on both sides and front or rear property
lines at a distance of thirty (30) feet from the intersection of such lines at
the comer of a street or highway; and
      (7)   The sidewalk vendor does not cause an undue concentration of
commercial activity that unreasonably interferes with the scenic and natural
character of the park or necessary to endure the public's use and enjoyment of
natural resources and recreational opportunities or regulations directly
related to objective health, safety or wellness concerns; and
      (8)   No vending shall occur in public streets, roadways, medians,
pedestrian islands, parking lots, alleys, or bikeways.
(§ 3, Ord. 3123, eff. December 18, 2018, as amended by § 2, Ord. 3146, eff.
December 19, 2019 and § 3, Ord. 3201, eff. February 17, 2022)
Sec. 5-31.06. Roaming sidewalk vending.
   (a)   Roaming sidewalk vendors shall meet the following:
      (1)   Sidewalk vending hours for residential zones shall be conducted
between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m. weekdays and 9:00 a.m. and 5:00
p.m. on the weekends; and
      (2)   The sidewalk vendor maintains their temporary vending area in a
clean, orderly, and sanitary condition; and
      (3)   The sidewalk vendor does not block entrances to buildings,
driveways, parking spaces, or building windows; and
      (4)   The sidewalk vendor does not conduct sales from a public street;
and
      (5)   No vending shall occur within a corner cutoff area. A corner cutoff
area is that area at all intersecting and intercepting streets or highways. The
cutoff line shall be in a horizontal plane, making an angle of forty-five (45)
degrees with the side, front, or rear property line, as the case may be. It
shall pass through the points located on both sides and front or rear property
lines at a distance of thirty (30) feet from the intersection of such lines at
the comer of a street or highway; and
      (6)   No vending shall occur within five hundred (500) feet of a
certified farmers' market, a swap meet, construction-related street or lane
closure, filming location, the Ontario International Airport, or an event held
pursuant to a temporary event permit; and
      (7)   No vending shall occur within five hundred (500) feet of the City-
owned arena located at 4000 East Ontario Center Parkway, Ontario, CA 91764, the
Ontario Convention Center, or Ontario Town Square on event days; and
      (8)   No vending shall occur in downtown commercial areas where there is
a likelihood of overcrowding on the sidewalk or overcrowding of parking areas,
with the potential of causing pedestrian and traffic safety issues; and
      (9)   No vending shall occur within five hundred (500) feet of any
school; any postsecondary educational facility attended by secondary pupils; or
any private kindergarten, elementary, or secondary school facility; and
      (10)   No vending shall occur within three (3) feet of any street lights,
edges of tree wells, parking meters, or above-ground utility structures; and
      (11)   No vending shall occur within two (2) feet of any existing
subsurface utility box, valve, or vault; and
      (12)   No vending shall occur within twenty (20) feet of another vendor;
and
      (13)   No vending shall occur within three (3) feet of bus stop
locations, red curbs, or at locations where there are existing above-ground
amenities such as newsstands or street furniture, including but not limited to
benches and bike racks; and
      (14)   No vending shall occur in public streets, roadways, medians,
pedestrian islands, parking lots, alleys, or bikeways; and
      (15)   No vending shall occur within twenty (20) feet of the entrance way
to any building, store, theater, movie house, house of worship, or place of
public assembly.
(§ 3, Ord. 3123, eff. December 18, 2018, as amended by § 2, Ord. 3146, eff.
December 19, 2019)
Sec. 5-31.07. Penalties.
   (a)   It is unlawful for any person to violate any provision or fail to
comply with any requirements of this chapter. Pursuant to California Government
Code Section 51039, a violation of this chapter shall by punished by:
      (1)   An administrative fine not exceeding one hundred dollars ($100) for
a first violation.
      (2)   An administrative fine not exceeding two hundred dollars ($200) for
a second violation within one (1) year of the first violation.
      (3)   An administrative fine not exceeding five hundred dollars ($500)
for each additional violation within one (1) year of the first violation.
   (b)    A violation of vending without a sidewalk vending permit, may, in
lieu of the penalties set forth in subsection (a), set forth above, be punished
by:
      (1)    An administrative fine not exceeding two hundred fifty ($250)
dollars for a first violation.
      (2)    An administrative fine not exceeding five hundred dollars ($500)
for a second violation within one (1) year of the first violation.
      (3)    An administrative fine not exceeding one thousand dollars ($1,000)
for each additional violation within one (1) year of the first violation.
   (c)    If an individual is subject to subsection (b), set forth above, for
vending without a sidewalk vending permit, upon the individual providing proof
of a valid permit issued by the City, the administrative fines set forth in
this Chapter shall be reduced to the administrative fines set forth in
subsection (a), respectively.
   (d)   The proceeds of any administrative fines assessed pursuant to this
chapter shall be deposited in the treasury of the City.
   (e)   Failure to pay an administrative fine assessed under this chapter
shall not be punishable as an infraction or misdemeanor. Additional fines,
fees, assessments, or any other financial conditions beyond those authorized in
this chapter shall not be assessed.
   (f)   Any violation of this chapter shall not be punishable as an infraction
or misdemeanor, and any person alleged to have violated any provisions of this
chapter shall not be subject to arrest except when otherwise permitted under
law.
   (g)   When assessing an administrative fine pursuant to this chapter, the
adjudicator shall take into consideration the person's ability to pay the fine.
The City shall provide the person with notice of his or her right to request an
ability-to-pay determination and shall make available instructions or other
materials for requesting an ability-to-pay determination. The person may
request an ability-to-pay determination at adjudication or while the judgment
remains unpaid, including when a case is delinquent or has been referred to a
comprehensive collection program.
      (1)   If the person meets the criteria described in subdivision (a) or
(b) of Government Code section 68632, the City shall accept, in full
satisfaction, twenty (20) percent of the administrative fine imposed pursuant
to this chapter.
      (2)   The City may allow the person to complete community service in lieu
of paying the total administrative fine, may waive the administrative fine, or
may offer an alternative disposition.
   (h)   A person who is currently serving, or who completed, a sentence, or
who is subject to a fine, for a conviction of a misdemeanor or infraction for
sidewalk vending, whether by trial or by open or negotiated plea, who would not
have been guilty of that offense under SB 946 had SB 946 been in effect at the
time of the offense, may petition for dismissal of the sentence, fine, or
conviction before the trial court that entered the judgment of conviction in
his or her case.
   (i)   Nothing contained herein shall be construed to impede the City's or
county's ability to enforce County Health Department codes and regulations.
(§ 3, Ord. 3123, eff. December 18, 2018, as amended by § 2, Ord. 3146, eff.
December 19, 2019 and § 4, Ord. 3201, eff. February 17, 2022)
CHAPTER 32: CITY LIBRARIES, MUSEUM OF HISTORY AND ART,
AND RECREATION AND COMMUNITY SERVICES
COMMUNITY FACILITIES RULES
   
5-32.01   Purpose; findings
   
5-32.02   Definitions
   
5-32.03   Codes of conduct
   
5-32.04   Penalties
Sec. 5-32.01. Purpose; findings.
   (a)   The mission and purpose of the City Library and Ontario Museum of
History and Art includes providing free and open access to a broad range of
educational, leisure, recreational, and general interest materials and services
to people of all ages and backgrounds in a safe, clean, civil, respectful, and
tranquil environment that is conducive to making everyone's visit at the
Library and Museum of History and Art a positive, productive, and enjoyable
experience, whether one is engaged in reading, writing, researching studying,
learning, and/or attending and participating in the multitude of community
programs and events offered therein.
   (b)   The mission and purpose of the Recreation and Community Services
Department may differ slightly from that of the City Library and the Ontario
Museum of History and Art in that it provides some recreational programs that
do not necessarily involve quiet contemplation as reading in a library or
attending a museum exhibit might involve, such as playing a sport. Nonetheless,
the Recreation and Community Services Department's mission includes providing
people with a safe, clean, civil, and respectful environment within which
patrons can enjoy a positive, productive, and enjoyable experience.
(§ 2, Ord. 3194, eff. December 16, 2021)
Sec. 5-32.02. Definitions.
   For purposes of this chapter, the following definitions apply:
   (a)   "City" means the City of Ontario.
   (b)   "City facility" means any facility which hosts programs to the public
under the jurisdiction of the Community Life & Culture Agency, which includes
all Ontario libraries, the Ontario Museum of History and Art, and the community
centers of the Recreation and Community Services Department.
   (c)   "Code of Conduct" means a policy establishing a patron code of conduct
duly adopted by the Library Board of Trustees, the Ontario Museum of History
and Art Board of Trustees, and/or the Recreation and Parks Commission.
(§ 2, Ord. 3194, eff. December 16, 2021)
Sec. 5-32.03. Codes of conduct.
   (a)   The Library Board of Trustees may establish a code of conduct to
govern the behavior of patrons who visit the City's libraries in order to
protect and further the mission of the City Library. The code of conduct, as it
may be established and/or amended from time to time, shall be considered part
of this chapter by reference.
   (b)   The Ontario Museum of History and Art Board of Trustees may establish
a code of conduct to govern the behavior of patrons who visit the Ontario
Museum of History and Art to protect and further the mission of the Museum of
History and Art. The code of conduct, as it may be established and/or amended
from time to time, shall be considered part of this chapter by reference.
   (c)   The Recreation and Parks Commission may establish a code of conduct to
govern the behavior of patrons who visit the City's community centers to
protect and further the mission of the Recreation and Community Services
Department. The code of conduct, as it may be established and/or amended from
time to time, shall be considered part of this chapter by reference.
   (d)   Any code of conduct shall include an appeal procedure to the
respective board or commission.
   (e)   Any code of conduct shall be conspicuously posted on the City
facility's premises. Any person who violates the code of conduct shall be
advised of the violation and the requirements of the code of conduct, and be
advised that if he or she continues to violate the code of conduct, it may
result in being required to leave the premises and being subject to criminal
penalties.
(§ 2, Ord. 3194, eff. December 16, 2021)
Sec. 5-32.04. Penalties.
   (a)   Any person who has violated any code of conduct may be subject to the
suspension of his or her borrowing, visitation, and/or participation privileges
for a period of time as provided by each respective code of conduct.
   (b)   Any person subject to suspension of his or her borrowing, visitation,
and/or participation privileges, as authorized by subsection (a) above, shall
remain subject to such suspension during the pendency of any administrative or
judicial appeal.
   (c)   Any person who fails or refuses to leave the City facility after being
given the requisite notice, warning, and direction to leave, shall be guilty of
a misdemeanor which shall be punishable by a fine not exceeding One Thousand
Dollars ($1,000) per violation, or by imprisonment in the County Jail for a
period not exceeding six (6) months, or by both such fine and imprisonment.
   (d)   Any person who returns to the City facility during any suspension
period shall be guilty of a misdemeanor which shall be punishable by a fine not
exceeding One Thousand Dollars ($1,000) per violation, or by imprisonment in
the County Jail for a period not exceeding six (6) months, or by both such fine
and imprisonment.
   (e)   Each such person shall be guilty of a separate offense for each and
every day during any portion of which any violation of or failure to comply
with any provision of this chapter, is committed, continued, or permitted by
such person and shall be punishable accordingly.
   (f)   The penalties contained in this section are cumulative.
(§ 2, Ord. 3194, eff. December 16, 2021)
CHAPTER 33: PUBLIC ART PROGRAM
   
5-33.01   Purpose
   
5-33.02   Public artworks: definitions
   
5-33.03   Public Art Program Advisory Commission
   
5-33.04   Policy for the gift or long term loan of public art
   
5-33.05   Private art for public enjoyment in commercial and industrial
development projects
   
5-33.06   Murals
   
5-33.07   Public art funded by City funds on City projects
Sec. 5-33.01. Purpose.
   This Chapter may be known and cited as the “Ontario Public Art Program.” It
is the goal of the City's Public Art Program to promote public art and art in
public places, as a cultural resource for the community, and act as a mechanism
to enhance the City's commercial vitality and economic stability. Furthermore,
it is intended that the Ontario Public Art Program will serve to enrich the
community aesthetic and built urban environment, by making available to the
public a diverse collection of artworks throughout the City. The aforementioned
goals will be realized through bringing contemporary art into the environment
and life of Ontario, enriching the lives of City residents and visitors by the
exposure to art in various forms, encouraging both emerging and established
artists living in Ontario and the Ontario region by supporting and purchasing
their work, acquiring a distinguished collection of art representing varying
genres, styles, scales, mediums, forms, and intent, and reflective of trends
and disciplines in art on a local, regional, national, and international level,
integrating artists into the City's design process, encouraging public dialogue
and interaction through a public art program; embracing a broad range of
artworks, which are reflective of the overall diversity of current works in the
field of visual arts, enriching the quality of life and economic vitality of
Ontario, and further defining distinct characteristics of neighborhoods.
(§ 2, Ord. 3208, eff. June 16, 2022, as amended by § 2, Ord. 3256, eff.
September 14, 2023)
Sec. 5-33.02. Public Artworks: Definitions.
   As used in this Chapter, the words, terms, and phrases listed below in
correct alphabetical order, shall have the following meanings:
   (a)   “Artist” means a practitioner in the arts, recognized by his or her
critics and peers as a professional who possesses serious artistic intent and
ability.
   (b)   “Artworks” means original pieces of art, including limited editions,
not limited by medium used. It may include paintings, sculptures, murals,
mosaics, and fountains. These categories may be realized through such media as
steel, bronze, stained glass, concrete, wood, ceramic tile, stone, and other
suitable materials. Artworks may also include earthworks, performing arts,
literary arts, special events, festivals, and other arts and culture
programming and/or visual arts not specifically outlined herein, as may be
deemed appropriate by the Public Art Program Advisory Committee. Artworks
include both temporary and permanent projects. Artworks does not include
objects that are mass produced.
   (c)   “Commercial message” means any message that advertises a business
conducted, services rendered, or goods produced or sold.
   (d)   “Commercial project” means any site, structure, facility, or land use
allowed pursuant to Table 5.02-1 (Land Use Matrix) of the City of Ontario
Development Code, within any of the commercial zoning districts established
under Section 5.01.005.B (Commercial Zoning Districts) of the Development Code,
or within the commercial portion of any residential mixed-use development.
   (e)   “Industrial project” means any site, structure, facility, or land use
allowed pursuant to Table 5.02-1 (Land Use Matrix) of the City of Ontario
Development Code, within any of the industrial zoning districts established
under Section 5.01.005.D (Industrial Zoning Districts) of the Development Code,
or within the industrial portion of any nonresidential mixed-use development.
   (f)   “Original art mural” means a unique, hand-painted, hand-tiled, or
digitally printed image on the exterior wall of a building that does not
contain any commercial message.
   (g)   “Public Art Collection” means publicly accessible artwork that is
acquired or commissioned by the City pursuant to the public art program.
   (h)   “Public Art Handbook” means a document that guides the Public Art
Program on the many aspects of having a Public Art Collection, including but
not limited to the acquisition, commission, gift, loan, maintenance and
deaccession of public art.
   (i)   “Public Art Program” means the program established for the selection,
acquisition, creation, installation, conservation, restoration, management,
planning, decommission, community education and publicity of public art in the
City of Ontario.
   (j)   “Public place” means any area on public property, either interior or
exterior, which must be accessible and visible to the general public.
   (k)   “Project applicant” means the property owner, developer or other
responsible party proposing a project requiring an art component.
   (l)   “Project improvement valuation” means the value of the tenant
improvements as determined by the then-current City total valuation
methodology.
   (m)   “Project valuation” means the value of the project as determined by
the then-current City total valuation methodology.
   (n)   “Project site” means the location of the improvements being developed.
   (o)   “Public art on City property” means original works of art located on,
affixed to, or applied on City-owned property.
   (p)   “Private art for public enjoyment” means original works of art located
on, affixed to, or applied on private property that are accessible and/or
visible to the general public.
   (q)   “Public Art Program Advisory Commission” means the five-member
advisory commission appointed by the City Council that is responsible for
ensuring that the criteria established by this Public Art Program have been
met.
   (r)   “Vintage original art mural” means an original art mural that existed
prior to the enactment of this Chapter.
(§ 2, Ord. 3208, eff. June 16, 2022, as amended by § 2, Ord. 3256, eff.
September 14, 2023)
Sec. 5-33.03. Public Art Program Advisory Commission.
   (a)    There is hereby created and established a Public Art Program Advisory
Commission. The Public Art Program Advisory Commission shall be comprised of
five members who shall be appointed by the City Council.
   (b)   Members of the Public Art Advisory Commission shall be comprised as
follows:
      (1)   Three (3) of the five (5) members shall be given priority
consideration from each of the following organizations, provided that the City
has received an application from at least one representative from each
organization.
         (A)   A representative from the Chaffey Community Museum of Art;
         (B)   A representative from Ontario Heritage;
         (C)   A representative from the Ontario Museum of History & Art
Associates;
      (2)   The remaining two (2) members, or more if the City has not received
an application from each of the three (3) organizations listed in Section 5-
33.03(b)(1)(A)-(C), may be selected from the following:
         (A)   Local non-profit historic preservation advocacy organization;
         (B)   Local arts educators;
         (C)   Local artists;
         (D)   Local performers;
         (E)   Arts professionals;
         (F)   College-level arts students; and
         (G) Architects, landscape architects, and other design professionals.
      (3)   Notwithstanding any contrary provision in the Ontario Municipal
Code, members of the Public Art Advisory Commission may be non-residents of the
City, subject to the limitation that no more than two (2) of the five (5)
members may be non-residents of the City.
      (4)   The City Councilmember Liaison to the Ontario Museum of History &
Art, shall serve as an ex officio, non-voting member.
   (c)   The process for appointment to the Public Art Advisory Commission
shall be as follows. A call for applications will be sent out for interested
appointees. Community Life & Culture staff will review the applications
received and determine whether the applicants meet the basic requirement from
this Section. Community Life & Culture staff will then present the qualified
candidates to the City Council for their review and nomination. The Mayor shall
appoint the members of the Commission, subject to ratification by a vote of the
entire City Council. Each Councilmember may suggest one member from the list of
qualified candidates for the Mayor to appoint to the Commission.
   (d)   Members of the Public Art Program Advisory Commission shall serve a
term of four (4) years. A person may serve multiple terms.
   (e)   Powers and Duties. The Public Art Program Advisory Commission shall
ensure that all criteria established by this Public Art Program have been
complied with. The Advisory Commission shall review all requests for the
installation of public art, examining proposals for public safety, weather
resistance, balance with the program, public response, proper lighting, public
accessibility, installation methods, proportion, composition, the artist's
previous experience, art training, and exhibition record. Advisory Commission
support shall be provided by the Museum, Arts & Culture Director or designee.
The Advisory Commission may establish, and amend from time to time, a Public
Art Handbook. Proposed commission, acquisition, and/or development of public
art or artworks shall go to the Commission for review even if an artist is not
involved.
      (1)   Construction and Installation of Public Artworks (Permanent). The
following procedure is to be followed in the construction of on-site permanent
public artworks:
         (A)   The composition of the proposed artwork shall be of a permanent
type of material in order to be a durable against vandalism, theft, and
weather, and require a low level of ongoing maintenance.
         (B)   The artwork shall be related in terms of scale, material, form
and content to immediate and adjacent buildings and landscaping so that it
complements the site and surrounding environment. A Certificate of
Appropriateness pursuant to Ontario Development Code Section 4.02.050 may be
required to ensure that the artwork does not cause an adverse impact to
historic resources.
            (C)   The artwork shall be constructed by persons experienced in
the production and installation of such artwork.
         (D)   The artwork shall be permanently affixed to the property unless
it is designated a temporary exhibit in the scope of the project when
commissioned.
         (E)   Installation of the artwork shall be planned and implemented to
enhance the piece and allow for unobstructed viewing from as many angles as
possible.
         (F)   The City shall obtain from the artist, complete maintenance
instructions, including methods to maintain the piece and the frequency of
maintenance.
         (G)   Each piece of artwork shall be identified by a plaque at the
site of an appropriate size and scale to the piece. The plaque shall be made of
cast metal and then placed in a location near the art piece listing the title
of the piece, the artist, and the date as well as the City and the Art in
Public Places Program.
      (2)   Construction and Installation of Public Artworks (Temporary). The
following procedure is to be followed in the construction of on-site temporary
public artworks:
         (A)   The composition of the proposed artwork shall be of a type of
material in order to be a durable against vandalism, theft, and weather, and
require a low level of maintenance.
         (B)    The artwork shall be related in terms of scale, material, form
and content to immediate and adjacent buildings and landscaping so that it
complements the site and surrounding environment.
         (C)   The artworks shall be constructed by persons experienced in the
production and installation of such artwork.
         (D)   The method of attachment or securing the artwork shall be
identified.
         (E)   Installation of the artwork shall be planned and implemented to
enhance the piece and allow for unobstructed viewing from as many angles as
possible.
         (F)   The City shall obtain from the artist, complete maintenance
instructions, including methods to maintain the piece and the frequency of
maintenance.
         (G)   Each piece of artwork shall be identified by a plaque at the
site of an appropriate size and scale to the piece. The plaque shall be made of
cast metal and then placed in a location near the art piece listing the title
of the piece, the artist, and the date as well as the City and the Art in
Public Places Program.
         (H)   Any security measures needed to secure the artwork, the
estimated cost of the security, and a source of funding for the security shall
be identified.
         (I)   Any temporary artwork must include a deinstallation plan that
clearly identifies which parts of the artwork (if any) need to be returned to
the artist and which may be disposed of after the term of the installation.
(§ 2, Ord. 3208, eff. June 16, 2022, as amended by § 2, Ord. 3256, eff.
September 14, 2023)
Sec. 5-33.04. Policy for the Gift or Long Term Loan of Public Art.
   (a)   Purpose. Unsolicited gifts or long term loans to the City can be an
important part of the City's art collection. The purpose of this Section is to
ensure that proposed gifts of public art undergo a review process to ensure
that acceptance of such gifts takes place in a fair and uniform manner.
Furthermore, it is the intent of this Section to ensure that potential gifts of
public artworks are evaluated as carefully as artworks that are commissioned,
and that such artworks undergo a careful review process that evaluates a gift
based upon acceptance criteria established according to the purposes,
guidelines, goals, and selection process that guides artworks that are
commissioned.
   (b)   Applicability. This Section applies to all unsolicited offers of
donation or long term loans of artworks to the City of Ontario. Unsolicited
offers of donation or long term loans of artworks for display in interior
spaces of City owned or leased buildings shall not be subject to the procedures
in this Section; however, the City Manager may choose to opt-in to the
procedures in this Section for review and consideration of such artworks.
   (c)   Procedures for Gifts or Long Term Loans. For each proposed gift or
long term loan of public art, a written proposal or letter of intent shall be
submitted to the City Manager. The City Manager shall refer the proposal to the
Public Art Advisory Commission for review and recommendation. The City
Council's decision shall be final and conclusive. The proposal shall consist of
the following items:
      (1)   Completed application form;
      (2)   Photographs, drawings, models, or designs of proposed artwork;
      (3)   Description and samples (if available) of materials and colors;
      (4)   Appraisal by a professional art appraiser (for long term loans);
      (5)   A site plan, to include photographs of site and neighborhood,
drawings of the proposed site with the project to scale. If located within a
historic district or on any other historic resource, a Certificate of
Appropriateness may be required pursuant to Ontario Development Code Section
4.02.050;
      (6)   Proposed transportation/delivery schedule, and request of City
responsibility for transport of the artwork to the City, if applicable;
      (7)   Proposed installation schedule;
      (8)   Maintenance manual, including the long-term intent of artist for
the preservation and maintenance of artwork;
      (9)   Maintenance schedule prepared by professional art curator;
      (10)   Estimated budget for installation and maintenance;
      (11)   Resume and examples of artist's previous work;
      (12)    Duration of the loan (if applicable);
      (13)   Proof of insurance sufficient to meet the requirements of the
City's Risk Manager, if necessary; and
      (14)   Building permits, if necessary.
   (d)   Criteria for the Evaluation of Proposed Gifts or Long Term Loans of
Public Art. The following criteria shall be used in evaluating proposed gifts
of long term loans of public art for review and acceptance by the City:
      (1)   Artworks may be existing or proposed works of art;
      (2)   Artworks must be one-of-a-kind or part of an original series.
Reproductions of originals are not considered eligible for acceptance;
      (3)   Gifts must maintain high artistic standards and are appropriate in
relationship or historical relevance to the City;
      (4)   The proposed location (if specified) is available and is
appropriate to the artwork's content, scale, and material. Factors to be
considered in selecting an appropriate site include type of artwork,
relationship to architectural and natural features, visibility and public
access, traffic patterns, future development plans for the area (if known), and
public use patterns of the site and surrounding area. If a location is on a
historic building, site, landscape or within a district issuance of a
Certificate of Appropriateness may be required pursuant to Ontario Development
Code Section 4.02.050;
      (5)   Restrictions from the donor, if any;
      (6)   Artwork proposals must demonstrate how the surrounding community
has been involved and consulted in the process;
      (7)   Costs of installation and maintenance and repair over the expected
life of the artwork shall be defined;
      (8)   Artistic quality (vision, originality and craftsmanship);
      (9)   Context (architectural, historical, geographical and socio-cultural
context of the site);
      (10)   Quality and permanency of materials (if ephemeral material: is
appropriate documentation included?);
      (11)   Safety;
      (12)   Diversity of artists (gender, race, culture) representation in the
existing collection of publicly-accessible artworks; and
      (13)   Diversity of artworks (media, scale, style, intention) in the
existing collection of publicly accessible artworks.
   (e)   Long Term Loans of Artwork. Upon recommendation by the Public Art
Program Advisory Commission and acceptance by the City Council, long term loans
of artwork may be displayed upon execution of a contract between the City and
the artist clearly identifying the terms and conditions of the loan and the
rights and responsibilities of all parties. Donations to the Ontario Museum of
History & Art (“Museum”) are subject to a different approval process
established by the Museum and/or subject to the City’s Donation Policy.
   (f)   Acceptance of Gifts of Public Art. Upon recommendation by the Public
Art Program Advisory Commission and acceptance by the City Council, gifts of
artworks will be deemed part of the permanent collection of the City, and
registered with the City's Department of Museum Arts & Culture, once the donor
has fulfilled the requirements as stated in the Public Art Handbook, which
shall include the following:
      (1)   Written certification of the installation of the artwork, if
completed by artist;
      (2)   An executed contract between the City and the artist transferring
title of the artwork and clearly defining the rights and responsibilities of
all parties;
      (3)   Written instructions for the care, maintenance, preservation, and
handling of the artwork, prepared with the assistance of a professional art
conservator to be provided by the artist;
      (4)   A sworn statement of no liens, claims, or other encumbrances
associated with the artwork;
      (5)   A written assignment of any and all warranties for materials used,
or labor performed by subcontractors or other persons; and
      (6)   A written assignment conveying, at a minimum, a perpetual license
for the City to reproduce the artwork in digital or print medium for City
purposes. The written assignment may include, should it be the artist's desire,
the conveying of all rights, including copyrights and waiver of all rights
under the Visual Artist's Rights Act of 1990, and its amendments (Section 106A
of the United States Copyright Act; Pub. L. No. 101 650).
      Donations to the Museum shall be subject to a different approval process
established by the Museum and/or subject to the City’s Donation Policy.
   (g)   Title and Ownership. Permanent gifts of artwork to the City shall
become the property of the City once an Agreement for Acceptance Donated
Artwork has been fully executed and the Donor has delivered the Bill of Sale/
Transfer of Title. At such time, all rights of title and ownership shall be
conveyed to the City, and all future decisions regarding the use and continued
ownership of the artwork shall be under the sole discretion of the City. As
owner of the artwork, the City may exercise any and all legal rights of
ownership, including, but not limited to, sale, relocation, or removal of the
artwork.
   (h)   Maintenance. When artwork gifts are situated at or on City owned or
occupied properties or facilities, the City shall assume its continued
maintenance.
   (i)   Removal, Relocation, or Deaccession of an Artwork. Artworks gifted to
the City may be relocated, removed, or deaccessioned from the City's public art
collection if the artwork becomes a hazard or liability, if the approved terms
of acceptance are not fulfilled, or for any other reason as determined by the
City Council, upon recommendation by the Public Art Program Advisory
Commission.
   (j)   Exemption. Gifts of state presented to the City by foreign governments
or by other political jurisdictions of the United States that may be accepted
by the City Council or City Manager on behalf of the City. Permanent placement
of any such artworks will be determined jointly by the City Manager and the
Public Art Program Advisory Commission. If not provided by the donor,
maintenance of the art will be the responsibility of the host City department.
(§ 2, Ord. 3208, eff. June 16, 2022, as amended by § 2, Ord. 3256, eff.
September 14, 2023)
Sec. 5-33.05. Private Art for Public Enjoyment in Commercial and Industrial
Development Projects.
   (a)   Purpose.
      (1)   The purpose of this Section is to establish a program for private
art for public enjoyment in which private developers shall be required to
integrate artworks throughout the commercial and industrial sectors of the
City, for the benefit of the general public. The goals of this program are as
follows:
         (A)   Differentiate the City of Ontario as a special place to live,
work, play, visit, and invest;
         (B)   Strengthen cultural awareness, creativity, and innovative
thinking in the community;
         (C)   Integrate the vision of artists with the perspective of other
design professionals into the planning and design of the urban landscape;
         (D)   Ensure public artworks are visually accessible to every member
of the community;
         (E)   Provide an acceptable counterbalance to what many consider to be
the undesirable effects of commercial and industrial development (e.g.
construction noise, traffic, congestion, and pollution); and
         (F)   Build a diverse collection of outdoor artworks by qualified
artists and ensure the collection is continually maintained.
      (2)   The public art in commercial and industrial development projects
program provides developers a way to make a lasting and visible contribution to
the community and alleviate the undesirable effects that may be associated with
commercial and industrial development.
   (b)   Applicability.
      (1)   All new commercial and industrial development projects, and new
tenant improvements constructed in or on new or existing commercial and
industrial buildings, having a total project building valuation of $500,000 or
more, shall be subject to the requirements of this Section. This Section does
not apply to the residential portion of mixed-use projects.
      (2)   All residential projects and public facilities projects constructed
by the City or by nonprofit organizations shall be exempt from the requirements
of this Section.
   (c)   Minimum Public Art Allocation.
      (1)   The required minimum public art allocation fees shall be as
follows, and may be amended from time to time by Resolution:
 
Eligibility               On-Site Fee Option         City Fee Option
                          Developer installs On-Site Developer provides the
                          public art display         City $10,000 for City to
New commercial/industrial valuated at 1% of the      deposit into the Public
development $5,000,000 or total final project        Art Fund to be used for
more                      valuation as determined by the installation of a new
                          the building official or   public art display or
                          designee                   maintain, upgrade, or
                                                     expand an existing display
                          Developer installs On-Site Developer provides the
                          public art display         City $5,000 for City to
Tenant Improvement on     valuated at 1% of the      deposit into the Public
commercial/industrial     total final project        Art Fund to be used for
development $500,000 or   improvement valuation as   the installation of a new
more                      determined by the building public art display or
                          official or designee       maintain, upgrade, or
                                                     expand an existing display
 
      (2)   All projects created through the On-Site Fee Option must be
reviewed and approved by the City and shall be installed in compliance with all
federal, state, and local applicable laws and regulations.
      (3)   All projects installed through the On-Site Fee Option must be
maintained by the developer during the life of the buildings and structures.
      (4)   If the artwork installed pursuant to this Section is altered,
removed, is not maintained in good condition, or is not provided as required,
the City may exercise any and all available legal and/or equitable remedies.
   (d)   Penalties. Violations of this Section may be subject to the penalties
set forth in
Chapter 2 of Title 1 of Volume I of the Ontario Municipal Code and/or subject
to revocation of the entitlements for the development project.
(§ 2, Ord. 3208, eff. June 16, 2022, as amended by § 2, Ord. 3256, eff.
September 14, 2023)
Sec. 5-33.06. Murals.
   (a)   Murals commissioned by the City may only be installed and maintained
if they have been approved by the Public Art Program Advisory Commission. Other
murals not commissioned by the City will be subject to an objective design
checklist established, and amended from time to time, by Resolution, and
subject to ministerial City review. Murals may only be located in commercial,
industrial, City-owned public property, and private property. The Advisory
Commission shall have the authority to review and approve City commissioned
murals in accordance with the procedures and standards outlined in this
Chapter.
   (b)   Standards. The Public Art Program Advisory Commission shall ensure
that City commissioned murals are consistent with the following standards:
      (1)   Murals shall be an original art mural, a work of art, that is hand-
painted, hand-tiled or digitally printed image or digital display system on the
exterior surfaces of a building or site designed as a work of art. The image
cannot be advertising or other commercial message with brand name, product
name, abbreviation thereof, company or business name or logo, trademark, brand
imagery or products and services for sale. The Public Art Program Advisory
Commission will determine if an image, painting pattern, or other element on
the exterior of a building or site is a work of art. If the Public Art Program
Advisory Commission determines that the image, painting pattern, or other
element is not a work of art, then other applicable law may be applied such as
sign or building design guidelines by other City departments.
      (2)   Murals must be durable and capable of being well-maintained.
      (3)   Murals shall not compromise the proper function of any building or
use or diminish public safety.
      (4)   Murals shall not incorporate recognized signs of hatred or
discrimination against any race, color, sex, age, national origin, disability,
religion, ancestry, marital status, familial status, gender identity or
expression, or sexual orientation.
      (5)   Murals shall not be obscene or harmful to minors as defined by law.
      (6)   A Certificate of Appropriateness shall be required if the mural is
on a historic building or site pursuant to Ontario Development Code Section
4.02.050.
   (c)   Application fee. There shall be an application fee of $100 per non-
City-commissioned mural application, which may be amended from time to time by
Resolution.
   (d)   An Original Art Mural is not considered a sign as defined in the
Ontario Development Code. However, nothing contained in this Chapter is
intended to change the rules governing the determination of whether a mural may
be placed on a historic building.
   (e)   A City commissioned mural shall remain in place, without alteration,
for a minimum of six (6) months.
   (f)    Removal. A City commissioned mural may be removed after six (6)
months from the date of registration, so long as it is not a registered
historic landmark itself or associated with a registered historic landmark
property, under any the following circumstances as determined by the Executive
Director of the Community Life & Culture Agency:
      (1)   The property is sold;
      (2)   The structure or property is substantially remodeled or altered in
a way that precludes continuance of the mural;
      (3)   The property undergoes a change of use authorized.
(§ 2, Ord. 3208, eff. June 16, 2022, as amended by § 2, Ord. 3256, eff.
September 14, 2023)
Sec. 5-33.07. Public Art Funded by City Funds on City Projects.
   (a)   For the purposes of this Section, "capital improvement project" means
new vertical City construction projects with a construction budget of
$1,000,000 or more that provide significant general public access. Examples
include, but are not limited to, new libraries, fire stations, police stations,
department campuses/headquarters, community centers, bridges, plazas, bus
shelters, shade structures, and structures within parks such as but not limited
to barns. A "capital improvement project" does not include park improvements,
new park development, or improvements to existing facilities.
   (b)   For the purposes of this Section, "development costs" means the total
development costs of the capital improvement project. Development costs may
include, but are not limited to, any and all construction costs, and site work
expenses. Development costs shall not include property acquisition, demolition,
financing, or any salaries and benefits of public employees supporting the
capital improvement project.
   (c)   For all City capital improvement projects that are funded through City
funds, with the exception of capital improvement projects funded through bond
proceeds or development impact fees as described in subsection (d) and/or (e)
herein below, the City shall, at the discretion of the City Council, set aside
an amount equal to one (1) percent of the City Council approved budget for
development costs of such capital improvement projects for the commission,
acquisition, and/or development of public art or artworks on site. Projects by
the Ontario Municipal Utility Company shall not use any ratepayer money for
public art but non-ratepayer funds may be used for such Ontario Municipal
Utility Company projects such as constructing a new building. There shall be no
requirement that an artist be involved in the commission, acquisition, and/or
development of such public art or artworks. For the purposes of this Section,
City funds means any funds held in City accounts, including but not limited to
the general fund, special funds, and bond revenues, excluding any enterprise
and ratepayer funds and any funds limited by federal, state, and/or local
statute, regulation, or funding source. Applicable capital improvement projects
may apply the one (1) percent of funds towards public art on the same project
site. However, the City Council shall have the discretion to designate the use
of such funds towards public art projects other than on the site from which the
funds were budgeted for projects valued at $100,000,000.00 or more.
   (d)   Bond proceeds may be utilized for the commission and/or acquisition of
artwork on a case by case basis and upon review and approval by City Finance
staff and City's Bond Counsel. If City Finance staff and City's Bond Counsel
approve the use of bond proceeds for the commission and/or acquisition of a
specific artwork, then the Public Art Commission shall request that the
specific amount needed to commission and/or acquire that artwork be distributed
to cover expenses, up to one (1) percent of the approved budget for development
costs of such capital improvement project. Bond proceeds shall not be directly
transferred to the Public Art Fund upon issuance of bonds but will only be
distributed on a case by case basis with approval by City Finance staff and
City's Bond Counsel.
   (e)   Development Impact Fees may be utilized for the commission and/or
acquisition of artwork on a case by case basis and upon review and approval by
City Finance staff and City's legal counsel. If City Finance staff and City's
legal counsel approve the use of Development Impact Fees proceeds for the
commission and/or acquisition of a specific artwork, then the Public Art
Commission shall request that the specific amount needed to commission and/or
acquire that artwork be distributed to cover expenses, up to one (1) percent of
the approved budget for development costs of such capital improvement project.
(§ 2, Ord. 3256, eff. September 14, 2023)
TITLE 6. SANITATION AND HEALTH
      Chapter
         
1.   ANIMALS AND FOWL
         
2.   FISH MEAL STORAGE AND HANDLING (REPEALED)
         
3.   INTEGRATED SOLID WASTE MANAGEMENT
         
4.   HEALTH AND SAFETY CODE
         
5.   RESERVED
         
6.   STORM WATER DRAINAGE SYSTEM
         
7.   PUBLIC SEWER SYSTEM
         
8.   WATER SERVICES (REPEALED)
         
8A.   WATER CONSERVATION PLAN
         
8B.   WATER SERVICES
         
8C.   RECYCLED WATER USE
         
8D.   POTABLE WATER FACILITIES
         
8E.   CROSS-CONNECTION CONTROL
         
9.   WEEDS AND REFUSE ABATEMENT
         
10.   MASSAGE (REPEALED)
         
11.   CERTIFICATION OF WORKER COMPETENCY AND FOOD INDUSTRY SANITARY PROCEDURES
         
12.   CONTROL OF BLOWING SAND AND PREVENTION OF SOIL EROSION BY WIND
         
13.   SMOKING
         
13A.   SMOKE-FREE PARKS
         
14.   GRAFFITI SUPPRESSION
         
15.   SOLID WASTE DISPOSAL AND RECYCLING (REPEALED)
         
16.   REGULATION OF EPHEDRINE PURCHASES
         
17.   REGULATION OF BUTANE PURCHASES
         
18.   CANNABIS
CHAPTER 1: ANIMALS AND FOWL
Article 1. Animals and Fowl (Repealed)
Article 2. Dogs and Cats
   
6-1.200   Definitions
   
6-1.201   Reserved
   
6-1.202   Reserved
   
6-1.203   Vaccination and licenses: Required
   
6-1.204   Dog licenses: Places of procurement
   
6-1.205   Dog licenses: Applications: Issuance: Form
   
6-1.206   Dog licenses: Fees: Penalties
   
6-1.207   Dog immunizations: Time period
   
6-1.208   Dog immunizations: Veterinarians
   
6-1.209   Dog tags: Issuance
   
6-1.210   Dog tags: Maintenance on dogs
   
6-1.211   Unauthorized removal of dog tags/licenses
   
6-1.212   Rabies examinations
   
6-1.213   Leashes
   
6-1.214   Vicious dogs
   
6-1.215   Impoundment of dogs at large
   
6-1.216   Impoundment of cats
   
6-1.217   Reserved
   6-1.218   Reserved
   6-1.219   Reserved
   6-1.220   Reserved
   6-1.221   Reserved
   6-1.222   Reserved
   6-1.223   Reserved
   
6-1.224   Commercial kennels: Licenses: Required: Fees
   
6-1.225   Commercial kennels: Licenses: Suspension and revocation
   
6-1.226   Operating a commercial kennel without a license unlawful
   
6-1.227   Commercial kennels: Application of license provisions
   
6-1.228   Commercial kennels: Reports of sales
   
6-1.229   Contracts for delegation of duties of Enforcing Officer
   
6-1.230   Keeping Pot Bellied Pigs
Article 2.5. Barking Dog and Noisy Animal Violations and Civil Fines
   
6-1.250   Definitions
   
6-1.251   Applicability
   
6-1.252   Barking dog and noisy animals declared public nuisance
   
6-1.253   Barking dog or noisy animal citation: General
   
6-1.254   Barking dog or noisy animal citation: Contents
   
6-1.255   Service of barking dog or noisy animal citation
   
6-1.256   Amount of barking dog or noisy animal civil fines
   
6-1.257   Payment of barking dog or noisy animal civil fines
   
6-1.258   Administrative hearing
   
6-1.259   Hearing procedures
   
6-1.260   Decision after administrative hearing
   
6-1.261   Right to judicial review
   
6-1.262   Collection of unpaid fines
Article 3. Dairies
   
6-1.301   Commercial dairy defined
   
6-1.302   Commercial dairies prohibited: Exceptions
Article 4. Standard for Care and Treatment for Sale of Animals at Swap Meets
   
6-1.400   Definitions
   
6-1.401   Standard of care
   
6-1.402   Enforcement
   
6-1.403   Penalties
Article 1. Animals and Fowl (Repealed)
Article 2. Dogs and Cats*
*Sections 6-1.200 through 6-1.217, codified from Ord. 1282, eff. January 8,
1958, as amended by Ord. 1715, eff. December 18, 1969, Ord. 1727, eff. June 18,
1970, Ord. 1831, eff. May 2, 1974, Ord. 1945, eff. June 16, 1977, Ord. 1994,
eff. April 7, 1978, Ord. 2037, eff. April 19, 1979, amended in its entirety by
Ord. 2523, eff. March 19, 1992.
Sec. 6-1.200. Definitions.
   For the purposes of this article, unless otherwise apparent from the
context, certain words and phrases used in this article are defined as follows:
   (a)   “Commercial kennel” shall mean any place, other than a private kennel,
where four (4) or more dogs over four (4) months or four (4) or more cats over
four (4) months of age are kept.
   (b)   “Enforcing Officer” shall mean the City Manager, the Police Chief, the
Humane Officer, the City Health Officer, or such other person as the Council
may designate.
(§ 1, Ord. 2523, eff. March 19, 1992)
Sec. 6-1.201. Reserved.
   (Editor's note: See § 9-1.1305 for provisions covering the keeping of cats
and dogs.)
Sec. 6-1.202. Reserved.
   (Editor's note: See § 9-1.1305 for provisions covering the keeping of cats
and dogs.)
Sec. 6-1.203. Vaccination and licenses: Required.
   Each dog over four (4) months of age harbored within the City shall be
vaccinated with a state approved anti-rabies vaccine in accordance with state
law and shall be licensed.
(§ 1, Ord. 2523, eff. March 19, 1992)
Sec. 6-1.204. Dog licenses: Places of procurement.
   Dog licenses shall be available from the Enforcing Officer.
(§ 1, Ord. 2523, eff. March 19, 1992)
Sec. 6-1.205. Dog licenses: Applications: Issuance: Form.
   Upon receipt of the required license fee accompanied by an anti-rabies
certificate and written application giving the name and address of the owner of
the dog and a brief description of the dog, the Enforcing Officer or an
authorized representative may issue and deliver to such person a license
certifying the payment of such fee, the date the anti-rabies vaccination was
administered, and setting forth the name and address of the applicant, a brief
description of the dog, and the number allotted to such dog. Assistance dogs,
as defined by Cal. Food & Agric. Code § 30850, must still be licensed in the
procedure outlined in this section but are exempt from paying the license fee.
(§ 1, Ord. 2523, eff. March 19, 1992)
Sec. 6-1.206. Dog licenses: Fees: Penalties.
   (a)   Fees: General. Every person owning or harboring any dog over four (4)
months of age within the City shall annually pay to the Enforcing Officer or to
such nonprofit organization as the Council may designate by contract as
collection agent an annual license fee as established by resolution of the City
Council.
   (b)   Fees: New residents in the City. The owner of any dog, which owner
moves into the City from another community, upon the presentation of a rabies
vaccination receipt signed by a licensed veterinarian and a license receipt
from another community for the current year, may be issued an Ontario license
tag upon the payment of One Dollar ($1.00) to cover the cost of the tag.
   (c)   Penalties. A penalty may be added to each license fee for failure to
pay such fee within thirty (30) days after such license fee shall fall due. The
amount of the penalty shall be established by resolution of the City Council.
(§ 1, Ord. 2523, eff. March 19, 1992)
Sec. 6-1.207. Dog immunizations: Time period.
   An owner of a dog, or one whose custody or possession a dog is in, must show
proof upon demand by the Enforcing Officer or representative and prior to
obtaining a license for such dog, that such dog has been vaccinated with a
state approved anti-rabies vaccine in accordance with state law.
(§ 1, Ord. 2523, eff. March 19, 1992)
Sec. 6-1.208. Dog immunizations: Veterinarians.
   Only veterinarians licensed by the State of California, or other state, to
practice veterinary medicine may immunize dogs against rabies. Upon
immunization with a rabies vaccine, the veterinarian shall issue a rabies
vaccination certificate to the dog owner or one whose custody or possession the
dog is in, a copy of which the veterinarian must forward to the Enforcing
Officer or his representative to be kept on file.
(§ 1, Ord. 2523, eff. March 19, 1992)
Sec. 6-1.209. Dog tags: Issuance.
   At the time of the issuance of a dog license, the Enforcing Officer or an
authorized representative will deliver to the applicant for such license a
metal tag which shall set forth the date of the expiration of the license.
(§ 1, Ord. 2523, eff. March 19, 1992)
Sec. 6-1.210. Dog tags: Maintenance on dogs.
   It shall be the duty of the owner or harborer of the dog for which a tag is
issued to maintain such tag on such dog.
(§ 1, Ord. 2523, eff. March 19, 1992)
Sec. 6-1.211. Unauthorized removal of dog tags/licenses.
   It is unlawful for any person other than the Enforcing Officer, or his
representative, or the owner of the dog, except in the case of an emergency, to
remove from any dog a dog tag or license.
(§ 1, Ord. 2523, eff. March 19, 1992)
Sec. 6-1.212. Rabies examinations.
   (a)   Biting dogs: Quarantine. Whenever it is shown that any dog has bitten
any person, the owner or person having the custody or possession of such dog
shall, upon the order of the City Health Officer or his representative,
quarantine the dog and keep it securely chained for a period of ten (10) days
and shall permit the City Health Officer or his representative to make an
inspection or examination of such dog at any time during such period.
Quarantined dogs shall not be removed from the premises where they have been
quarantined without the permission of the City Health Officer. The City Health
Officer, in the interest of protecting the person bitten, may order the dog
quarantined for a period of ten (10) days at the owner's expense at the City
Pound or at a licensed veterinary hospital.
   (b)   Dogs having or suspected of having rabies. The Enforcing Officer or an
authorized representative shall have the right to seize any dog within the City
having or suspected of having rabies and cause the same to be examined by the
City Health Officer, and it shall be the duty of the City Health Officer to
examine the dog for the purpose of determining if such dog is afflicted with
rabies.
   (c)   Release of rabies-free dogs. If it shall be determined that such dog
does not have rabies, the dog shall be returned to the owner or person whose
custody or control the dog is presently in.
(§ 1, Ord. 2523, eff. March 19, 1992)
Sec. 6-1.213. Leashes.
   No person owning or harboring any dog within the City shall permit such dog,
whether licensed or not, to be upon any public street, sidewalk, lane, alley,
court, or any other public place or upon any private property or premises,
other than those of the person owning or having control or custody of such dog,
except when such dog is held under a leash six (6) feet or less in length, by a
competent person.
(§ 1, Ord. 2523, eff. March 19, 1992)
Sec. 6-1.214. Vicious dogs.
   Chapter 9 of Division 14 of the Food and Agricultural Code (commencing with
Cal. Food & Agric. Code § 31601) is hereby adopted as the law and procedures to
be followed in the City of Ontario for potentially dangerous and vicious dogs.
(§ 1, Ord. 2523, eff. March 19, 1992)
Sec. 6-1.215. Impoundment of dogs at large.
   (a)   Dogs at large. It shall be the duty of the Enforcing Officer to
impound any dog running loose upon a public street, sidewalk, lane, alley,
court, or other public place or upon any private property or premises, other
than those of the person owning or having control or custody of such dog, and
the Enforcing Officer shall keep the dog impounded until claimed, destroyed, or
otherwise disposed of.
   (b)   Release to owners; Fees. The owner, caretaker or custodian of a dog so
impounded may reclaim such dog upon the payment of the required license fee, if
applicable, a redemption fee, and food and care costs in an amount as
established by resolution of the City Council. These fees are to be paid to the
Enforcing Officer.
   (c)   Adoption; Disposal. Where the owner, caretaker or custodian of the dog
is known, he or she will be notified by mail that his or her animal has been
impounded. If the dog has not been reclaimed within ten (10) days from mailing
of the notice to the owner's or custodian's last known address on file, or
within three (3) days of the impoundment where no owner, caretaker, or
custodian is known, the Enforcing Officer, in lieu of destroying such dog, may
offer the dog for adoption. The Enforcing Officer, however, with the approval
of a licensed veterinarian or humane officer of the state, may humanely destroy
any impounded animal on the same day it is impounded if the animal is in great
pain or discomfort due to any injury or infectious disease which may
contaminate and be detrimental to the health of the other animals at the animal
shelter.
(§ 1, Ord. 2523, eff. March 19, 1992)
Sec. 6-1.216. Impoundment of cats.
   (a)   Release to owners: Fees. The owner, caretaker or custodian of a cat
impounded may reclaim such cat upon the payment of a redemption fee and food
and care costs in an amount as established by resolution of the City Council.
These fees are to be paid to the Enforcing Officer.
   (b)   Adoption; Disposal. Where the owner, caretaker or custodian of the cat
is known, he or she will be notified by mail that his or her animal has been
impounded. If the cat has not been reclaimed within ten (10) days from mailing
of the notice to the owner's or custodian's last known address on file, or
within three (3) days of the impoundment where no owner, caretaker, or
custodian is known, the Enforcing Officer, in lieu of destroying such cat, may
offer the cat for adoption. The Enforcing Officer, however, with the approval
of a licensed veterinarian or humane officer of the state, may humanely destroy
any impounded animal on the same day it is impounded if the animal is in great
pain or discomfort due to any injury or infectious disease which may
contaminate and be detrimental to the health of the other animals at the animal
shelter.
(§ 1, Ord. 2523, eff. March 19, 1992)
Secs. 6-1.217—6-1.223. Reserved.
   (Editor’s note: See §§ 6-1.250 et seq. for provisions covering barking dogs
and noisy animals.)
Sec. 6-1.224. Commercial kennels: Licenses: Required: Fees.
   Every person engaging in the business of operating a commercial kennel, as
defined §
6-1.200(a) of this article, shall obtain a license from the License Official
and shall pay an annual license fee as is established by resolution of the City
Council.
(§ 1, Ord. 2523, eff. March 19, 1992)
Sec. 6-1.225. Commercial kennels: Licenses: Suspension and revocation.
   (a)   A commercial kennel license may be suspended or revoked for any of the
following reasons:
      (1)   If one or more dogs kept at the kennel are finally determined to be
public nuisances, because of barking, pursuant to the provisions of this
article;
      (2)   If the animals kept on the kennel premises are not securely
maintained so as to prevent their escape;
      (3)   If animals kept on the kennel premises are not at all times
provided with sufficient water, sufficient and proper food and protection from
the elements;
      (4)   If the kennel premises are not at all times maintained in a clean
and sanitary condition;
      (5)   If any animal kept on the kennel premises is subjected to cruel
treatment;
      (6)   If the reports required by §
6-1.228 of this article are not timely filed;
   (b)   If the Enforcing Officer determines that grounds for suspension or
revocation of a commercial kennel license may exist, the Enforcing Officer
shall give written notice, by personal service or by mail, to the license
holder setting forth all of the following:
      (1)   The name and address of the commercial kennel license holder;
      (2)   The violation(s) which are the grounds for the proposed suspension
or revocation of the commercial kennel license;
      (3)   The date or dates upon which the violation(s) were observed to
exist;
      (4)   A summary of the evidence which supports the violation(s) and the
names and addresses of any witnesses known to the Enforcing Officer;
      (5)   The name or description of the animal if a violation involves an
identifiable animal;
      (6)   Whether the proposed action is revocation or suspension and, if
suspension the proposed length of suspension; and
      (7)   A notice of the date, time and place at which a hearing will be
held before a hearing officer appointed by the Enforcing Officer to determine
whether the proposed suspension or revocation shall be imposed. Said date shall
be not less than fifteen (15) nor more than thirty (30) days after the notice
provided by this section is given to the license holder.
   (c)   The hearing officer shall hear and determine all facts and testimony
which he or she deems pertinent. Such facts and testimony may include all
evidence relevant to the violations charged in the notice of intent to revoke
or suspend the commercial kennel license. The hearing officer shall not be
limited by the technical rules of evidence. The license holder may appear in
person, by counsel, or in person and by counsel and may present such written
and/or oral evidence as he or she deems appropriate. Within fifteen (15) days
after the conclusion of the hearing, the hearing officer shall render his or
her decision and shall give written notice of that decision, by personal
service or by mail, to the license holder. That decision shall become final
fifteen (15) days after the date of personal service, or mailing, unless a
written notice of appeal is filed with the hearing officer, the City Council
shall hear and determine the appeal pursuant to the procedures set forth in §
6-1.221 of this article.
   (d)   If the license holder fails to appear at the time and place set for
hearing before the hearing officer, either personally, or by counsel, or by
counsel and in person, then the hearing officer may consider the facts stated
in the notice as being established and the proposed action as set forth in the
notice shall be ordered by the hearing officer.
   (e)   Any hearing before a hearing officer pursuant to this section may be
continued for a reasonable time at the request of the license holder or on the
hearing officer's own motion.
(§ 1, Ord. 2523, eff. March 19, 1992)
Sec. 6-1.226. Operating a commercial kennel without a license unlawful.
   Any person who operates a commercial kennel without first obtaining a
commercial kennel license, or who continues to operate a commercial kennel
after his or her license has been revoked or during any period of license
suspension, is guilty of a misdemeanor.
(§ 1, Ord. 2523, eff. March 19, 1992)
Sec. 6-1.227. Commercial kennels: Application of license provisions.
   All dogs owned by, or kept in, a commercial kennel shall be subject to the
licensing provisions of this article upon such dogs attaining the age of four
(4) months.
(§ 1, Ord. 2523, eff. March 19, 1992)
Sec. 6-1.228. Commercial kennels: Reports of sales.
   Upon the request of the Enforcing Officer, the sale of each dog or cat by a
commercial kennel before such dog or cat has attained the age of four (4)
months shall be reported by each commercial kennel operator on a form to be
furnished by the City Health Officer, which form shall include the following
information:
   (a)   The name and address of the person to whom the dog or cat is sold;
   (b)   A description of the dog or cat;
   (c)   The age of the dog or cat; and
   (d)   Such other pertinent data as the Health Officer may require.
(§ 1, Ord. 2523, eff. March 19, 1992)
Sec. 6-1.229. Contracts for delegation of duties of Enforcing Officer.
   The Council may, by contract, delegate to a nonprofit humane society the
collection of license fees and the performance of any of the duties of the
Enforcing Officer.
(§ 1, Ord. 2523, eff. March 19, 1992)
Sec. 6-1.230. Keeping Pot Bellied Pigs.
   The keeping of pot bellied pigs as domestic pets shall be authorized on
residential property in the City subject to the restrictions set forth herein.
   (a)   Definition: “Pot bellied pigs” shall mean a domesticated miniature
Vietnamese, Chinese, or Asian pot bellied pig not exceeding 90 pounds in weight
and 18 inches in height (measured at the shoulder), and characterized by a
swayed back and straight tail.
   (b)   Pot bellied pigs shall only be permitted in RE, R1, R1.5, R2 and R3
residential zones, in conjunction with a detached single family residence.
   (c)   Pot bellied pigs shall be provided with a fenced yard designed to
assure confinement of the animal when out of doors. Such yard areas must be
kept in a clean, safe, and odor-free condition.
   (d)   There shall be no more than one pot bellied pig permitted per lot or
parcel.
   (e)   Pot bellied pigs shall be licensed in the same manner as dogs, subject
to the same restrictions and penalties, pursuant to the provisions of Title 6
of the Ontario Municipal Code.
   (f)   The breeding of pot bellied pigs shall not be permitted. All pot
bellied pigs must be spayed or neutered.
   (g)   Prior to licensing of a pot bellied pig, veterinary certification
shall be required stating 1) the pig is spayed or neutered; 2) the pig is in
good health and has received all necessary vaccinations; and 3) the height and
weight of the pig.
   (h)   All male pot bellied pigs two years of age or older shall have their
tusks removed.
   (i)   While outside the owner's premises or property, pot bellied pigs shall
be restrained by a harness and leash or other similar restraint, not longer
than six (6) feet in length.
(§ 1, Ord. 2655, eff. March 19, 1998)
Article 2.5. Barking Dog and Noisy Animal Violations and Civil Fines
Sec. 6-1.250. Definitions.
   For the purposes of this Article, unless otherwise apparent from the
context, certain words and phrases used in this Article are defined as follows:
   (a)   "Barking dog" means a dog that barks, bays, cries, howls or makes any
noise for an extended period of time to the disturbance of any person at any
time of day or night, regardless of whether the dog is physically situated in
or upon private property. Such extended period of time shall consist of
incessant barking for 30 minutes or more in any 24-hour period, or intermittent
barking for 60 minutes or more during any 24-hour period. A dog shall not be
deemed a "barking dog" for purposes of this Chapter if, at any time the dog is
barking, a person is trespassing or threatening to trespass upon private
property in or upon which the dog is situated, or when the dog is being teased
or provoked.
   (b)   "Civil Citation" means a notice issued pursuant to this Article that
there has been a violation of this Chapter.
   (c)   "Day or Days" as used in this Article shall mean calendar day or
calendar days, respectively, unless otherwise expressly provided. The time in
which any act provided by law is to be done is computed by excluding the first
day and including the last, unless the last day is a holiday, and then it is
also excluded.
   (d)   "Director" means the Community Improvement Director, or his or her
designee.
   (e)   "Enforcement Officer" means the City Manager, Police Chief, Humane
Officer, City Health Officer, Sheltermaster, Community Improvement Officer, or
other such persons as the Council may designate.
   (f)   "Hearing Officer" means the person designated by the City Manager, or
his or designee, to serve as the overseeing authority for administrative
hearings held pursuant to this
Article 2.5. 
   (g)   "Issued" means giving a civil citation to a violator. Issuance occurs
on the date when a barking dog or noisy animal civil citation is personally
served on the violator, or the date it is mailed to the property where the
barking dog or noisy animal is located or where the barking dog or noisy animal
violation occurred, or the date the citation is posted in a conspicuous place
either on the property where the barking dog or noisy animal is located or
where the barking dog or noisy animal violation occurred. When service is made
by posting, the barking dog or noisy animal citation shall also be mailed
within 24 hours of posting to any address known for the violator.
   (h)   "Noisy Animal" shall mean any animal other than a dog that makes a
noise which emanates from the animal. The noise must be for an extended period
of time to the disturbance of another person, either continuously for 30
minutes or more in any 24-hour period, or intermittently for a total of 60 or
more accumulated minutes during any 24-hour period. An animal shall not be
considered a "noisy animal" for purposes of this Article if the animal is
making noise because a person is trespassing or threatening to trespass upon
private property in or upon which the animal is situated, or when the animal is
being teased or provoked, or if the animal is injured.
   (i)   "Notice of Decision" means a form used by a Hearing Officer to inform
a violator and/or complainant of an administrative hearing decision regarding
provisions of this Chapter.
   (j)   "Owner" means any person who possesses, has title to or an interest
in, harbors or has control, custody or possession of a dog or animal, and the
verb forms of "to own" shall include all those shades of meaning.
   (k)   A "Responsible Person" may also be referred to as a "violator" herein.
A Responsible Person is any of the following:
      (1)   A person who allows a barking dog or noisy animal violation to
exist, whether through willful action, failure to act, or failure to exercise
proper control over a barking dog or noisy animal.
      (2)   A person whose agent, employee, or independent contractor allows a
barking dog or noisy animal violation to exist, whether through willful action,
failure to act, or failure to exercise proper control over a barking dog or
noisy animal.
      (3)   A person who is the owner of, and a person who is a lessee or
sublessee with the current right of possession of, real property in or upon
which a barking dog or noisy animal violation occurs.
      (4)   For purposes of this Article, "person" includes a natural person or
legal entity, and the owners, majority stockholders, corporate officers,
trustees, and general partners of a legal entity.
      (5)   For the purposes of this Article, there may be more than one
Responsible Person for a barking dog or noisy animal violation, and a minor at
least fourteen (14) years of age may be a Responsible Person subject to the
provisions of this Article.
(§ 3, Ord. 3229, eff. January 19, 2023)
Sec. 6-1.251. Applicability.
   (a)   This Section makes any violation for keeping, maintaining, or
permitting the behavior of a barking dog or noisy animal, as defined in §
6-1.250, subject to civil fine.
   (b)   This Article therefore establishes the administrative procedures for
the imposition, enforcement, collection, and administrative review of civil
fines for barking dog or noisy animal violations pursuant to Government Code
section 53069.4 and the plenary police power of the City.
   (c)   The issuance of a civil citation under this Article is solely at the
City's discretion. By adopting this Article, the City does not intend to limit
its discretion to utilize any other remedy, civil or criminal, including
declaring a barking dog or noisy animal a public nuisance and abating as such.
   (d)   The purpose of issuing civil citations pursuant to this Article is to
encourage voluntary and complete compliance with the provisions of this Code
and to eliminate nuisances for the protection and benefit of the entire
community.
(§ 3, Ord. 3229, eff. January 19, 2023)
Sec. 6-1.252. Barking Dog and Noisy Animals Declared Public Nuisance.
   (a)   A barking dog or noisy animal, as defined in §
6-1.250, may be declared to be a public nuisance that may be abated as provided
in this Section.
   (b)   A barking dog or noisy animal may be deemed a public nuisance when two
or more declarations, made under penalty of perjury and made by declarants
living in separate households, are filed with the Enforcing Officer within a
sixty (60) day period stating in detail all of the following:
      (1)   That the declarant is a resident of a residential neighborhood
located within 200 yards of the boundaries of the premises where the dog or
animal is located;
      (2)   Within the past month declarant has heard the dog bark or animal
make noise for substantially long periods to the extreme annoyance of the
declarant.
   (c)   Upon receipt of two such declarations, the Enforcing Officer shall
assign an officer to investigate the complaints. The officer shall personally
interview both the complainants and the Owner and/or Responsible Party.
   (d)   If the investigating officer determines that there is merit to the
complaints, the Owner and/or Responsible Party shall be notified by the officer
that the dog's barking, or animal's noises, is annoying the neighbors and that
it must be abated.
   (e)   If any further declaration is received by the Enforcing Officer
concerning the same barking dog or noisy animal, within a six (6) month period
from the last of the initial declarations, the Enforcing Officer may take
action by notifying the Owner and/or Responsible Party by certified mail,
return receipt requested, that an administrative hearing is to be held. Such
administrative hearing will be held in accordance with the provisions of § 1-
5.08 of this Code.
(§ 3, Ord. 3229, eff. January 19, 2023)
Sec. 6-1.253. Barking Dog or Noisy Animal Citation: General.
   (a)   In addition to treating a barking dog or noisy animal as a public
nuisance, any Enforcement Officer also has the authority to issue a civil
citation to any Responsible Person for a barking dog or noisy animal violation
that the Enforcement Officer did not see or hear occur based on a complaint,
signed under penalty of perjury, lodged by a member of the community who has
been disturbed by the barking dog or noisy animal. A Responsible Person to whom
a civil citation is issued shall be liable for and shall pay to the City the
fine or fines described in the barking dog or noisy animal citation when due.
Where the Responsible Person is a minor under the age of eighteen (18) years,
the minor's parents or legal guardian shall be liable for and held responsible
for payment of their minor child's citation fines and/or late penalties. In any
case, the Responsible Person (or his/her parents or legal guardian, when the
Responsible Person is under the age of eighteen) shall have the right to appeal
the issuance of the citation pursuant to the provisions of this Article.
   (b)   Prior to issuing a civil citation for a barking dog or noisy animal,
the Responsible Person shall be given a 10-day period within which to correct
the problem.
   (c)   Each day a barking dog or noisy animal violation exists beyond the
initial 10-day period allowed for correction shall be a separate violation and
may be subject to a separate citation and fine. A barking dog or noisy animal
civil citation may include a violation for one (1) or more days on which a
violation exists, and for violation of one (1) or more Code sections.
(§ 3, Ord. 3229, eff. January 19, 2023)
Sec. 6-1.254. Barking Dog or Noisy Animal Citation: Contents.
   Each barking dog or noisy animal citation shall contain the following
information:
   (a)   Date on which a complaint or personal inspection established the
barking dog or noisy animal violation(s).
   (b)   Name of the Responsible Person for the barking dog or noisy animal
violation(s) (if known).
   (c)   Address where the barking dog or noisy animal violation(s) occurred.
   (d)   The Code sections violated.
   (e)   Whether the violation(s) were established by inspection or by
complainant.
   (f)   Amount of the fine for the violation(s) and procedure to pay the fine
to avoid a late payment penalty.
   (g)   Designation of prior civil citations issued for the same Code
violation(s), if known by the Enforcement Officer.
   (h)   Notification of an assigned administrative hearing date, time and
location where the civil fine may be contested.
   (i)   Description of the procedure for requesting a continuance of the
assigned administrative hearing.
   (j)   A notice that a barking dog or noisy animal violation is a nuisance
and that collection of unpaid fines and/or penalties can result in additional
fines, penalties and/or imprisonment in the County jail.
   (k)   Signature of the Enforcement Officer who issued the barking dog or
noisy animal citation and/or civil fine.
   (l)   Date upon which the barking dog or noisy animal citation and/or civil
fine was issued.
   (m)   Proof of service to be completed by the Enforcement Officer indicating
whether citation was issued by personal service, by mail, or by posting in a
conspicuous place on the property where the barking dog or noisy animal
violation occurred.
   (n)   A self-addressed envelope in which the violator can mail the civil
fine to the City if the citation is not contested.
   (o)   Any other information deemed necessary by the Enforcement Officer for
enforcement or collection purposes.
(§ 3, Ord. 3229, eff. January 19, 2023)
Sec. 6-1.255. Service of Barking Dog or Noisy Animal Citation.
   A barking dog or noisy animal citation may be served as follows:
   (a)   An Enforcement Officer may personally serve the barking dog or noisy
animal citation on the Responsible Person. The Responsible Person shall be
requested to sign a copy of the citation showing his or her receipt of the
citation and notice of the Responsible Person's right to an administrative
hearing. Signing the citation shall not constitute an admission of guilt.
   (b)   An Enforcement Officer may mail the civil citation by certified mail,
return receipt requested, if the property owner and/or occupier's name is
known, but the violator is not present when personal service is attempted. The
citation shall be mailed to the address where the barking dog or noisy animal
violation occurred.
   (c)   An Enforcement Officer may post a copy of the barking dog or noisy
animal citation in a conspicuous place on the property where the barking dog or
noisy animal violation occurred if the property owner and/or occupier's name is
unknown. In this event, the citation shall also be mailed addressed to the
owner of the property where the barking dog or noisy animal violation occurred
as reflected on the County's property tax rolls. A copy of the citation shall
also be mailed within 24 hours of posting the citation addressed to "Resident"
at the address where the barking dog or noisy animal violation occurred.
(§ 3, Ord. 3229, eff. January 19, 2023)
Sec. 6-1.256. Amount of Barking Dog or Noisy Animal Civil Fines.
   Fines for violating the provisions of this Article shall be as follows:
   (a)   An administrative fine not exceeding one hundred dollars ($100) for a
first violation.
   (b)   An administrative fine not exceeding two hundred dollars ($200) for a
second violation within one (1) year of the first violation.
   (c)   An administrative fine not exceeding five hundred dollars ($500) for
each additional violation within one (1) year of the first violation.
(§ 3, Ord. 3229, eff. January 19, 2023)
Sec. 6-1.257. Payment of Barking Dog or Noisy Animal Civil Fines.
   (a)   After receiving a barking dog or noisy animal citation pursuant to §
6-1.256, the violator may respond by either of the following methods:
      (1)   The violator may choose to correct the barking dog or noisy animal
violation and pay the fine stated in the citation to the City within thirty
(30) days from the date of the citation. A late payment of twenty dollars ($20)
shall be charged if the fine is not paid within thirty (30) days of the
citation date. Payment shall be made by enclosing the fine amount by check or
money order in the self-addressed envelope attached to the civil citation and
mailing the envelope to the Director by U.S. first class mail, postage prepaid.
The Director may authorize payment to be made in accordance with any other
method, at any location within the City, or to any address.
      (2)   The violator may choose to appear at an administrative hearing on
the assigned administrative hearing date contained in the citation. In that
event, the fine is due and payable to the Hearing Officer at the conclusion of
the hearing if the Hearing Officer upholds the barking dog or noisy animal
citation. The Hearing Officer may allow the violator an additional period of
time within which to pay the fine if, in the Hearing Officer's sole discretion,
such additional time for payment is necessary.
   (b)   Payment of a fine shall not excuse the violator from correcting the
barking dog or noisy animal violation. The issuance of a barking dog or noisy
animal citation and/or payment of a fine shall not bar the City from taking any
other enforcement action regarding a barking dog or noisy animal violation that
is not corrected, including issuing additional barking dog or noisy animal
citations and/or criminal complaints.
(§ 3, Ord. 3229, eff. January 19, 2023)
Sec. 6-1.258. Administrative Hearing.
   (a)   Any person who receives a barking dog or noisy animal citation may
contest it by appearing at the assigned administrative hearing date, time and
location noted on the barking dog or noisy animal citation. A violator may
contest the barking dog or noisy animal citation by denying that a violation
occurred, by denying that it was not corrected within the original ten (10) day
correction period, if applicable, or by denying that the violator is a
Responsible Person for the violation.
   (b)   If the citation fine is not paid prior to the assigned date and time
of the administrative hearing noted on the barking dog or noisy animal
citation, the violator must personally attend the administrative hearing on the
date, time and place specified. A failure to personally appear at the
administrative hearing shall constitute an abandonment of any defense the
violator may have to the barking dog or noisy animal citation.
(§ 3, Ord. 3229, eff. January 19, 2023)
Sec. 6-1.259. Hearing Procedures.
   (a)   Hearings shall be conducted by a Hearing Officer either: (i) on the
date, time and place specified in the barking dog or noisy animal citation, or
(ii) on the date assigned when a continuance pursuant to subsection (f) below
has been granted. The violator and complainant shall be notified of the
assigned hearing date, time and location by the Director or his/her designee.
   (b)   The violator and complainant shall be given the opportunity to testify
and to present evidence relevant to the barking dog or noisy animal citation.
   (c)   The citation itself and accompanying complaint's affidavit signed
under penalty of perjury attesting to the barking dog or noisy animal violation
provided to the Hearing Officer shall be accepted by the Hearing Officer as
prima facie evidence of the violation and the facts stated in such documents.
   (d)   Neither the Enforcement Officer nor any other representative of the
City shall be required to attend the hearing.
   (e)   The failure of the recipient of an administrative citation to appear
at the administrative citation hearing, including after a continuance is
granted pursuant to subsection (f) below, shall constitute forfeiture of the
fine and a failure to exhaust his/her administrative remedies.
   (f)   The Director may continue a hearing one time upon a request for
continuance made by the violator, complainant, or a representative of the City,
which request must be based upon a showing of good cause. A Hearing Officer may
also continue a hearing upon his or her own motion to request additional
information with respect to the violation. All continuance requests shall
either: (i) be made in person at the hearing, or (ii) be made by a written
request received by the Director via e-mail, facsimile or letter at least one
week (7 days) prior to the hearing date. If a continuance is granted, the
parties will be notified, and a new hearing date shall be scheduled that is
within fourteen (14) days of the date on which the hearing was first scheduled
to take place. If the request for continuance is denied, the parties will be
notified, and the hearing shall proceed as originally scheduled.
   (g)   The hearing shall be conducted informally, and the legal rules of
evidence need not be followed.
   (h)   The Hearing Officer is not required to provide transcriptions of
hearings, but is required to make available tapes of hearings for a fee.
(§ 3, Ord. 3229, eff. January 19, 2023)
Sec. 6-1.260. Decision After Administrative Hearing.
   (a)   After considering all the evidence and testimony submitted at an
administrative hearing, the Hearing Officer shall issue a written decision to
the violator and complainant to uphold or to dismiss the barking dog or noisy
animal citation based upon a conclusion of whether or not a violation occurred
for which the violator was a Responsible Person. The Hearing Officer's decision
is final. The Hearing Officer has no discretion or authority to reduce the
amount of a fine.
   (b)   If the Hearing Officer's decision is to uphold the barking dog or
noisy animal citation, the civil fine imposed for the violation shall be due at
the conclusion of the administrative hearing, or at some other time as directed
by the Hearing Officer. If the decision is to dismiss the barking dog or noisy
animal citation, the civil fine shall no longer be due and payable.
   (c)   The employment, performance evaluation, compensation and benefits of
the Hearing Officer shall not be directly or indirectly conditioned upon the
amount of administrative citation fines upheld by the Hearing Officer.
(§ 3, Ord. 3229, eff. January 19, 2023)
Sec. 6-1.261. Right to Judicial Review.
   (a)   A Responsible Person may seek judicial review of the administrative
hearing decision by filing an appeal with the Superior Court within twenty (20)
calendar days after the Responsible Person receives a copy of the notice of
decision at the conclusion of the hearing in accordance with the provisions of
California Government Code section 53069.4.
   (b)   No judicial appeal is permitted where a violator has failed to appear
at an assigned administrative hearing, or is deemed to have abandoned the
contest of the barking dog or noisy animal citation by an unexcused
nonappearance at the hearing, or where a citation has been dismissed by a
Hearing Officer because a complainant has failed to appear at an assigned
administrative hearing.
(§ 3, Ord. 3229, eff. January 19, 2023)
Sec. 6-1.262. Collection of Unpaid Fines.
   (a)    The City, at its discretion, may pursue any and all legal and
equitable remedies for the collection of unpaid fines and late penalties.
Pursuit of one remedy does not preclude the pursuit of any other remedies until
the total fines and late penalties owed by a violator under this Chapter have
been collected.
   (b)   Failure to timely remit payment of a citation fine and/or late penalty
authorized under §
6-1.257 above will result in criminal liability and a warrant may be issued for
a violator's arrest. Nonpayment of such fine and/or late penalty shall be a
misdemeanor, punishable by a fine of not more than one thousand dollars
($1,000) or by imprisonment in the County jail for a period of not more than
six (6) months or by both such fine and imprisonment.
(§ 3, Ord. 3229, eff. January 19, 2023)
Article 3. Dairies
Sec. 6-1.301. Commercial dairy defined.
   For the purposes of this article, “commercial dairy” shall mean a dairy
consisting of three (3) or more cows, goats, or other milk animals furnishing
milk for commercial purposes.
(§ 1, Ord. 528, eff. January 6, 1932)
Sec. 6-1.302. Commercial dairies prohibited: Exceptions.
   No person shall keep or maintain any commercial dairy within the City;
provided, however, the provisions of this article are not intended to prohibit
the following:
   (a)   The keeping of cows or goats within the Agricultural Zones (A1) in the
City, which cows or goats furnish milk for the owner or his family residing
within the City; and
   (b)   Any commercial dairy existing prior to annexation to the City, which
dairy will be allowed to operate indefinitely.
(§ 1, Ord. 528, eff. January 6, 1932, as amended by § 1, Ord. 1908, eff. July
15, 1976)
Article 4. Standard for Care and Treatment for Sale of Animals at Swap Meets
Sec. 6-1.400. Definitions.
   (a)   For the purposes of this article, “vendor” shall include any person
offering for sale an animal at a swap meet, flea market, or open-air market.
   (b)   For the purposes of this article, “sale” shall include any exchange
for value, trade, or adoption, so long as a change in ownership of the animal
occurs.
(§ 2, Ord. 3045, eff. April 14, 2016)
Sec. 6-1.401. Standard of care.
   A vendor is charged with care and treatment of the animal offered for sale
during transport to the site of sale, while the animal is present at the site
of sale, and transport from the site of sale. In particular, a vendor must do
all of the following:
   (a)   Maintain the facilities used for the keeping of animals in a sanitary
condition.
   (b)   Provide proper heating and ventilation for the facilities used for the
keeping of animals.
   (c)   Provide adequate nutrition for, and humane care and treatment of, all
animals that are under the vendor’s care and control.
   (d)   Take reasonable care to release for sale, trade, or adoption only
those animals that are free of disease or injuries.
   (e)   Provide adequate space appropriate to the size, weight, and species of
animals.
   (f)   Have a documented program of routine care, preventative care,
emergency care, disease control and prevention, and veterinary treatment and
euthanasia that is established and maintained by the vendor in consultation
with a licensed veterinarian employed by the vendor or a California-licensed
veterinarian at least once a year.
   (g)   Provide buyers of an animal with general written recommendations for
the generally accepted care of the type of animal sold, including
recommendations as to the housing, equipment, cleaning, environment, and
feeding of the animal. This written information shall be in a form determined
by the vendor and may include references to Internet Web sites, books,
pamphlets, videos, and compact discs.
   (h)   Present for inspection and display a current business license issued
by the local jurisdiction where the animals are principally housed.
   (i)   Maintain records for identification purposes of the person from whom
the animals offered for sale were acquired, including that person’s name,
address, e-mail address, and telephone number and the date the animals were
acquired.
(§ 2, Ord. 3045, eff. April 14, 2016)
Sec. 6-1.402 Enforcement.
   This article shall be enforced by the City Manager, the Police Chief, the
Humane Officer, the City Health Officer, or such other person as the Council or
City Manager may designate.
(§ 2, Ord. 3045, eff. April 14, 2016)
Sec. 6-1.403. Penalties.
   (a)   Any person who violates or fails to comply with any provision of this
article shall be subject to any of the penalties and procedures set forth in
Chapter 2 of Title 1 of the Municipal Code.
   (b)   The provisions and procedures concerning administrative citations set
forth in Chapter 5 of Title 1 of the Municipal Code shall apply to any
administrative citations issued for violations of this article. A violation of
this article shall constitute a “transient” violation within the meaning of
that chapter.
(§ 2, Ord. 3045, eff. April 14, 2016)
CHAPTER 2: FISH MEAL STORAGE AND HANDLING
(Repealed by Ordinance 3028, addopted 12-1-15, and moved to Development Code
Division 5.03)
CHAPTER 3: INTEGRATED SOLID WASTE MANAGEMENT
Article 1: General Provisions
   
6-3.101   Declaration of policy
   
6-3.102   Purpose and objectives
   
6-3.103   Administration
   
6-3.104   Applicability
   
6-3.105   Exclusive jurisdiction
   
6-3.106   Definitions
Article 2: Prohibitions
   
6-3.201   Accumulations
   
6-3.202   Burning of solid waste
   
6-3.203   Contamination of green waste and commingled recycling
   
6-3.204   Dangerous and infected substances
   
6-3.205   Dead animals
   
6-3.206   Dumping and burying
   
6-3.207   Scavenging
   
6-3.208   Solid waste not subject to routine collection
   
6-3.209   Unauthorized containers
Article 3: Solid Waste Services
   
6-3.301   Responsibility to provide for collection
   
6-3.302   Placement of solid waste in containers
   
6-3.303   Maintenance of collection containers
   
6-3.304   Responsibility to provide for and use integrated waste collection
services
   
6-3.305   Exemption from service
   
6-3.306   Residential collection containers
   
6-3.307   Residential collection frequency
   
6-3.308   Residential containers, placement
   
6-3.309   Residential collections of bulky items
   
6-3.310   Responsibility to provide for and use collection services
   
6-3.311   Commercial collection containers
   
6-3.312   Commercial collection frequency
   
6-3.313   Commercial containers, placement
   
6-3.314   Commercial storage standards
Article 4: Rates and Provisions for Services and Billing
   
6-3.401   Integrated waste collection charges
   
6-3.402   Special service charges
   
6-3.403   Waiver of advanced payment or deposit
   
6-3.404   Physically challenged/elderly discount
   
6-3.405   Set-out/set-back service
   
6-3.406   Excess tonnage, weight violations
   
6-3.408   Abatement collection charges
   
6-3.409   Collection fees, customers to be billed
   
6-3.410   Collection and payment
   
6-3.411   Collection, delinquent fees
Article 5:  Allowable Composting and Recycling, Non-Waste Disposal
   
6-3.501   Backyard residential composting
   
6-3.502   Non-Waste Dealer operations
   
6-3.503   Appeal
   
6-3.504   Public access to information and confidentiality
   
6-3.505   Non-Waste Dealer purchases or receipt of Non-Waste, property owner
responsibility
   
6-3.506   Prohibition on collecting solid waste, recyclable materials, organic
waste, or Non-Waste for a fee.
Article 6: Business Recycling Requirements
   
6-3.600   Purpose
   
6-3.601   Business recycling plan
   
6-3.602   Construction and demolition recycling plan
   
6-3.603   Alternate compliance
   
6-3.604   Mandatory business recycling
   
6-3.605   Mandatory commercial business organics service
Article 7: Reduction and Reuse Provisions
   
6-3.701   City recycled goods policy
Article 8: Mandatory Organic Waste Disposal Reduction
   
6-3.801   Requirements for single-family generators (standard compliance
approach)
   
6-3.802   Requirements for single-family generators (performance-based
compliance approach)
   
6-3.803   Requirements for commercial businesses (standard compliance approach)
   
6-3.804   Requirements for commercial businesses (performance-based compliance
approach)
   
6-3.805   Waivers for generators
   
6-3.806   Requirements for commercial edible food generators
   
6-3.807   Requirements for food recovery organizations and services
   
6-3.808   Requirements for facility operators
   
6-3.809   Self-hauler requirements
   
6-3.810   Inspections and investigations
   
6-3.811   Enforcement
Article 1: General Provisions
Sec. 6-3.101. Declaration of policy.
   The City Council of the City of Ontario hereby finds and declares:
   (a)   The intent and purpose of this chapter is to comply with state law on
solid waste management as it is found in California Public Resources § 40000 et
seq.
   (b)   State law requires local agencies such as the City to control and
reduce their waste streams, and to meet per capita waste generation goals each
year. This reduction requires an ongoing evolution of the practices within the
City to include elements that reduce waste generation, promote reuse, and
require collection of recyclables and organic waste.
   (c)   The accumulation, collection, removal, disposal, composting, and
recycling of solid waste shall be controlled by the City for the protection of
the public health, safety and welfare, and to contribute toward the diminution
of health hazards and pollution in the City. The City Council finds that to
give practical effect to this policy, a comprehensive system for the periodic
collection, removal, disposal, composting and/or recycling of integrated waste
from all premises in the City is essential and benefits all residents of the
City; therefore, all such occupants are made responsible for the collection,
disposal, composting, and/or recycling of solid waste.
   (d)   The provisions of this chapter shall control in the event of any
inconsistencies between this chapter and any other City ordinances,
resolutions, or other written arrangements.
   (e)   Nothing in this chapter shall limit the right of an individual person,
organization, or other entity to donate, sell or otherwise dispose of
recyclables or organics, provided that any such donation, sale or disposal is
in accordance with the provisions of this chapter, including but not limited to
the provisions of §
6-3.808(b).
   (f)   The City Manager shall be responsible for reviewing solid waste
collection services, contracts, permits, fees and rates, and for making
recommendations on the administration of the above to the City Council for
final approval.
(§ 1, Ord. 3187, eff. January 1, 2022, as amended by Ord. 3216, eff. August 18,
2022)
Sec. 6-3.102. Purpose and objectives.
   This chapter sets forth uniform requirements and regulations for the direct
and indirect users of the solid waste collection services of the City. It also
allows for the City to comply with all applicable state and federal laws,
including, but not limited to, The Integrated Waste Management Act of 1989,
California Code Title 14, Division 7, and any subsequent amendments to each.
(§ 1, Ord. 3187, eff. January 1, 2022)
Sec 6-3.103. Administration.
   Except as otherwise provided in this chapter, the City Manager shall
administer, implement, direct and cause enforcement of the provisions of this
chapter. Whenever any power is granted to or a duty is imposed upon the City
Manager, the City Manager or his or her designee shall exercise this power or
perform this duty.
(§ 1, Ord. 3187, eff. January 1, 2022)
Sec 6-3.104. Applicability.
   (a)   This chapter shall apply to all waste generators within the City, and
to waste generators outside the City who are, by permit, contract, or agreement
with the City, users of the City's non-organic waste, recycling and green waste
and other organics collection services, or are conducting business or
activities within the City which fall under the provisions of this chapter.
   (b)   The inspection, reporting, and enforcement provisions of this chapter
shall further apply to the donation, sale, or disposal of Non-Waste, as that
term is defined in Section
6-3.106, as though the purchasers, recipients, collectors, transporters,
recyclers, haulers, or other persons in receipt of such Non-Waste were
collectors of solid waste.
(§ 1, Ord. 3187, eff. January 1, 2022, as amended by Ord. 3216, eff. August 18,
2022)
Sec 6-3.105. Exclusive jurisdiction.
   (a)   The collection of all solid waste within the City shall be performed
under the direction of the City Manager, and for such purposes, the City may
use City personnel, enter into contract agreements with private hauling firms
or approve franchise agreements to perform such collection, provided that the
City shall respect all continuation rights required by the Public Resources
Code.
   (b)   Residential, integrated, waste management collection services and
commercial, integrated, waste management collection services shall be provided
exclusively by or under the direction of the City. A solid waste enterprise may
not provide waste collection services except as authorized by the City pursuant
to §
6-3.105(a). This section does not prohibit the commercial collection of
recyclables or organics pursuant to §§
6-3.502 through
6-3.510, provided all such commercial collection of recyclables or organics
complies with the provisions of this chapter.
   (c)   Each violation of this section will be considered an infraction and
subject to penalties listed in §
1-2.01.
(§ 1, Ord. 3187, eff. January 1, 2022)
Sec. 6-3.106. Definitions.
   For the purpose of this chapter, unless otherwise apparent from context,
certain words and phrases used in this chapter shall have the meanings
hereinafter designated. The definitions in this chapter are included for
reference purposes only and are not intended to narrow the scope of definitions
set forth in federal or state laws or regulations. Words used in this chapter
in the singular may include the plural, and the plural may include the
singular. Use of the masculine shall also mean the feminine and neuter.
   (a)   "Account." A statement or record utilized by the City for billing
customers that receive integrated waste services.
   (b)   "Administrator." The City Utilities Manager or his or her designee.
   (c)   "Bin." City-provided or privately-owned, integrated waste containers,
generally with a lid, that are collected by a front-loading collection vehicle.
   (d)   "Blue container" has the same meaning as in 14 CCR § 18982.2(a)(5) and
shall be used for the purpose of storage and collection of source separated
recyclable materials or source separated blue container waste.
   (e)   "Bulky item." Any item unable to be collected through normal
collection methods, such as an appliance, furniture or bundled brush.
   (f)   "Business recycling plan." A business recycling plan as set forth in §
6-3.601.
   (g)   "C & D" or "construction and demolition debris." Lumber, paper,
cardboard, metals, masonry (brick, concrete, and the like), carpet, plastic,
pipe (plastic, metal, and clay), drywall, rocks, dirt, and green waste related
to land development. These materials produce debris that is not hazardous
waste, as defined by Cal. Pub. Resources Code §
   (h)   "California Code of Regulations" or "CCR" means the State of
California Code of Regulations.
   (i)   "CalRecycle" means California's Department of Resources Recycling and
Recovery.
   (j)   "Cart." The City-provided, plastic, solid waste container with a
tight-fitting lid and wheels, collected by an automated, side-loading
collection vehicle. Carts may be in the sizes and colors determined by the
City.
   (k)   "City." The City of Ontario, California.
   (l)   "City Manager." The chief administrative officer of the City or his or
her designee.
   (m)   "Collection." The operation of gathering together and transporting of
materials subject to this chapter to a point of disposal and/or a recycling or
composting center/facility.
   (n)   "Collector." A person employed by the City or any other person (or the
agents or employees thereof) with whom the City shall have contracted to
collect, carry, transport, compost, and/or recycle non-organic waste,
recyclables and organics within the City.
   (o)   "Commercial" or "commercial business." A business, industrial,
commercial establishment, or construction site, and any multiple-family,
residential dwelling with five (5) units or more on one (1) account.
   (p)   "Commercial edible food generator" includes a tier one or a tier two
commercial edible food generator as defined in CCR §§ 18982(a)(73) and (a)(74).
   (q)   "Compactor." A privately-owned receptacle for compressing waste used
in commercial establishments, collected by a front-loading or a roll-off
vehicle.
   (r)   "Community composting" means any activity that composts green
material, agricultural material, food material, and vegetative food material,
alone or in combination, and the total amount of feedstock and compost on-site
at any one time does not exceed one hundred (100) cubic yards and seven hundred
fifty (750) square feet, as specified in 14 CCR § 17855(a)(4); or, as otherwise
defined by 14 CCR § 18982(a)(8).
   (s)   "Compliance review" means a review of records by the City to determine
compliance with Article 8.
   (t)   "Compost." The product resulting from the controlled biological
decomposition of organic wastes that are source separated from the municipal
waste stream, or that are separated at a centralized facility.
   (u)   "Container." A cart, bin, roll-off, compactor or similar receptacle
used to temporarily store solid waste, organics or recyclables for collection
service.
   (v)   "Container contamination" or "contaminated container" means a
container, regardless of color, that contains prohibited container
contaminants, or as otherwise defined in 14 CCR § 18982(a)(55).
   (w)   "Customer." The owner and/or occupant of any property within the City
that is required to participate in the City's integrated waste collection
program, including green waste, other organics and recyclables.
   (x)   "Designated source separated organic waste facility", shall have the
same definition as 14 CCR § 18982(14.5).
   (y)   "Designee" means an entity that the City contracts with or otherwise
arranges to carry out any of the City's responsibilities as authorized in 14
CCR § 18981.2. A designee may be a government entity, a hauler, a private
entity, or a combination of those entities.
   (z)   "Discard" means to dispose of solid waste through means other than
sale or donation.
   (aa)   "Discarded materials" means materials set out for collection by a
generator in one or more containers.
   (bb)   "Divert." To use material for any purpose other than disposal in a
landfill or transformation facility.
   (cc)   "Donate" means to gratuitously surrender or part with material of
value to the donator, with no net payment between the donator and the donee.
   (dd)   "Edible food" means food intended for human consumption, or as
otherwise defined in 14 CCR § 18982(a)(18). "Edible food" is not solid waste if
it is recovered and not discarded.
   (ee)   "Enforcement action" means an action of the City to address non-
compliance including, but not limited to, issuing administrative citations,
fines, penalties, or using other remedies.
   (ff)   "Enforcement Officer" means the city manager, county administrative
official, chief operating officer, executive director, or other executive in
charge or their authorized designee(s) who is/are partially or whole
responsible for enforcing Article 8.
   (gg)   "Food recovery" means actions to collect and distribute food for
human consumption that otherwise would be disposed, or as otherwise defined in
14 CCR § 18982(a)(24).
   (hh)   "Food recovery organization" means an entity that engages in the
collection or receipt of edible food from commercial edible food generators and
distributes that edible food to the public for food recovery either directly or
through other entities or as otherwise defined in 14 CCR § 18982(a)(25),
including, but not limited to:
      (1)   A food bank as defined in Section 113783 of the Health and Safety
Code;
      (2)   A nonprofit charitable organization as defined in Section 113841 of
the Health and Safety Code; and,
      (3)   A nonprofit charitable temporary food facility as defined in
Section 113842 of the Health and Safety Code.
   (ii)   "Food recovery service" means a person or entity that collects and
transports edible food from a commercial edible food generator to a food
recovery organization or other entities for food recovery, or as otherwise
defined in 14 CCR § 18982(a)(26).
   (jj)   "Food waste." Discarded raw, cooked, or processed edible substances,
ices, beverages, ingredients used or intended for use or for sale, in whole or
in part, for human consumption, and chewing gum. Food waste includes
compostable plastics. Food waste is a subset of organics.
   (kk)   "Generator" or "waste generator" means a person or entity that is
responsible for the initial creation of waste.
   (ll)   "Gray container" has the same meaning as in 14 CCR § 18982.2(a)(28)
and shall be used for the purpose of storage and collection of gray container
waste.
   (mm)   "Gray container waste" means solid waste that is collected in a gray
container that is part of a three (3)-container organic waste collection
service that prohibits the placement of organic waste in the gray container as
specified in 14 CCR § 18984.1(a)-(b), or as otherwise defined in 14 CCR § 17402
(a)(6.5).
   (nn)   "Green building." The use of materials in a more efficient manner.
Green building practices can include salvaging dimensional lumber from
structures, using reclaimed aggregates, or designing a structure in a way that
requires less material.
   (oo)   "Green container" has the same meaning as in 14 CCR § 18982.2(a)(29)
and shall be used for the purpose of storage and collection of source separated
green container organic waste.
   (pp)   "Green waste." Tree and shrubbery trimmings, tree roots less than six
(6) inches in diameter, vegetation matter resulting from land clearing, grass,
weeds, straw, or leaves, wood chips, sawdust and other household garden,
organic materials that have been segregated from other solid waste materials
for the purpose of deposit at a designated collection location, including
curbside location, for collection and transportation to a compost facility.
Green waste does not include palm fronds, cactus or tree limbs, roots or stumps
larger than six (6) inches in diameter. Green waste is a subset of organics.
   (qq)   "Grocery store" means a store primarily engaged in the retail sale of
canned food; dry goods; fresh fruits and vegetables; fresh meats, fish, and
poultry; and any area that is not separately owned within the store where the
food is prepared and served, including a bakery, deli, and meat and seafood
departments, or as otherwise defined in 14 CCR § 18982(a)(30).
   (rr)   "Hazardous waste." A waste, or combination of wastes, which, because
of its quantity, concentration or physical, chemical, or infectious
characteristics, may do either of the following:
      (1)   Cause or significantly contribute to an increase in mortality or an
increase in serious irreversible, or incapacitating reversible illness; or
      (2)   Pose a substantial present or potential hazard to human health or
environment when improperly treated, stored, transported, or disposed of, or
otherwise managed. Unless expressly provided otherwise, "hazardous waste"
includes extremely hazardous waste and acutely hazardous waste.
   (ss)   "High diversion organic waste processing facility" means a facility
that is in compliance with the reporting requirements of 14 CCR § 18815.5(d)
and meets or exceeds an annual average mixed waste organic content recovery
rate of fifty percent (50%) percent between January 1, 2022 and December 31,
2024, and seventy-five percent (75%) after January 1, 2025, as calculated
pursuant to 14 CCR § 18815.5(e) for organic waste received from the "mixed
waste organic collection stream" as defined in 14 CCR § 17402(a)(11.5); or, as
otherwise defined in 14 CCR § 18982(a)(33).
   (tt)   "Inspection" means a site visit where a City reviews records,
containers, and an entity's collection, handling, recycling, or landfill
disposal of organic waste or edible food handling to determine if the entity is
complying with requirements set forth in Article 8, or as otherwise defined in
14 CCR § 18982(a)(35).
   (uu)   "Integrated waste." The City's Integrated Waste Department.
   (vv)   "Integrated waste collection" means the collection of source
separated green container organic waste in the green container, source
separated recyclable materials in the blue container; and gray container waste
in the gray container.
   (ww)   "Large event" means an event, including, but not limited to, a
sporting event or a flea market, that charges an admission price, or is
operated by a local agency, and serves an average of more than two thousand
(2,000) individuals per day of operation of the event, at a location that
includes, but is not limited to, a public, nonprofit, or privately owned park,
parking lot, golf course, street system, or other open space when being used
for an event.
   (xx)   "Large venue" means a permanent venue facility that annually seats or
serves an average of more than two thousand (2,000) individuals within the
grounds of the facility per day of operation of the venue facility. A venue
facility includes, but is not limited to, a public, nonprofit, or privately
owned or operated stadium, amphitheater, arena, hall, amusement park,
conference or civic center, zoo, aquarium, airport, racetrack, horse track,
performing arts center, fairground, museum, theater, or other public attraction
facility. A site under common ownership or control that includes more than one
(1) large venue that is contiguous with other large venues in the site, is a
single large venue.
   (yy)   "Local education agency" means a school district, charter school, or
county office of education that is not subject to the control of city or county
regulations related to solid waste, or as otherwise defined in 14 CCR § 18982
(a)(40).
   (zz)   "Mixed waste organic collection stream" or "mixed waste" means
organic waste collected in a container that is required by 14 CCR §§ 18984.1,
18984.2 or 18984.3 to be taken to a high diversion organic waste processing
facility or as otherwise defined in 14 CCR § 17402(a)(11.5).
   (aaa)   "Multi-family residential dwelling" or "multi-family" means of,
from, or pertaining to residential premises with five (5) or more dwelling
units. Multi-family premises do not include hotels, motels, or other transient
occupancy facilities, which are considered commercial businesses.
   (bbb)   "Non-organic waste." Solid waste that does not include recyclables
and organics.
   (ccc)   "Non-Waste" means material generated by a generator that would
otherwise be disposed of as solid waste, and that may be properly placed in a
container set out for City collection by a generator, but is instead sold for
value or donated to a Non-Waste Dealer. Non-Waste does not include solid waste,
recyclable materials, or organic waste that is abandoned or discarded.
   (ddd)   "Non-Waste Dealer" means a person or entity who, as part of a
regular and continuing part or whole of their business practice, purchases Non-
Waste or receives donated Non-Waste, including but not limited to a scrap
buyer, compostable materials buyer, or recyclables broker.
   (eee)   "Notice of violation" or "NOV" means a notice that a violation has
occurred that includes a compliance date to avoid an action to seek penalties,
or as otherwise defined in 14 CCR § 18982(a)(45) or further explained in 14 CCR
§ 18995.4
   (fff)   "Occupant." One who has certain legal rights to or control over the
premises occupied; a tenant or owner.
   (ggg)   "Organics," "organic waste," and "organic material." Solid wastes
containing material originated from living organisms and their metabolic waste
products, including, but not limited to, food, green material, landscape and
pruning waste, organic textiles and carpets, lumber, wood, paper
products,printing and writing paper, manure, biosolids, digestate, and sludges.
   (hhh)   "Organic waste generator" means a person or entity that is
responsible for the initial creation of organic waste, or as otherwise defined
in 14 CCR § 18982(a)(48).
   (iii)   "Paper products" include, but are not limited to, paper janitorial
supplies, cartons, wrapping, packaging, file folders, hanging files, corrugated
boxes, tissue, and toweling, or as otherwise defined in 14 CCR § 18982(a)(51).
   (jjj)   "Person." An individual, firm, limited liability company,
association, partnership, political subdivision, government agency,
municipality, industry, public or private corporation, or any other entity
whatsoever.
   (kkk)   "Printing and writing papers" include, but are not limited to, copy,
xerographic, watermark, cotton fiber, offset, forms, computer printout paper,
white woven envelopes, manila envelopes, book paper, note pads, writing
tablets, newsprint, and other uncoated writing papers, posters, index cards,
calendars, brochures, reports, magazines, and publications, or as otherwise
defined in 14 CCR § 18982(a)(54).
   (lll)   "Prohibited container contaminants" means the following:
      (1)   Discarded materials placed in the blue container that are not
identified as acceptable source separated recyclable materials for the City's
blue container;
      (2)   Discarded materials placed in the green container that are not
identified as acceptable source separated green container organic waste for the
City's green container;
      (3)   Discarded materials placed in the gray container that are
acceptable source separated recyclable materials and/or source separated green
container organic wastes to be placed in the City's green container and/or blue
container.
   (mmm)   "Property owner." The record owner of a property, including the
homeowner/business owner association of a residential/business condominium
project.
   (nnn)   "Recovered organic waste products" means products made from
California, landfill-diverted recovered organic waste processed in a permitted
or otherwise authorized facility, or as otherwise defined in 14 CCR § 18982(a)
(60).
   (ooo)   "Recovery" means any activity or process described in 14 CCR §
18983.1(b), or as otherwise defined in 14 CCR § 18982(a)(49).
   (ppp)   "Recyclable materials" or "recyclables." Non-organic, reusable waste
materials, including, but not limited to, metal, glass, and plastic, that are
to be collected, separated or processed and used as raw materials.
"Recyclables" may include paper products, printing and writing paper, wood, dry
lumber and textiles.
   (qqq)   "Recycle" or "recycling." The process of collecting, sorting,
cleansing, treating, and reconstructing materials that would otherwise become
refuse or garbage, and returning them to the economic mainstream in the form of
raw material for new, revised, or reconstituted products that meet the quality
standards necessary to be used in the marketplace.
This includes, without limitation, items intended for "re-use" or "personal
use," irrespective of their intended return to the economic mainstream or
marketplace.
   (rrr)   "Recycled-content paper" means paper products and printing and
writing paper that consists of at least thirty percent (30%), by fiber weight,
post- consumer fiber, or as otherwise defined in 14 CCR § 18982(a)(61).
   (sss)   "Residential." Any residential dwelling or apartment house.
   (ttt)   "Reuse." Further or repeated use of construction or demolition
debris.
   (uuu)   "Roll-off bin" or "roll-off." A compactor or open-top, City-owned or
private container collected by a roll-off collection vehicle.
   (vvv)   "Route review" means a visual inspection of containers along a
hauler route for the purpose of determining container contamination, and may
include mechanical inspection methods such as the use of cameras, or as
otherwise defined in 14 CCR § 18982(a)(65).
   (www)   "Sale" and "sold" means the act of transferring ownership of Non-
Waste for value between a generator and a Non-Waste Dealer. A transaction is
not a sale if it does not result in a net payment to the Non-Waste generator,
as evaluated under the totality of the circumstances (including, but not
limited to, any rebates, bin rental fees, etc.). If a transaction purporting to
be the sale of Non-Waste involves a net charge, fee, or cost to the Non-Waste
generator, it is not a sale of Non-Waste and is instead solid waste hauling
activity subject to the solid waste provisions of this Code.
   (xxx)   "SB 1383" means Senate Bill 1383 of 2016 approved by the Governor on
September 19, 2016.
   (yyy)   "SB 1383 Regulations" or "SB 1383 Regulatory" means the Short-Lived
Climate Pollutants: Organic Waste Reduction regulations developed by CalRecycle
and adopted in 2020 that created 14 CCR, Division 7, Chapter 12 and amended
portions of regulations of 14 CCR and 27 CCR.
   (zzz)   "Scavenging." The removal of any solid waste material without
authorization of the property owner and/or the City.
   (aaaa)   "Self-hauler" means a person, who hauls solid waste, organic waste
or recyclable material he or she has generated to another person. Self-hauler
also includes a person who back-hauls waste, or as otherwise defined in 14 CCR
§ 18982(a)(66). Back-haul means generating and transporting organic waste to a
destination owned and operated by the generator using the generator's own
employees and equipment, or as otherwise defined in 14 CCR § 18982(a)(66)(A).
   (bbbb)   "Single-family" means of, from, or pertaining to any residential
premises with fewer than five (5) units.
   (cccc)   "Solid waste." All putrescible and non-putrescible solid,
semisolid, and liquid wastes, including garbage, trash, refuse, paper, rubbish,
ashes, industrial wastes, construction and demolition wastes, abandoned
vehicles and parts thereof, discarded home and industrial appliances,
dewatered, treated, or chemically fixed sewage sludge that is not hazardous
waste, manure, vegetable or animal solid and semisolid wastes, and other
discarded solid and semisolid wastes. Solid waste does not include hazardous,
radioactive waste or medical waste.
   (dddd)   "Solid waste enterprise." An entity authorized by the County of San
Bernardino or other regulatory authority to provide integrated waste services
in such area prior to its annexation by the City.
   (eeee)   "Source separated" means materials, including commingled recyclable
materials, that have been separated or kept separate from the solid waste
stream, at the point of generation, for the purpose of additional sorting or
processing those materials for recycling or reuse in order to return them to
the economic mainstream in the form of raw material for new, reused, or
reconstituted products, which meetthe quality standards necessary to be used in
the marketplace, or as otherwise defined in 14 CCR § 17402.5(b)(4). Source
separated shall include separation of materials by the generator, property
owner, property owner's employee, property manager, or property manager's
employee into different containers for the purpose of collection such that
source separated materials are separated from gray container waste/mixed waste
or other solid waste for the purposes of collection and processing.
   (ffff)   "Source separated blue container waste" means source separated
wastes that can be placed in a blue container that is limited to the collection
of those organic wastes and non-organic recyclables as defined in 14 CCR §
18982(a)(43), or as otherwise defined by 14 CCR § 17402(a)(18.7).
   (gggg)   Source separated green container organic waste" means source
separated organic waste that can be placed in a green container that is
specifically intended for the separate collection of organic waste by the
generator, excluding source separated blue container waste, carpets, non-
compostable paper, and textiles.
   (hhhh)   "Supermarket" means a full-line, self-service retail store with
gross annual sales of Two Million Dollars ($2,000,000), or more, and which
sells a line of dry grocery, canned goods, or nonfood items and some perishable
items, or as otherwise defined in 14 CCR § 18982(a)(71).
   (iiii)   "Tier one commercial edible food generator" means a commercial
edible food generator that is one (1) of the following:
      (1)   Supermarket.
      (2)   Grocery store with a total facility size equal to or greater than
ten thousand (10,000) square feet.
      (3)   Food service provider.
      (4)   Food distributor.
      (5)   Wholesale food vendor.
   (jjjj)   "Tier two commercial edible food generator" means a commercial
edible food generator that is one (1) of the following:
      (1)   Restaurant with two hundred fifty (250) or more seats, or a total
facility size equal to or greater than five thousand (5,000) square feet.
      (2)   Hotel with an on-site food facility and two hundred (200) or more
rooms.
      (3)   Health facility with an on-site food facility and one hundred (100)
or more beds.
      (4)   Large venue.
      (5)   Large event.
      (6)   A State agency with a cafeteria with two hundred fifty (250) or
more seats or total cafeteria facility size equal to or greater than five
thousand (5,000) square feet.
      (7)   A local education agency facility with an on-site food facility.
   (kkkk)   "Wholesale food vendor" means a business or establishment engaged
in the merchant wholesale distribution of food, where food (including fruits
and vegetables) is received, shipped, stored, prepared for distribution to a
retailer, warehouse, distributor, or other destination, or as otherwise defined
in 14 CCR § 189852(a)(76).
(§ 1, Ord. 3187, eff. January 1, 2022, as amended by Ord. 3216, eff. August 18,
2022)
Article 2. Prohibitions
Sec. 6-3.201. Accumulations.
   (a)   Every person owning or occupying any building, lot or premises in the
City shall keep such property in a clean and sanitary condition; this includes
placing all solid waste, with the exception of bulky items, in the appropriate
container. The property owner or occupant shall not cause or permit organic
waste to collect or accumulate for more than one (1) week, or cause or permit
any other solid waste to accumulate for a period in excess of one (1) month;
provided, however, the provisions of this section shall not be construed to
interfere with any occupant keeping building materials upon premises during
construction, reconstruction, or repair of a building or structure thereon
under a valid building permit, nor with the keeping of wood neatly piled upon
such premises for household use.
   (b)   The Administrator may require a greater number of collections per week
or may require placement of additional containers upon finding that an
unhealthful, unsightly, or public nuisance exists under the current service
level. The Administrator may also reduce the number of collections per week or
permit fewer containers upon a finding that the lower collection frequency and/
or fewer containers are sufficient to maintain the premises in a clean and
sanitary condition and will not result in putrescible materials accumulating
for greater than one week. In either event, the customer will be charged for
collections and/or containers at the current fee schedule. Prior to imposing
such service and rate adjustments, the City shall provide at least two (2)
written notifications, at least seven (7) days apart, to the customer as listed
on the City billing. The customer may appeal such a determination in writing to
the City Manager within seven (7) days of the second notice. The City shall not
impose the service adjustments until the seven (7) day appeal period has
passed, or if appealed, until the City Manager determines the outcome of the
appeal.
   (c)   If a member of the Integrated Waste staff observes that a property
owner or occupant will violate this section, Integrated Waste will notify Code
Enforcement. If the Code Enforcement officer determines a violation of this
section, the Code Enforcement officer will tag the container or property with a
notice of violation, requiring the property owner or occupant to bring the
property into compliance. It is expected that the property owner's or
occupant's attempt to comply with the directives of the notice of violation
will require input from the Integrated Waste Department. If the property owner
or occupant does not respond to or comply with the notice of violation, the
City will take the necessary steps to bring the property into compliance,
including, if necessary, cleaning and sanitizing the container and area. The
property owner shall be held responsible for all fees and costs incurred as a
result of the City bringing the property into compliance.
(§ 1, Ord. 3187, eff. January 1, 2022, as amended by § 2, Ord. 3213, eff. July
21, 2022)
Sec. 6-3.202. Burning of solid waste.
   No solid waste shall be burned within the City.
(§ 1, Ord. 3187, eff. January 1, 2022)
Sec. 6-3.203. Contamination of green waste and commingled recycling.
   (a)   No person shall place in any container identified for refuse,
recyclables, green waste, food waste or organics, any material other than that
identified material. The containers set aside for refuse, recyclables, green
waste, food waste or organics shall be used only for refuse, recyclables, green
waste, food waste or organics, and for no other materials. Generator shall
place source separated green container organic waste, including food waste, in
the green container; source separated recyclable materials in the blue
container; and refuse in the gray container. Generators shall not place
materials designated for the gray container into the green container or blue
container, nor place materials designated for the green container or blue
container into the gray container.
   (b)   If, upon inspection by the Collector, it is determined that the
recyclables, green waste, food waste or organics container is contaminated, it
shall be tagged and the container shall not be collected. If the customer
wishes a special return collection prior to the next scheduled collection day,
the customer may be charged for the special collection in accordance with § 6-
3.811(d)(3) and §
6-3.402 of this chapter.
(§ 1, Ord. 3187, eff. January 1, 2022)
Sec. 6-3.204. Dangerous and infected substances.
   (a)   No person shall place or deposit in any container for collection,
pursuant to the provisions of this chapter, any unbroken and exposed hypodermic
needles, medicines, pills, poisons, caustic acids, explosives or similar
dangerous substances that may cause human injury or harm.
   (b)   No person shall place or deposit in any container for collection,
pursuant to the provisions of this chapter, wearing apparel, bedding or other
articles from any home or place where any infectious or contagious disease has
prevailed. The owner or occupant of any premises where an infectious or
contagious disease has prevailed shall forthwith notify the San Bernardino
County Health Officer, and shall dispose of such articles in accordance with
his or her directions.
(§ 1, Ord. 3187, eff. January 1, 2022)
Sec. 6-3.205. Dead animals.
   (a)   No person shall place or deposit upon any public street, park or
alley, or in any container for the collection pursuant to the provisions of
this chapter, any dead animal.
   (b)   The bodies of any dead animals within the City shall be promptly
removed to such place as may be designated by the Administrator. In the event
the owner of such dead animal is known, such owner shall pay the cost of
removal of the dead animal. If such animal is found upon any public street,
park or alley, or upon private property, the City shall arrange for its removal
in the event its owner is not found.
(§ 1, Ord. 3187, eff. January 1, 2022)
Sec. 6-3.206. Dumping and burying.
   No person shall dump, place or deposit upon, or bury in any lot, land,
street, alley, water or waterway within the City, any solid waste or substance
condemned by the San Bernardino County Health Department, or any other
deleterious or offensive substance; provided, however, the provisions of this
section shall not apply to any land used as a properly-permitted landfill,
transfer station, materials-recovery facility, organic waste-processing
facility or similar use.
(§ 1, Ord. 3187, eff. January 1, 2022)
Sec. 6-3.207. Scavenging.
   (a)   Only the City may remove any recyclables or organics, which have been
segregated from other solid waste, and placed at the curbside or at a location
designated for the collection of recyclables or organics.
   (b)   Such recyclables or organics are the property of the City upon
placement of the container for collection. No unauthorized person shall remove
non-organic waste, recyclables or organics from City containers.
   (c)   In any civil action by the City against a person alleged to have
violated any provision of this section, the court may award a civil penalty of
not more than One Thousand Dollars ($1,000.00) for each unauthorized removal
against the unauthorized person removing the solid waste.
   (d)   Violation of this section is unlawful and shall be a misdemeanor. Each
separate unauthorized removal shall be a separate violation.
(§ 1, Ord. 3187, eff. January 1, 2022, as amended by Ord. 3216, eff. August 18,
2022)
Sec. 6-3.208. Solid waste not subject to routine collection.
   Solid waste not subject to routine collection shall include large household
appliances, furniture, logs, stumps, construction waste, dirt, or junked
automobiles or automobile parts.
(§ 1, Ord. 3187, eff. January 1, 2022)
Sec. 6-3.209. Unauthorized containers.
   (a)   Containers used to collect solid waste placed in the City by
unauthorized collectors or haulers are subject to impoundment. Containers shall
be placed in a storage facility and the hauler shall be responsible for all
fees incurred as a result of the impoundment.
   (b)   Containers violating this section of the chapter shall be tagged by
Code Enforcement, or Integrated Waste Department staff, for removal within
twenty-four (24) hours. If it is not removed within twenty-four (24) hours, the
container will be impounded by the City without granting any further notice or
warning. The confiscated container will be placed in a storage facility and the
hauler shall be responsible for all fees incurred as a result of the
impoundment.
   (c)   This Section shall not apply to a Non-Waste Dealer operating pursuant
to the provisions of this chapter and possessing all necessary business license
(s) and permit(s) to the extent that such a Non-Waste Dealer uses its own Non-
Waste container for the purchase or donation of Non-Waste and not for a fee.
The provision of such a Non-Waste container cannot involve any net payment by
any individual to the Non-Waste Dealer or Non-Waste container's provider; any
net payment by the generator of purported Non-Waste to the person receiving it
renders that transaction an act of solid waste collection subject to the
provisions of this Code.
(§ 1, Ord. 3187, eff. January 1, 2022, as amended by Ord. 3216, eff. August 18,
2022)
Article 3. Solid Waste Services
Sec. 6-3.301. Responsibility to provide for collection.
   The property owner or occupant of any residential unit within the City is
responsible to provide for the removal of solid waste from such premises in
accordance with provisions of this chapter.
(§ 1, Ord. 3187, eff. January 1, 2022)
Sec. 6-3.302. Placement of solid waste in containers.
   (a)   All solid waste shall be placed in suitable containers furnished by
the City.
   (b)   Ashes shall be thoroughly moistened to prevent them from scattering
and starting the container on fire.
   (c)   Dog droppings, sanitary napkins, and items that are unsanitary and
offensive shall be securely wrapped and placed in the non-organic waste
container.
   (d)   Hazardous wastes, such as, but not limited to, pesticides, used motor
oil and other lubricants, car batteries, television and computer monitors, and
tires, shall not be placed into the City's containers. Household hazardous
waste may be disposed of properly by being taken to household hazardous waste
collection centers or any other designated collection points.
   (e)   All lubricants, such as motor oil, shall be disposed of in the proper
manner by being taken to a household hazardous waste drop-off center or any
other officially designated collection point.
   (f)   All solid waste placed in a container shall be placed loosely in such
container so as to ensure the ease of disposal.
   (g)   All materials placed into a container shall be contained within the
container, and the lid, if applicable, shall be completely shut. Until removed
by the Collector, the customer shall be responsible for the clean-up of any and
all discards the customer has generated, dumped, spilled or otherwise lost or
littered, notwithstanding human and animal interference, wind or other natural
forces and weather during storage, collection, removal or transfer. The
Collector shall be responsible for any discards spilled during collection,
removal or transfer by the Collector.
(§ 1, Ord. 3187, eff. January 1, 2022)
Sec. 6-3.303. Maintenance of collection containers.
   All collection containers shall be kept in clean and sanitary condition by
the owner or person using the same.
(§ 1, Ord. 3187, eff. January 1, 2022)
Sec. 6-3.304. Responsibility to provide for and use integrated waste collection
services.
   (a)   Every person owning or occupying a residential unit within the City
shall provide for integrated waste collection services in accordance with the
provisions of this chapter.
   (b)   It shall be unlawful for the owner or occupant of any residential unit
within the City to fail or neglect to provide for the removal of non-organic
waste, recyclables, green waste or other organics from such premises in
accordance with provisions of this chapter.
(§ 1, Ord. 3187, eff. January 1, 2022)
Sec. 6-3.305. Exemption from service.
   Any customer may make an application for exemption from integrated waste
collection services on the basis that a developed property is unoccupied, and
that no non-organic waste, green waste, other organics or recyclable materials
shall be placed or offered for collection by the City or its authorized
Collector, from such property. The Administrator may temporarily exempt such
property from participation in the City's integrated waste collection program
for the limited period while the property is unoccupied; provided, that any
such statement or representation shall be made in affidavit form, fully sworn
to by the person making such statement or representation, and filed with the
Administrator. An exemption shall be valid only for the time that the
statements made in the affidavit continue to be true. Any violation of
provisions of the exemption shall result in termination of the exemption and
shall require the customer to subscribe to the integrated waste collection
services in accordance with this chapter.
(§ 1, Ord. 3187, eff. January 1, 2022)
Sec. 6-3.306. Residential collection containers.
   As many needed City-provided carts may be used and shall be charged
according to the integrated waste schedule of charges contained in §
6-3.401(a).
(§ 1, Ord. 3187, eff. January 1, 2022)
Sec. 6-3.307. Residential collection frequency.
   All non-organic waste, recycling, green waste and other organics shall be
collected from residential units a minimum of one (1) time per week. The City
shall specify the number and different types of carts required.
(§ 1, Ord. 3187, eff. January 1, 2022)
Sec. 6-3.308. Residential containers, placement.
   (a)   Residential, non-organic waste, recycling, and green waste carts shall
be placed for collection by 6:00 a.m. on the scheduled collection day, but not
prior to the evening preceding the collection day. Carts shall be removed no
later than the evening after collection day. Such carts shall be placed for
collection along the alley where a useable alley exists. Where there is no
useable alley, such carts shall be placed for collection near the street curb.
Where no curbs or walks exist, such carts shall be placed in a location
convenient for collection along the street right-of-way, and at least three (3)
feet from any mailboxes, cars, or any other obstructions for safety and
efficiency.
   (b)   Any obstructing object(s) that prevent the Integrated Waste Collector
from collecting residential carts will be reported to Code Enforcement. The
Code Enforcement officer will tag the obstructing object(s) (e.g., a basketball
hoop) with a notice of violation requiring immediate removal. If the property
owner is issued two (2) notice of violations for the same obstructing object
(s), the City will impound the object(s) without granting any further notice or
warning. The confiscated object(s) will be placed in a storage facility and the
property owner shall be responsible for all fees incurred as a result of the
impoundment.
   (c)   If the provisions of this section are not fully complied with, the
Integrated Waste Collector shall place a tag indicating a violation on the
cart. No collection shall be made until the provisions of this section are
complied with. The resident may request a collection prior to the next
scheduled collection date and shall be charged as listed in §
6-3.401(a) of this chapter.
   (d)   It shall be the customer's responsibility to provide means of entering
and exiting premises, adequate collection vehicle turning radius, and vertical
and horizontal clearance for the Integrated Waste Collectors and equipment.
   (e)   In all cases of dispute or complaints arising from or concerning the
place where carts from residential units shall be placed while awaiting the
removal of their contents, the Administrator shall forthwith designate the
place and his or her decision shall be final.
   (f)   Residential customers may receive bin service when permitted by the
Administrator. Except as otherwise determined by the Administrator, bin service
shall be subject to the same provisions in this chapter for residential cart
service.
(§ 1, Ord. 3187, eff. January 1, 2022)
Sec. 6-3.309. Residential collections of bulky items.
   (a)   Residential customers are entitled to four (4) bulky item pick-ups per
calendar year as part of the regular residential monthly service fees, on an
appointment basis that is to be made one (1) week prior to the desired
collection day. Items are to be identified to ensure efficient and proper
collection. Additional collections are subject to charges listed in §
6-3.401(a) of this chapter.
   (b)   Materials to be collected shall be limited to five (5) individual
items that can be easily handled by two (2) persons.
   (c)   If the bulky item pick-up exceeds the customer's bulky item collection
limits as specified in subsections (a) or (b), the City may pick up the bulky
item and charge the customer according to fees listed in §
6-3.401(a).
(§ 1, Ord. 3187, eff. January 1, 2022)
Sec. 6-3.310. Responsibility to provide for and use collection services.
   (a)   The property owner or occupant of any commercial establishment within
the City shall make arrangements for the removal of non-organic waste,
recyclables, green waste and other organics from such premises in accordance
with provisions of this chapter.
   (b)   It shall be unlawful for the owner or occupant of any commercial
establishment within the City to fail or neglect to provide for the removal of
non-organic waste, recyclables, green waste or other organics from such
premises in accordance with provisions of this chapter.
(§ 1, Ord. 3187, eff. January 1, 2022)
Sec. 6-3.311. Commercial collection containers.
   All commercial establishments shall utilize one (1) of the various sizes of
bins, roll-offs or other containers available through the City for the
collection of non-organic waste, recyclables, green waste and other organics.
The commercial establishment may utilize cart service with the Administrator's
consent, and the Administrator shall otherwise establish the minimum level of
required collection service pursuant to the procedures in § 6-3.201.
(§ 1, Ord. 3187, eff. January 1, 2022)
Sec. 6-3.312. Commercial collection frequency.
   All non-organic waste, recycling, green waste and other organics generated
at commercial establishments shall generally be collected a minimum of one (1)
time per week. Roll-off service shall generally be provided a minimum of one
(1) time every fourteen (14) days if the collection material is free from
putrescible material, or the container may be removed. However, in all cases,
the Administrator may increase or decrease the minimum level of required
collection service pursuant to the procedures in §
6-3.201.
(§ 1, Ord. 3187, eff. January 1, 2022, as amended by § 3, Ord. 3213, eff. 7-21-
2022)
Sec. 6-3.313. Commercial containers, placement.
   (a)   All commercial collection carts, bins, roll-offs or other containers
shall be placed in an area approved by the City, which shall be easily
accessible to the Integrated Waste Collector.
   (b)   In all cases of disputes or complaints arising from or concerning the
placement of carts, bins, roll-offs or other containers, a written notice shall
be given to the City. In all cases of disputes or complaints, the Administrator
shall designate the placement, and his or her decision shall be final.
(§ 1, Ord. 3187, eff. January 1, 2022)
Sec. 6-3.314. Commercial storage standards.
   All new development projects utilizing commercial collection bins, rather
than cart collection of non-organic waste, which:
   (a)   Have submitted a site plan on or after September 1, 1993, for
development plan review as prescribed by Title 9, Development Code;
   (b)   Are existing development projects which will be adding thirty percent
(30%) or more to the existing floor area; or
   (c)   Are existing development projects which will be adding one thousand
(1,000) square feet or more; shall meet the requirements of this section.
   All qualifying development projects shall include an area set aside for the
provision of adequate and accessible enclosures for the storage of recyclables,
non-organic waste and organics in proper containers. The design, construction
and accessibility of the enclosures shall be shown on the site plan in
conformance with the standards and specifications of the Integrated Waste
Department, the design guidelines adopted by the City's Planning Department,
and §§ 4.408.1, 4.410.2, 5.408.1, and 5.410.1 of the California Green Building
Standards Code, 24 CCR, Part 11.
(§ 1, Ord. 3187, eff. January 1, 2022)
Article 4. Rates and Provisions for Services and Billing
Sec. 6-3.401. Integrated waste collection charges.
   (a)   In addition to other fees, assessments or charges provided by the
Municipal Code or adopted by the City Council, the owner or occupant of any
residential unit or any commercial establishment shall pay monthly integrated
waste service charges as established from time to time by a resolution of the
City Council.
   (b)   The Revenue Services Department shall collect all charges authorized
by the City Council pursuant to this section.
   (c)   The City Council may require any person liable for payment of
integrated waste service charges to make a reasonable, advanced payment with
the Revenue Services Department as security for the payment of such charges.
   (d)   All monies received from the collection of integrated waste shall be
deposited in the integrated waste fund of the City.
(§ 1, Ord. 3187, eff. January 1, 2022)
Sec. 6-3.402. Special service charges.
   (a)   Charges for special services shall be based on actual costs of
collection and disposal as determined by the Administrator.
   (b)   The Administrator may establish charges for integrated waste
collection services for special events or other special circumstances.
(§ 1, Ord. 3187, eff. January 1, 2022)
Sec. 6-3.403. Waiver of advanced payment or deposit.
   (a)   Any customer may make a request for a waiver of the advanced payments
required for temporary, residential and construction-site, commercial bin
service, residential, roll-off service, and commercial, roll-off service. The
Administrator has the authority, in his or her sole discretion, to grant a
waiver of any such advanced payments. In exercising such discretion, the
Administrator shall take into account the following conditions:
      (1)   Whether the customer has maintained an active, water or integrated
waste account for at least six (6) months;
      (2)   Whether the customer has kept the water or integrated waste account
current and has a good payment history; and
      (3)   That the weekend and construction-site bin service shall not be
used by the customer for cleaning up the property for the purpose of vacating
said property.
   (b)   Any customer may request a waiver for deposit fees for residential,
integrated waste services if the customer resides in a newly annexed area of
the City and integrated waste service to the customer was previously provided
by a solid waste enterprise. Customer shall be required to provide proof of
previous service in the form of a bill in order to obtain a waiver. The
Administrator has the authority, in his or her sole discretion, to grant a
waiver of any such deposits.
(§ 1, Ord. 3187, eff. January 1, 2022)
Sec. 6-3.404. Physically challenged/elderly discount.
   Eligible customers may apply for and receive a physically challenged or
senior citizen's discount pursuant to §
6-8.50.
(§ 1, Ord. 3187, eff. January 1, 2022)
Sec. 6-3.405. Set-out/set-back service.
   Physically challenged and/or elderly customers with infirmities, who do not
have an able-bodied person assisting with their household or business
activities, may receive set-out/set-back service for automated containers, upon
written request, on the proper form to and approval by the Administrator. The
request shall describe the infirmity and/or other factors, and the care they
are receiving from a family member, a service provider or other assistant, for
their infirmity, which require the applicant to receive such service. For those
persons approved for the service, there shall be no additional charge. The
applicant may be requested to re-certify to the City upon notice. If the City
deems it necessary, the applicant may be required to provide proof from a
physician of the physical challenge or infirmity.
(§ 1, Ord. 3187, eff. January 1, 2022)
Sec. 6-3.406. Excess tonnage, weight violations.
   All roll-offs and compactors are limited to a maximum of twelve (12) tons.
It is the customer's responsibility to ensure that the containers are not
overloaded, and the load contents are balanced for safe collection. If the
contents are not balanced, or excess tonnage is apparent, the City may require
excess tonnage to be off-loaded by the customer prior to City collection. In
the event the City hauls excess tonnage, charges for violation of weight
limitations in excess of twelve (12) tons of solid waste matter per commercial
roll-off shall be imposed, in addition to the existing disposal charges in
effect at the time of disposal for actual weight over twelve (12) tons.
(§ 1, Ord. 3187, eff. January 1, 2022)
Sec. 6-3.408. Abatement collection charges.
   All forms of solid waste not otherwise collected through normal, integrated
waste service may be collected by the City for such charges as the
Administrator shall determine as reasonable.
(§ 1, Ord. 3187, eff. January 1, 2022)
Sec. 6-3.409. Collection fees, customers to be billed.
   The fees established by the City Council shall be billed to and paid for by
the property owner; provided, however, that the owner shall have the right to
reimbursement from the respective occupants or proprietor for whose benefit the
charge is paid. For residential users, such fees may be billed to and paid for
by the owner, occupant, tenant or lessor. Fees may be established or amended by
resolution.
(§ 1, Ord. 3187, eff. January 1, 2022)
Sec. 6-3.410. Collection and payment.
   The City may use a unified billing system for City-furnished services. The
charges for water, integrated waste, storm water abatement and wastewater
services may be billed on the water bill and collected as one (1) item. Failure
to pay the amount due in full will result in penalties listed in §
1-2.07.
(§ 1, Ord. 3187, eff. January 1, 2022)
Sec. 6-3.411. Collection, delinquent fees.
   Any delinquent fees are subject to the provisions of §
1-2.07.
(§ 1, Ord. 3187, eff. January 1, 2022)
Article 5. Allowable Composting and Recycling, Non-Waste Disposal
Sec. 6-3.501. Backyard residential composting.
   (a)   Notwithstanding any other provision of this chapter, residents are
encouraged to compost green wastes, including grass clippings, leaves, plant
trimmings, wood ashes and vegetable kitchen scraps (but not including other
household refuse or animal wastes). The following conditions regarding
composting must be met:
      (1)   Compost piles or containers are located in the rear or side yard,
not visible from a public street, and no greater than five (5) feet in height;
      (2)   The compost piles or containers are at least five (5) feet from the
property line or separated from adjacent property by a solid wall;
      (3)   Compost piles are maintained so that they do not generate an
offensive odor or harbor rodents;
      (4)   The maximum size of any pile or container is five (5) feet in
height by five (5) feet in width by five (5) feet in length;
      (5)   The compost is enclosed, screened or otherwise maintained to
minimize insects or pests; and
      (6)   The pile or container shall not permit surface run-off or leachate
to another property.
   (b)   The Administrator may authorize, for educational purposes, the
creation of a composting demonstration area visible to the public at a City
park or other facility.
   (c)   No composting shall be permitted at any location that is determined to
be a fire hazard by the City's Fire Department.
(Ord. 3216, eff. August 18, 2022)
Sec. 6-3.502. Non-Waste Dealer Operations.
   (a)   Non-Waste Dealers shall be expressly subject to all inspection,
reporting, and enforcement provisions of this chapter, and all other applicable
regulations, permits, charges for use, terms, and fees established by the City.
Conditions for lawfully operating as a Non-Waste Dealer shall be enforced by
the City in accordance with this chapter and all applicable county, state, and
federal regulations.
   (b)   Any such Non-Waste Dealer operating at any time in the City shall
furnish, at a frequency established by the City, but no less than quarterly
each calendar year, a report of the amount of Non-Waste (including but not
limited to all materials that would be deemed recyclables, organics, or
contaminated materials if otherwise discarded as solid waste) collected from
within the City. The report shall contain the weight and type of Non-Waste
collected, the names and addresses of generators from which the Non-Waste was
collected, and the final destination of the Non-Waste collected, as further
detailed in subdivision (g) below. The report shall be submitted in a format
necessary to meet state criteria. The report shall be considered late if
submitted thirty (30) days after the date due. Failure to provide the report
within thirty (30) days from the due date is hereby declared an infraction and
subject to penalties listed in OMC § 1-2.01.
   (c)   All such businesses operating as a Non-Waste Dealer shall keep their
collection containers in good condition and free from graffiti. Containers must
be kept in a clean and sanitary condition and must be appropriately sanitized
upon notification from the City.
   (d)   Such bins, roll-offs, or other containers to collect Non-Waste by Non-
Waste Dealers must be placed according to the standards set by the City. Such
containers shall not be placed in the public right-of-way. The containers shall
be placed in enclosure(s) which meet City standards when applicable. Separate
containers for recyclables and organics shall be provided if applicable. Bins,
roll-offs or other containers utilized by a Non-Waste Dealer shall be clearly
identified by the name of the Non-Waste Dealer and other information the
Administrator may require. The Administrator may regulate the colors and look
of such containers as necessary to ensure they are distinguishable from those
utilized by the City's Collector(s).
   (e)   Bins, roll-offs, or other containers to collect Non-Waste by Non-Waste
Dealers must be used exclusively for the collection of Non-Waste, as
applicable. Residual material within a container other than Non-Waste regularly
purchased by or donated to the Non-Waste Dealer must not exceed five percent
(5%) in any container, as determined at the discretion of the Administrator.
   (f)   Each violation of sections
6-3.502,
6-3.503,
6-3.504,
6-3.505 and
6-3.506 will be considered an infraction and subject to penalties listed in OMC
§
1-2.01 and section
6-3.811 of this Code, with the exception of subdivisions (f) and (g) of Section
6-3.811.
      (1)   Notwithstanding any language to the contrary, the obligations of
Non-Waste Dealers under this chapter are effective immediately and subject to
all enforcement measures, administrative penalties, and civil penalties for
non-compliance with no regard to any education period or other delay. If the
City determines that a Non-Waste Dealer or similar entity is not in compliance
with this Article 8, it shall document the noncompliance or violation, issue a
Notice of Violation, and take enforcement action pursuant to this §
6-3.811. Subdivisions (f) and (g) of this §
6-3.811 are inapplicable to Non-Waste Dealers.
   (g)   (1)   Non-Waste Dealers, including, but not limited to, scrap buyers
and compostable material buyers, shall keep a record of the amount and type of
Non-Waste purchased or received from any entity in any transaction as part of
the Non-Waste Dealer's regular course of business. This record shall be subject
to inspection by the City, and shall include, at a minimum, the following
information:
         (i)   The Non-Waste Dealer's receipts and weight tickets for any
transaction.
         (ii)   The amount of Non-Waste in cubic yards or tons, purchased by,
transported by, or donated to the Non-Waste Dealer from each entity in any
transaction. If the nature of the Non-Waste Dealer's business involves the
purchase or receipt of Non-Waste that is not reasonably suited for recordation
in cubic yards or tons (i.e. used furniture, etc.), the record shall instead
reflect the number and weight of each item of Non-Waste.
         (iii)   A general description of the type of Non-Waste collected in
any given transaction.
         (iv)   The date of each transaction.
         (v)   The name and contact information of each entity that sold,
donated, or otherwise disposed of the Non-Waste material in a given
transaction.
         (vi)   The location to which all Non-Waste was taken or hauled in a
given transaction.
      (2)   If solid waste, recyclable materials, or organic waste is
inadvertently collected in the receipt of Non-Waste, such materials are the
responsibility of the Non-Waste Dealer and will be considered to have been
generated by the Non-Waste Dealer as a commercial generator. In that event, all
such materials shall be subject to all other applicable provisions of this
chapter, including but not limited to Section
6-3.809.
      (3)   Non-Waste Dealers shall provide all records collected pursuant to
this Section to the City at a frequency determined by the City, but no less
than quarterly each calendar year. Such records shall be considered late if
received thirty (30) days or more after their due date, and is an infraction
subject to penalties listed in OMC §
1-2.01.
   (h)   The Administrator may issue a compliance order, whereby the Non-Waste
Dealer must comply with all directives, conditions, and requirements therein
within the time prescribed. The compliance order shall contain terms and
conditions to ensure compliance with this chapter. The Administrator may issue
citations pursuant to Sec.
6-3.811 when it is determined that a Non-Waste Dealer:
      (1)   Fails to comply with any provision of this chapter, a City
administrative order, a City compliance order, or a City compliance agreement;
      (2)   Knowingly provides a false statement, representation, record,
report, or document to the City;
      (3)   Refuses to provide records or other documents required by the City
to determine compliance with the permit or this chapter.
(Ord. 3216, eff. August 18, 2022)
Sec. 6-3.503. Appeal.
   (a)   Pursuant to §
1-4.01, any affected Non-Waste Dealer may appeal in writing to the City
Council, by filing with the City Clerk a written notice of such appeal, setting
forth grounds thereof. The appellant shall file such notice within fourteen
(14) days after receipt of the notice of the administrative decision concerned.
   (b)   The order of the City Council shall be deemed final upon its adoption.
   (c)   If the Non-Waste Dealer fails to appeal to the City Council, or the
City Council fails to reverse or modify the administrative decision, the
Administrator's administrative decision shall be deemed final.
(Ord. 3216, eff. August 18, 2022)
Sec. 6-3.504. Public access to information and confidentiality.
   (a)   Businesses seeking to obtain a Commercial Recycler Collection Permit
shall complete and file with the City, prior to commencing collection efforts,
an application on the forms prescribed by the City, and pay any applicable
application fees. Any such business collecting recyclables and organics in the
City shall have a business license pursuant to OMC §
3-1.105, and shall be registered with any other applicable regulatory
authorities.
   (b)   Applicants may also be required to submit information related to the
applicant's anticipated destination of material and potential annual tonnages
as may be requested by the City to properly evaluate the permit application.
   (c)   The permit application may be denied if the applicant fails to
establish to the City's satisfaction that the business has failed to obtain a
business license, has failed to comply with the health and sanitation
regulations of the City, San Bernardino County and the State of California, or
if the applicant has, in the past, demonstrated an inability or unwillingness
to comply with state or federal solid waste law, or the requirements set forth
in this article.
   (d)   After evaluation of the data, the Administrator may issue a Commercial
Recycler Collection Permit, subject to terms and conditions set forth in this
chapter, and as otherwise determined by the Administrator to be appropriate to
comply with applicable law.
(§ 1, Ord. 3187, eff. January 1, 2022)
Sec. 6-3.505. Non-Waste Dealer purchases or receipt of Non-Waste, property
owner responsibility.
   For Non-Waste collected by businesses other than the City, the property
owner shall be responsible for contracting with the Non-Waste Dealer for
regular pick-up and collection of the Non-Waste. Recyclables, organics, solid
waste, and Non-Waste shall not be permitted to accumulate such that a visual or
public health and safety nuisance is created. The City shall have the authority
to abate any such nuisance and charge the property owner or Non-Waste Dealer
for the expense of abating the nuisance.
(Ord. 3216, eff. August 18, 2022)
Sec. 6-3.506. Prohibition on Collecting Solid Waste, Recyclable Materials,
Organic Waste, or Non-Waste for a Fee.
   No person, expressly including, but not limited to, a Non-Waste Dealer, may
charge a fee or receive any compensation for the collection, transport,
disposal, processing, or recycling of Non-Waste, recyclable materials,
organics, or solid waste, or charge a rental fee for a container of any such
material to be collected within the City. Non-Waste Dealers shall collect only
those Non-Waste materials that are sold or donated by the generator thereof.
Nothing in this chapter limits the right of any person to donate, sell, or
otherwise dispose of his or her Non-Waste.
(Ord. 3216, eff. August 18, 2022)
 
Article 6. Business Recycling Requirements
Sec. 6-3.600. Purpose.
   (a)   The purpose of this article is to:
      (1)   Promote recycling and diversion of commercial solid waste by
requiring certain specified businesses, non-residential properties, commercial
buildings and construction and demolition projects to divert recyclable
materials from the landfill.
      (2)   Comply with California Green Building Standards Code (CalGreen),
requiring diversion of waste from specified construction and demolition
projects.
      (3)   Comply with state commercial recycling laws, requiring recycling by
certain specified businesses.
      (4)   Comply with state commercial organic waste recycling laws,
requiring organic waste recycling for certain specified businesses.
   (b)   Each violation of this article will be considered an infraction and
subject to penalties listed in §
1-2.01.
(§ 1, Ord. 3187, eff. January 1, 2022)
Sec. 6-3.601. Business recycling plan.
   (a)   A business recycling plan shall be submitted by customers using
commercial collection service and proposing to conduct the following business
activity:
      (1)   Addition of a new development for which a site plan for development
review has been submitted as prescribed by Title 9, Development Code;
      (2)   Addition of thirty percent (30%) or more to the existing floor area
of any existing development; or
      (3)   Addition of one thousand (1,000) square feet or more to any
existing development projects.
   (b)   Submitted plans shall include, but not be limited to, the following
information:
      (1)   A written description of the projected annual waste generation
rates;
      (2)   The estimated type of generated waste by volume;
      (3)   The measures to be taken to reduce waste;
      (4)   The methods to be used to separate recyclable material from the
waste stream and temporarily store them inside the building prior to transport
to the outside storage area for collection by an authorized recycler; and
      (5)   Identification of the proposed business used to collect or receive
recycled material.
   (c)   All customers subject to the provisions of this chapter shall submit a
business recycling plan to the Administrator within thirty (30) days of receipt
of written notice. Business recycling plans shall be considered complete once
final approval is made by the Administrator.
   (d)   All customers subject to the provisions of this chapter, and
regardless of permit status, shall implement, at a minimum, the measures
identified in the business recycling plan for reduction of waste.
   (e)   Business recycling plans shall be updated at a frequency as determined
by the City.
(§ 1, Ord. 3187, eff. January 1, 2022)
Sec. 6-3.602. Construction and demolition recycling plan.
   Wastes going to landfill from construction and demolition activities must be
minimized to the greatest extent possible by recycling, deconstruction for
reuse, or by use of "green building" practices. Material targeted for recycling
shall include concrete, asphalt, clean wood (unpainted or untreated), brick,
metal, cardboard and sheetrock. The City Manager may modify the targeted
materials based on available markets.
   (a)   A construction and demolition recycling plan shall be submitted for
conducting the following types of development activities:
      (1)   The construction of any structure;
      (2)   Additions or alterations of non-residential structures;
      (3)   Additions or alterations of residential structures that increase
the structure's conditioned area, volume or size.
   (b)   In preparing the construction and demolition recycling plan, customers
for building or demolition permits involving the removal of all or part of an
existing structure shall consider deconstruction to the maximum extent
feasible.
   (c)   Plans may be required to be submitted on City-approved forms. Plans
shall ensure the diversion of at least sixty-five percent (65%) of the total
construction and demolition debris generated by the project for reuse or
recycling, and shall include, but not be limited to, the following information:
      (1)   The estimated volume or weight of the project construction and
demolition debris to be generated, by materials type, the estimated volume or
weight of construction and demolition debris that can feasibly be diverted for
reuse or recycling, and the estimated volume or weight of construction and
demolition debris that will be hauled as refuse. In estimating the volume or
weight of materials identified in the construction and demolition recycling
plan, the customer shall use the standardized conversion rates approved by the
City for this purpose;
      (2)   A drawing that identifies an area for the loading and collection of
recyclable materials, with appropriate access for collection vehicles;
      (3)   A description of how the materials will be separated at the source
and/or recycled by utilizing the services of a processor;
      (4)   Identification of the recycled materials to be used in the
construction or remodeling of the facility;
      (5)   Identification of the proposed vendor or facility proposed to
collect or receive recycled material; and
      (6)   A description of green building practices in use, if any.
   (d)   All customers with projects subject to the provisions of this chapter
shall implement, at a minimum, the measures identified in the construction and
demolition recycling plan, and shall demonstrate compliance with the following
construction-site requirements:
      (1)   Construction waste and demolition debris shall be removed from the
construction site on a regular basis, and shall not be stored on site and in
the open for a period in excess of four (4) weeks, provided that such waste is
not hazardous or noxious and does not constitute a nuisance, in which case it
must be appropriately secured and regularly removed from the construction site;
      (2)   Reasonable efforts shall be demonstrated to provide for segregation
of recyclable construction materials and demolition debris for diversion from
landfills; and
      (3)   Construction waste and demolition debris that may become windblown
shall be containerized to prevent litter.
   (e)   No demolition permit or building permit shall be issued for any
development activity subject to this chapter, unless the construction and
demolition recycling plan has been approved by the City.
   (f)   The issuance of the certificate of occupancy will be conditional on
submittal of a report that documents the construction and demolition debris
recycled. The report shall be submitted to the Administrator and shall contain
the following information:
      (1)   The estimated and actual quantities of all construction waste and
demolition debris listed in the construction and demolition recycling plan;
      (2)   Copies of recycling receipts or other pertinent documentation that
demonstrate waste diversion and recycling in conformance with the approved
construction and demolition recycling plan. Customers shall make reasonable
efforts to ensure that all construction and demolition debris diverted for
recycling or hauled to a landfill are measured and recorded using the most
accurate method of measurement available. To the extent practical, all
construction and demolition debris shall be weighed by measurement on scales in
compliance with all regulatory requirements for accuracy and maintenance. For
construction and demolition debris for which weighing is not practical due to
small size or other considerations, a volumetric measurement shall be used. For
conversion of volumetric measurements to weight, customers shall use the
standardized conversion rates approved by the City for this purpose; and
      (3)   Any additional information the customer believes is relevant to
determining its efforts to comply in good faith with this section.
(§ 1, Ord. 3187, eff. January 1, 2022)
Sec. 6-3.603. Alternate compliance.
   As an alternative to the sixty-five percent (65%) diversion requirement, a
customer may meet the diversion requirements by ensuring that the combined
weight of new construction disposal does not exceed three and four-tenths (3.4)
pounds per square foot of the building area for low-rise residential
structures, and two (2) pounds per square foot of building area for other
structures.
(§ 1, Ord. 3187, eff. January 1, 2022)
Sec. 6-3.604. Mandatory business recycling.
   (a)   The following commercial customers shall recycle and divert from the
landfill recyclable materials generated by the customer in accordance with this
§
6-3.604:
      (1)   A commercial business that generates four (4) cubic yards or more
of solid waste per week;
      (2)   A multi-family dwelling of five (5) units or more.
   (b)   Businesses subject to this §
6-3.604 shall arrange for recycling services from the Collector or a Non-Waste
Dealer. A customer subject to this §
6-3.604 shall take at least one (1) of the following actions:
      (1)   Source separate recyclable materials from other solid waste and
subscribe to a basic level of recycling service that includes collection, self-
hauling, or other arrangements for the pickup of the recyclable materials.
      (2)   Subscribe to a recycling service that may include mixed-waste
processing that yields diversion results comparable to source separation.
   (c)   A customer meeting the conditions of §
6-3.604(a) may request an exemption from the requirements of §
6-3.604(b) by submitting an application on a form prescribed by the
Administrator. After reviewing the exemption request, the Administrator shall
either approve or disapprove the exemption request. To be eligible for an
exemption from requirements of this section, the business must demonstrate
that:
      (1)   There are no recyclable materials being generated by any activities
of the customer;
      (2)   There is inadequate storage space for the storage of recyclable
materials;
      (3)   There is no viable market for the recycling materials or recycling
facility available.
(§ 1, Ord. 3187, eff. January 1, 2022, as amended by Ord. 3216, eff. August 18,
2022)
Sec. 6-3.605. Mandatory commercial business organics service.
   (a)   A customer meeting the conditions of §
6-3.604(a)(1) that generates four (4) cubic yards of solid waste per week shall
recycle and divert from the landfill organics generated by the customer.
   (b)   A customer subject to this section shall arrange for organics service
from the Collector or a Non-Waste Dealer. A customer subject to this section
shall take at least one (1) of the following actions:
      (1)   Source separate organic waste from other solid waste and subscribe
to a basic level of organics recycling service that includes collection and
recycling of organics.
      (2)   Recycle its organics onsite or self-haul its own organics for
recycling.
      (3)   Subscribe to an organics service that may include mixed-waste
processing that specifically recycles organics.
   (c)   A customer subject to this section may request an exemption from the
requirements of §
6-3.605(b) by submitting an application on a form prescribed by the
Administrator. After reviewing the exemption request, the Administrator shall
either approve or disapprove the exemption request. To be eligible for an
exemption from the requirements of §
6-3.605(b), the customer must demonstrate that:
      (1)   There is less than one-half (½) of a cubic yard per week of
organics being generated by any activities of the customer;
      (2)   There is inadequate storage space for the storage of organics;
      (3)   There is no viable market for the organics or organic recycling
facility available.
(§ 1, Ord. 3187, eff. January 1, 2022, as amended by Ord. 3216, eff. August 18,
2022)
Article 7. Reduction and Reuse Provisions
Sec. 6-3.701 City recycled goods policy.
   (a)   In procurement of goods for the City, a preference shall be given to
purchase recycled goods. Special emphasis shall be placed on the purchase of
products manufactured with post-consumer recycled materials. Fitness and
quality being equal, the City shall purchase recycled products instead of non-
recycled products whenever available at no more than the total cost of non-
recycled products. Recycled goods are defined and provided for in such state
legislation as the State Agency Buy Recycled Campaign (commencing with Cal.
Pub. Con. Code § 12153) and the California Integrated Waste Management Act of
1989 (commencing with Cal. Pub. Res. Code § 40000).
   (b)   All City departments and direct service providers to the City, as
applicable, must comply with the City's Recovered Organic Waste Product
procurement policy and Recycled-Content Paper procurement policy.
   (c)   All City departments may, at their option and with purchasing
concurrence, require procurement of designated recycled products or recycled
products as specified in §
6-3.701(a).
   (d)   The City shall require its contractors and consultants to use and
specify recycled products in fulfilling contractual obligations whenever
practicable.
   (e)   The City shall promote the use of recycled products, publicizing its
procurement policy whenever practicable.
(§ 1, Ord. 3187, eff. January 1, 2022)
Article 8: Mandatory Organic Waste Disposal Reduction
Sec. 6-3.801 Requirements for single-family generators (standard compliance
approach).
   (a)   Single-family organic waste generators shall comply with the following
requirements:
      (1)   Shall subscribe to the City's green waste or organic waste
collection services for all organic waste generated as described below in §
6-3.801(a)(2) unless exempt by §
6-3.305. The City shall have the right to review the number and size of a
generator's containers to evaluate adequacy of capacity provided for each type
of collection service for proper separation of materials and containment of
materials; and, single-family generators shall adjust its service level for its
collection services as requested by the City. Generators may additionally
manage their organic waste by preventing or reducing their organic waste,
managing organic waste through backyard residential composting pursuant to §
6-3.501, and/or using a community composting site.
      (2)   Shall participate in the City's green waste or organic waste
collection service(s) by placing designated materials in designated containers
in accordance with §
6-3.203.
   (b)   City may choose to comply with §
6-3.802 instead of this §
6-3.801.
(§ 1, Ord. 3187, eff. January 1, 2022)
Sec. 6-3.802 Requirements for single-family generators (performance-based
compliance approach).
   (a)   Single-family organic waste generators.
      (1)   Shall be automatically enrolled in the City's integrated waste
collection services in accordance with §
6-3.304 and §
6-3.307 with a minimum source separated recyclable materials service level of
thirty-two (32) gallons per week, and with a minimum source separated green
container organic waste service level of thirty-two (32) gallons per week,
approved by the City
      (2)   Manager or his or her designee. City shall have the authority to
change this minimum required levels of service over time. City shall have the
right to review the number, size, and location of a generator's containers to
evaluate adequacy of capacity provided for each type of collection service for
proper separation of materials and containment of materials; and, generator
shall adjust its service level for its collection services as requested by the
City.
      (3)   Shall participate in the City's three (3)-container system for
source separated blue container recyclable materials, source separated green
container organic materials, and gray container waste collection services.
Generator participation in the collection programs requires that generators
place source separated green container organic waste, including food waste, in
the green container; source separated recyclable materials in the blue
container; and gray container waste in the gray container. Generators shall not
place materials designated for the gray container into the green container or
blue container, nor place materials designated for the green container or blue
container into the gray container.
      (4)   Nothing in this section prohibits a generator from preventing or
reducing waste generation, managing organic waste through backyard residential
composting pursuant to §
6-3.501, and/or using a community composting site.
   (b)   City may choose to comply with §
6-3.801 instead of this §
6-3.802.
(§ 1, Ord. 3187, eff. January 1, 2022)
Sec. 6-3.803 Requirements for commercial businesses (standard compliance
approach).
   (a)   Generators that are commercial businesses, including multi-family
residential dwellings, shall:
      (1)   Subscribe to the City's three (3)-container collection services and
comply with requirements of those services as described below in §
6-3.803(a)(2). The City shall have the right to review the number and size of a
generator's containers and frequency of collection to evaluate adequacy of
capacity provided for each type of collection service for proper separation of
materials and containment of materials; and, commercial businesses shall adjust
their service level for their collection services as requested by the City.
      (2)   Participate in the City's three (3)-container collection services
by placing source separated green container organic waste, including food
waste, in the green container; source separated recyclable materials in the
blue container; and gray container waste in the gray container. Generator shall
not place materials designated for the gray container into the green container
or blue container, nor place materials designated for the green container or
blue container into the gray container.
      (3)   Supply and allow access to an adequate number, size and location of
collection containers with sufficient labels or colors (conforming with §
6-3.803(a)(4)(i) and §
6-3.803(a)(4)(ii) below) for employees, contractors, tenants, and customers,
consistent with the City's blue container, green container, and gray container
collection service or, if self-hauling, per the commercial businesses'
instructions to support its compliance with its self haul program, in
accordance with §
6-3.605(b)(2).
      (4)   Excluding multi-family residential dwellings, provide containers
for the collection of source separated green container organic waste and source
separated recyclable materials in all indoor and outdoor areas where disposal
containers are provided for customers, for materials generated by that
business. Such containers do not need to be provided in restrooms. If a
commercial business does not generate any of the materials that would be
collected in one type of container, then the business does not have to provide
that particular container in all areas where disposal containers are provided
for customers. Pursuant to 14 CCR § 18984.9(b), the containers provided by the
business shall have either:
         (i)   A body or lid that conforms with the container colors provided
through the collection service provided by City, with either lids conforming to
the color requirements or bodies conforming to the color requirements or both
lids and bodies conforming to color requirements. A commercial business is not
required to replace functional containers, including containers purchased prior
to January 1, 2022, that do not comply with the requirements of the subsection
prior to the end of the useful life of those containers, or prior to January 1,
2036, whichever comes first.
         (ii)   Container labels that include language or graphic images, or
both, indicating the primary material accepted and the primary materials
prohibited in that container, or containers with imprinted text or graphic
images that indicate the primary materials accepted and primary materials
prohibited in the container. Pursuant 14 CCR § 18984.8, the container labeling
requirements are required on new containers commencing January 1, 2022.
      (5)   Multi-family residential dwellings are not required to comply with
container placement requirements or labeling requirement in §
6-3.803(a)(4) pursuant to 14 CCR § 18984.9(b).
      (6)   To the extent practical through education, training, inspection,
and/or other measures, excluding multi-family residential dwellings, prohibit
employees from placing materials in a container not designated for those
materials in accordance with §
6-3.203, or if recycling organics onsite or self-hauling under §
6-3.605(b)(2) per the commercial businesses' instructions to support its
compliance with its onsite recycling or self-haul program, in accordance with §
6-3.809.
      (7)   Excluding multi-family residential dwellings, periodically inspect
containers for contamination and inform employees if containers are
contaminated and of the requirements to keep contaminants out of those
containers pursuant to 14 CCR § 18984.9(b)(3).
      (8)   Annually provide information to employees, contractors, tenants,
and customers about organic waste recovery requirements and about proper
sorting of source separated green container organic waste and source separated
recyclable materials.
      (9)   Provide education information before or within fourteen (14) days
of occupation of the premises to new tenants that describes requirements to
keep source separated green container organic waste and source separated
recyclable materials separate from gray container waste (when applicable) and
the location of containers and the rules governing their use at each property.
      (10)   Provide or arrange access for the City or its agent to their
properties during all inspections conducted in accordance with § 6-3.809 to
confirm compliance with the requirements of this
Article 8.
      (11)   If a commercial business wants to self-haul, meet the self-hauler
requirements in §
6-3.809.
      (12)   Nothing in this section prohibits a generator from preventing or
reducing waste generation, managing organic waste on site, or using a community
composting site.
      (13)   Commercial businesses that are tier one or tier two commercial
edible food generators shall comply with food recovery requirements, pursuant
to §
6-3.806.
   (b)   City may choose to comply with §
6-3.804 instead of this §
6-3.803.
(§ 1, Ord. 3187, eff. January 1, 2022)
Sec. 6-3.804 Requirements for commercial businesses (performance-based
compliance approach).
   (a)   Commercial businesses, which includes multi-family residential
dwellings, shall:
      (1)   With the exception of self-haulers subject to §
6-3.809, be automatically enrolled in the City's three (3)-container collection
services with a source separated recyclable materials service level of thirty-
two (32) gallons and with a source separated green container organic waste
service level of thirty-two (32) gallons, approved by the City Manager or his
or her designee. The City shall have the authority to change the minimum
required service levels over time.
      (2)   With the exception of self-haulers subject to §
6-3.809, participate in the City's three (3)-container collection services by
placing source separated green container organic waste, including food waste,
in the green container; source separated recyclable materials in the blue
container; and gray container waste in the gray container. Generator shall not
place materials designated for the gray container into the green container or
blue container, nor place materials designated for the green container or blue
container into the gray container.
      (3)   Supply and allow access to adequate number, size, and location of
collection containers with sufficient labels or colors, for employees,
contractors, tenants and customers, consistent with the City's three (3)-
container collection services. The containers provided by the commercial
business must have either:
         (i)   A body or lid that conforms with the container colors provided
through the collection service provided by City, with either lids conforming to
the color requirements or bodies conforming to the color requirements or both
lids and bodies conforming to color requirements. A commercial business is not
required to replace functional containers, including containers purchased prior
to January 1, 2022, that do not comply with the requirements of the subsection
prior to the end of the useful life of those containers, or prior to January 1,
2036, whichever comes first.
         (ii)   Container labels that include language or graphic images, or
both, indicating the primary material accepted and the primary materials
prohibited in that container, or containers with imprinted text or graphic
images that indicate the primary materials accepted and primary materials
prohibited in the container. Pursuant to 14 CCR § 18984.8, the container
labeling requirements are required on new containers commencing January 1,
2022.
      (4)   Excluding multi-family residential dwellings, provide containers
for the collection of source separated green container organic waste, and
source separated recyclable materials in all indoor and outdoor areas where
disposal containers are provided for customers, for materials generated by that
business. Such containers do not need to be provided in restrooms. If a
commercial business does not generate any of the materials that would be
collected in one type of container, then the business does not have to provide
that particular container in all areas where disposal containers are provided
for customers.
      (5)   Excluding multi-family residential dwellings, prohibit employees
from placing materials in a container not designated for those materials to the
extent practical through education, training, inspection, and/or other
measures.
      (6)   Excluding multi-family residential dwellings, periodically inspect
blue container, green container, and gray containers for contamination and
inform employees if containers are contaminated and of the requirements to keep
contaminants out of those containers.
      (7)   Annually provide information to employees, contractors, tenants,
and customers about organic waste recovery requirements and about proper
sorting of source separated green container organic waste and source separated
recyclable materials. This information shall also be provided to new tenants
within fourteen (14) days of occupation of the premises.
      (8)   Provide or arrange access for the City or its agent to their
properties during all inspections to confirm compliance with SB 1383
Regulations.
   (b)   City may choose to comply with §
6-3.803 instead of this §
6-3.804.
(§ 1, Ord. 3187, eff. January 1, 2022)
Sec. 6-3.805 Waivers for generators.
   (a)   De minimis waivers. The City may waive a commercial businesses'
obligation (including multi-family residential dwellings) to comply with some
or all of the organic waste requirements if the commercial business provides
documentation that the business generates below a certain amount of organic
waste material as described in §
6-3.805(a)(2) below. Commercial businesses requesting a de minimis waiver
shall:
      (1)   Submit an application specifying the services that they are
requesting a waiver from and provide documentation as noted in §
6-3.805(a)(2) below.
      (2)   Provide documentation that either:
         (i)   The commercial businesses' total solid waste collection service
is two (2) cubic yards or more per week and organic waste subject to collection
in a blue container or green container comprises less than twenty (20) gallons
per week per applicable container of the businesses’ total waste; or,
         (ii)   The commercial businesses' total solid waste collection service
is less than two (2) cubic yards per week and organic waste subject to
collection in a blue container or green container comprises less than ten (10)
gallons per week per applicable container of the businesses' total waste.
      (3)   Notify City if circumstances change such that commercial business's
organic waste exceeds threshold required for waiver, in which case waiver will
be rescinded.
      (4)   Provide written verification of eligibility for de minimis waiver
every five (5) years, if the City has approved de minimis waiver.
   (b)   Physical space waivers. The City may waive a commercial businesses' or
property owner's obligations (including multi-family residential dwellings) to
comply with some or all of the recyclable materials and/or organic waste
collection service requirements if the City has evidence from its own staff, a
hauler, licensed architect, or licensed engineer demonstrating that the
premises lacks adequate space for the collection containers required for
compliance with the organic waste collection requirements.
   A commercial business or property owner may request a physical space waiver
through the following process:
      (1)   Submit an application form specifying the type(s) of collection
services for which they are requesting a compliance waiver.
      (2)   Provide documentation that the premises lacks adequate space for
blue containers and/or green containers including documentation from its
hauler, licensed architect, or licensed engineer.
      (3)   Provide written verification to the City that it is still eligible
for physical space waiver every five (5) years, if the City has approved
application for a physical space waiver.
   (c)   Additional waivers. The City may provide any additional waivers of the
requirements of this chapter to the extent permitted by applicable law. The
City Manager or his or her designee shall be responsible for determining the
grounds for the waiver, its scope, and appropriate administration.
   (d)   Review and approval of waivers by City. Review and approval of waivers
will be the responsibility of the City Manager or his or her designee.
(§ 1, Ord. 3187, eff. January 1, 2022)
Sec. 6-3.806 Requirements for commercial edible food generators.
   (a)   Tier one commercial edible food generators must comply with the
requirements of this §
6-3.806 commencing January 1, 2022, and tier two commercial edible food
generators must comply commencing January 1, 2024.
   (b)   Large venue or large event operators not providing food services, but
allowing for food to be provided by others, shall require food facilities
operating at the large venue or large event to comply with the requirements of
this §
6-3.806, commencing January 1, 2024.
   (c)   Commercial edible food generators shall comply with the following
requirements:
      (1)   Arrange to recover the maximum amount of edible food that would
otherwise be disposed.
      (2)   Contract with, or enter into a written agreement with food recovery
organizations or food recovery services for: (i) the collection of edible food
for food recovery; or, (ii) acceptance of the edible food that the commercial
edible food generator self-hauls to the food recovery organization for food
recovery.
      (3)   Shall not intentionally spoil edible food that is capable of being
recovered by a food recovery organization or a food recovery service.
      (4)   Allow the City's designated enforcement entity or designated third
party enforcement entity to access the premises and review records pursuant to
14 CCR § 18991.4.
      (5)   Keep records that include the following information, or as
otherwise specified in 14 CCR § 18991.4:
         (i)   A list of each food recovery service or organization that
collects or receives its
edible food pursuant to a contract or written agreement established under 14
CCR § 18991.3(b).
         (ii)   A copy of all contracts or written agreements established under
14 CCR § 18991.3(b).
         (iii)   A record of the following information for each of those food
recovery services or food recovery organizations:
            (A)   The name, address and contact information of the food
recovery service or food recovery organization.
            (B)   The types of food that will be collected by or self-hauled to
the food recovery service or food recovery organization.
            (C)   The established frequency that food will be collected or
self-hauled.
            (D)   The quantity of food, measured in pounds recovered per month,
collected or self-hauled to a food recovery service or food recovery
organization for food recovery.
   (d)   Nothing in this article shall be construed to limit or conflict with
the protections provided by the California Good Samaritan Food Donation Act of
2017, the Federal Good Samaritan Act, or share table and school food donation
guidance pursuant to Senate Bill 557, Chapter 557, Statutes of 2017.
(§ 1, Ord. 3187, eff. January 1, 2022)
Sec. 6-3.807 Requirements for food recovery organizations and services.
   (a)   Food recovery services collecting or receiving edible food directly
from commercial edible food generators, via a contract or written agreement
established under 14 CCR § 18991.3(b), shall maintain the following records, or
as otherwise specified by 14 CCR § 18991.5(a)(1):
      (1)   The name, address, and contact information for each commercial
edible food generator from which the service collects edible food.
      (2)   The quantity in pounds of edible food collected from each
commercial edible food generator per month.
      (3)   The quantity in pounds of edible food transported to each food
recovery organization per month.
      (4)   The name, address, and contact information for each food recovery
organization that the food recovery service transports edible food to for food
recovery.
   (b)   Food recovery organizations collecting or receiving edible food
directly from commercial edible food generators, via a contract or written
agreement established under 14 CCR § 18991.3(b), shall maintain the following
records, or as otherwise specified by 14 CCR §18991.5(a)(2):
      (1)   The name, address, and contact information for each commercial
edible food generator from which the organization receives edible food.
      (2)   The quantity in pounds of edible food received from each commercial
edible food generator per month.
      (3)   The name, address, and contact information for each food recovery
service that the organization receives edible food from for food recovery.
   (c)   Food recovery organizations and food recovery services that have their
primary address physically located in the City and contract with or have
written agreements with one (1) or more commercial edible food generators
pursuant to 14 CCR § 18991.3(b) shall report to the City it is located in the
total pounds of edible food recovered in the previous calendar year from the
tier one and tier two commercial edible food generators they have established a
contract or written agreement with pursuant to 14 CCR § 18991.3(b) no later
than December 31 annually.
   (d)   Food recovery capacity planning.
      (1)   Food recovery services and food recovery organizations. In order to
support edible food recovery capacity planning assessments or other studies,
food recovery services and food recovery organizations operating in the City
shall provide information and consultation to the City, upon request, regarding
existing, or proposed new or expanded, food recovery capacity that could be
accessed by the City and its commercial edible food generators. A food recovery
service or food recovery organization contacted by the City shall respond to
such request for information within sixty (60) days, unless a shorter timeframe
is otherwise specified by the City.
(§ 1, Ord. 3187, eff. January 1, 2022)
Sec. 6-3.808 Requirements for facility operators.
   (a)   Requirements for facility operators and community composting
operations.
      (1)   Owners of facilities, operations, and activities that recover
organic waste, including, but not limited to, compost facilities, in-vessel
digestion facilities, and publicly-owned treatment works shall, upon the City's
request, provide information regarding available and potential new or expanded
capacity at their facilities, operations, and activities, including information
about throughput and permitted capacity necessary for planning purposes.
Entities contacted by the City shall respond within sixty (60) days.
      (2)   Community composting operators, upon the City's request, shall
provide information to the City to support organic waste capacity planning,
including, but not limited to, an estimate of the amount of organic waste
anticipated to be handled at the community composting operation. Entities
contacted by the City shall respond within sixty (60) days.
(§ 1, Ord. 3187, eff. January 1, 2022, as amended by Ord. 3216, eff. August 18,
2022)
Sec. 6-3.809 Self-hauler requirements.
   (a)   Self-haulers shall source separate all recyclable materials and
organic waste generated on-site from solid waste in a manner consistent with 14
CCR §§ 18984.1 and 18984.2, or shall haul organic waste to a high diversion
organic waste processing facility.
   (b)   Self-haulers shall haul their source separated recyclable materials to
a facility that recovers those materials; and haul their source separated green
container organic waste to a solid waste facility, operation, activity, or
property that processes or recovers source separated organic waste.
Alternatively, self-haulers may haul organic waste to a high diversion organic
waste processing facility.
   (c)   Self-haulers that are commercial businesses (including multi-family
residential dwellings) shall keep a record of the amount of organic waste
delivered to each solid waste facility, operation, activity, or property that
processes or recovers organic waste; this record shall be subject to inspection
by the City. The records shall include the following information:
      (1)   Delivery receipts and weight tickets from the entity accepting the
waste.
      (2)   The amount of material in cubic yards or tons transported by the
generator to each entity.
      (3)   If the material is transported to an entity that does not have
scales on-site, or employs scales incapable of weighing the self-hauler's
vehicle in a manner that allows it to determine the weight of materials
received, the self-hauler is not required to record the weight of material but
shall keep a record of the entities that received the organic waste.
   (d)   Self-haulers that are commercial businesses (including multi-family
self-haulers) shall provide information collected in §
6-3.809(c) to the City if requested.
   (e)   A residential organic waste generator that self-hauls organic waste is
not required to record information in §
6-3.809(c) or report information in §
6-3.809(d).
(§ 1, Ord. 3187, eff. January 1, 2022)
Sec. 6-3.810 Inspections and investigations.
   (a)   City representatives and/or its designated entity, including designees
are authorized to conduct inspections and investigations, at random or
otherwise, of any collection container, Non-Waste container, collection vehicle
loads, or transfer, processing, or disposal facility for materials collected
from generators, or source separated materials to confirm compliance with this
Article 8 by organic waste generators, commercial businesses (including multi-
family residential dwellings), property owners, commercial edible food
generators, Non-Waste Dealers, self-haulers, hauler, food recovery service, and
food recovery organizations, subject to applicable laws. This section does not
allow the City to enter the interior of a private residential property for
inspection.
   (b)   The regulated entity shall provide or arrange for access during all
inspections (with the exception of residential property interiors) and shall
cooperate with the City's employee or its designated entity/designee during
such inspections and investigations. Such inspections and investigations may
include confirmation of proper placement of materials in containers, edible
food recovery activities, records, or any other requirement described herein.
Failure to provide or arrange for: (i) access to an entity's premises; or (ii)
access to records for any inspection or investigation is a violation of this
Article 8 and may result in penalties described in §
6-3.811.
   (c)   Any records obtained by the City during its inspections, and other
reviews shall be subject to the requirements and applicable disclosure
exemptions of the Public Records Act as set forth in Government Code Section
6250 et seq.
   (d)   City representatives, its designated entity, and/or designee are
authorized to conduct any inspections, or other investigations as reasonably
necessary to further the goals of this Article, subject to applicable laws.
   (e)   City shall receive written complaints from persons regarding an entity
that may be potentially non-compliant with SB 1383 Regulations, including
receipt of anonymous complaints.
(§ 1, Ord. 3187, eff. January 1, 2022, as amended by Ord. 3216, eff. August 18,
2022)
Sec. 6-3.811 Enforcement.
   (a)   Violation of any provision of this Article shall constitute grounds
for issuance of a notice of violation and assessment of a fine by a Enforcement
Officer. Enforcement actions under this Article are issuance of an
administrative citation and assessment of a fine. The procedures in §
1.2.01 et seq. shall govern the imposition, enforcement, collection, and review
of administrative citations issued to enforce this
Article 8 and any rule or regulation adopted pursuant to this
Article 8, except as otherwise indicated in this
Article 8.
   (b)   Other remedies allowed by law may be used, including civil action or
prosecution as misdemeanor or infraction. City may pursue civil actions in the
California courts to seek recovery of unpaid administrative citations.
   (c)   Penalty amounts for types of violations. The penalty levels are as
follows:
      (1)   For a first violation, the amount of the base penalty shall be
Fifty Dollars ($50.00) to One Hundred Dollars ($100.00) per violation.
      (2)   For a second violation, the amount of the base penalty shall be One
Hundred Dollars ($100.00) to Two Hundred Dollars ($200.00) per violation.
      (3)   For a third or subsequent violation, the amount of the base penalty
shall be Two Hundred Fifty Dollars ($250.00) to Five Hundred Dollars ($500.00)
per violation.
   (d)   Factors considered in determining penalty amount. The following
factors shall be used to determine the amount of the penalty for each violation
within the appropriate penalty amount range:
      (1)   The nature, circumstances, and severity of the violation(s).
      (2)   The violator's ability to pay.
      (3)   The willfulness of the violator's misconduct.
      (4)   Whether the violator took measures to avoid or mitigate violations
of this chapter.
      (5)   Evidence of any economic benefit resulting from the violation(s).
      (6)   The deterrent effect of the penalty on the violator.
      (7)   Whether the violation(s) were due to conditions outside the control
of the violator.
   (e)   Appeals process. Persons receiving an administrative citation
containing a penalty for an uncorrected violation may request a hearing to
appeal the citation pursuant to §
1-4.01 et seq.
   (f)   Education period for non-compliance. Beginning January 1, 2022 and
through December 31, 2023, the City will conduct inspections, route reviews or
waste evaluations, and compliance reviews, depending upon the type of regulated
entity, to determine compliance, and if the City determines that organic waste
generator, self-hauler, hauler, tier one commercial edible food generator, food
recovery organization, food recovery service, or other entity is not in
compliance, it shall provide educational materials to the entity describing its
obligations under this Article 8 and a notice that compliance is required by
January 1, 2022, and that violations may be subject to administrative civil
penalties starting on January 1, 2024.
   (g)   Civil penalties for non-compliance. Beginning January 1, 2024, if the
City determines that an organic waste generator, self-hauler, hauler, tier one
or tier two commercial edible food generator, food recovery organization, food
recovery service, or other entity is not in compliance with this Article 8, it
shall document the noncompliance or violation, issue a Notice of Violation, and
take enforcement action pursuant to this §
6-3.811.
(§ 1, Ord. 3187, eff. January 1, 2022, as amended by Ord. 3216, eff. August 18,
2022)
CHAPTER 4: HEALTH AND SAFETY CODE
   
6-4.01   Adoption of Portions of Title 3 of the San Bernardino County Code
   
6-4.02   Definitions
   
6-4.03   Validity and Severability
   
6-4.04   Existing Law Continued
   
6-4.05   No Liability/No Warranty
   
6-4.06   Vector Control
   
6-4.07   Penalties
   
6-4.08   Adoption of the San Bernardino Code
   
6-4.09   Enforcement agency designated
   
6-4.10   Schedule and collection of fees
   
6-4.11   Violations; Penalty
Sec. 6-4.01. Adoption of Portions of Title 3 of the San Bernardino County Code.
   Pursuant to the Cal. Health & Safety Code §§ 120125 et seq., §§ 101025 et
seq., §§ 101375 et seq., §§ 101450 et seq., and §§ 101275 et seq., Cal. Pub.
Res. Code §§ 21050 et seq. (California Environmental Quality Act) and other
relevant state authority, the City finds that the public's interest will be
best served by certain Environmental Health Services and related Consumer
Protection Programs within the jurisdiction of the city being enforced and
administered through the Division of Environmental Health of the County of San
Bernardino Public Health Department, except as may be specified in the
following sections. The Director and designated Health Officers of the Division
of Environmental Health are hereby authorized to enforce and administer within
the City of Ontario all such state laws pertaining to environmental health, as
well as all provisions of the City of Ontario Health and Safety Code and any
incidental provisions necessary for the full and adequate enforcement of the
provisions incorporated therein, as they relate to ambulances, food protection,
dairies and dairy products, vector control and recreational health.
   For the purpose of providing regulations relating to public health and
safety, providing for the issuance of permits and the collection of fees,
providing remedies and penalties for the violation of such regulations, and
providing any related requirements or assistance necessary to fully and
adequately administer and enforce the Health and Safety Code of the City of
Ontario in the City, the following portions of the County Code are hereby
adopted by reference and made part of this chapter as though set forth in full:
   (a)   Title 3, Division 1, Chapter 1 - Health Officer (§§ 31.011 et seq.)
   (b)   Title 3, Division 1, Chapter 6 - Hearing Procedure (§§ 31.061 et seq.)
   (c)   Title 3, Division 1, Chapter 8 - Ambulances (§§ 31.081 et seq.)
   (d)   Title 3, Division 3, Chapter 1 - Authority and Administration (§§
33011 et seq.)
   (e)   Title 3, Division 3, Chapter 2 - Permits and Hearing Procedures (§§
33.020 et seq.)
   (f)   Title 3, Division 3, Chapter 4 - Food Protection (§§ 33.041 et seq.)
   (g)   Title 3, Division 3, Chapter 5 - Dairies and Dairy Products (§§ 3.051
et seq.)
   (h)   Title 3, Division 3, Chapter 9 - Insect, Rodent, and Other Vector
Control (§§ 33.0901 et seq.)
   (i)   Title 3, Division 3, Chapter 11 - Recreational Health (§§ 33.111 et
seq.)
   One (1) copy of each of the Chapters of the County Code incorporated by
reference is on file in the office of the City Clerk for public record and
inspection. The City's adoption and incorporation by reference of those
portions of the County Code are subject to the amendments, additions and
deletions set forth in this chapter.
(§ 1, Ord. 1613, eff. September 16, 1965, as amended by § 1, Ord. 2642, eff.
October 16, 1997)
Sec. 6-4.02. Definitions.
   City Code: Whenever the term “City Code” is used in this chapter, it shall
refer to the City of Ontario Municipal Code.
   City Health and Safety Code: Those portions of the County Code incorporated
by reference into this chapter, as well as this chapter itself, shall be known
as the City Health and Safety Code.
   County Code: Whenever the term “County Code” is used in this chapter, it
shall refer to the San Bernardino County Code.
   County or County of San Bernardino: Whenever the terms “County” or “County
of San Bernardino” are used in the City Health and Safety Code, the terms
“City” or “City of Ontario” shall be substituted therefor, unless the context
otherwise requires for administration or enforcement purposes. Notwithstanding
the foregoing, all permits shall be obtained from, and all fees and costs shall
be paid to, the San Bernardino County Division of Environmental Health.
   Department of Environmental Health Services: Whenever the term “Department
of Environmental Health Services” is used in the City Health and Safety Code,
the term “Division of Environmental Health” shall be substituted therefor.
(§ 2, Ord. 1613, eff. September 16, 1965, as amended by § 1, Ord. 2642, eff.
October 16, 1997)
Sec. 6-4.03. Validity and Severability.
   This City Health and Safety Code or any application of it to any person,
firm, organization, partnership or corporation shall not be in conflict with
any state or Federal laws, rules or regulations. If any provision or clause of
the City Health and Safety Code, or the application thereof is held invalid,
such invalidity shall not affect other provisions or applications of the City
Health and Safety Code which can be given effect without the invalid provision
or application. To this end, the provisions of the City Health and Safety Code
are declared to be severable.
(§ 3, Ord. 1613, eff. September 16, 1965, as amended by § 1, Ord. 2642, eff.
October 16, 1997)
Sec. 6-4.04. Existing Law Continued.
   The provisions of the City Health and Safety Code, insofar as they are
substantially the same as provisions of existing laws and ordinances relating
to the same subject matter, shall be construed as restatements, continuations,
and amendments thereof, and not as new enactments.
(§ 4A through E, Ord. 1613, eff. September 16, 1965, as amended by § 1, Ord.
2642, eff. October 16, 1997)
Sec. 6-4.05. No Liability/No Warranty.
   The City and its officials, officers, employees and agents shall not be held
liable for any act or omission of any person, including any employee or agent
of the County of San Bernardino, when made in good faith reliance upon any
state or federal law, rule or regulation, any ordinances and codes of the City
or the County of San Bernardino, and upon current policies and procedures. The
City and its officials, officers, employees and agents shall not be held liable
for the negligence of, nor as the guarantor of proper performance by, any
person or entity holding any license, permit, certificate, registration,
privilege, or other entitlement from the City.
(§ 4F and G, Ord. 1613, eff. September 16, 1965, as amended by § 1, Ord. 2642,
eff. October 16, 1997)
Sec. 6-4.06. Vector Control.
   The provisions of the City Health and Safety Code pertaining to Vector
Control are amended as follows:
   (a)   Article 4 of Chapter 9 of Division 3 of Title 3 of the County Code -
San Bernardino County Vector Control Program (§§ 33.0941 et seq.) shall not
apply to the area serviced by the West Valley Vector Control District.
   (b)   The County will assign Vector Control personnel pursuant to any
existing contract with the City of Ontario.
   (c)   The County shall provide to the City quarterly reports, in a form and
containing information acceptable to the City, outlining the progress of this
program.
   (d)   The County shall provide appropriate indemnity to the City, in a form
and pursuant to terms acceptable to the City Attorney, covering the County's
obligations under the City Health and Safety Code.
(§ 4H through L, Ord. 1613, eff. September 16, 1965, as amended by § 1, Ord.
2642, eff. October 16, 1997)
Sec. 6-4.07. Penalties.
   It shall be unlawful for any person or entity to violate any provision of
the City Health and Safety Code. Every act prohibited or declared unlawful by
the City Health and Safety Code, as well as every failure to perform an act
made mandatory by the City Health and Safety Code, is punishable as a
misdemeanor, provided, however, that the City Attorney or citing officer may
specify in the accusatory pleadings that it shall be an infraction whenever
they shall determine that the interests of justice so require. Every person who
causes, aids, abets or conceals a violation of the City Health and Safety Code
is guilty of violating the City Health and Safety Code. Except as provided for
herein, all violations of the City Health and Safety Code shall be prosecuted
by the City pursuant to the terms and conditions of
Chapter 2 of Title 1 of the City Code.
(§ 4M, Ord. 1613, eff. September 16, 1965, as amended by § 1, Ord. 2642, eff.
October 16, 1997)
Sec. 6-4.08. Adoption of the San Bernardino Code.
   (a)   The City adopts, by reference, and makes a part of this chapter by
reference, San Bernardino County Ordinance No. 3930, entitled:
"An Ordinance of the County of San Bernardino, State of California, Adding
Chapter 14 Division 3 of Title 3 and Adding Subsection 16.0213B (b)(17) to
Chapter 2 of Division 6 of Title 1, All of the San Bernardino County Code
Relating to Inspection Grading of Food Establishments."
   (b)   The aforementioned sections of the San Bernardino County Code, adopted
by San Bernardino County Ordinance No. 3930, are adopted as the Inspection
Grading of Food Establishments Program of the City of Ontario.
(§ 1, Ord. 2827, eff. May 4, 2006)
Sec. 6-4.09. Enforcement agency designated.
   The County of San Bernardino Department of Environmental Health Services is
designated as the enforcement agency for the City and is authorized to provide
the qualified personnel necessary to enforce the provisions of this chapter.
(§ 1, Ord. 2827, eff. May 4, 2006)
Sec. 6-4.10. Schedule and collection of fees.
   The schedule of fees contained within San Bernardino County Ordinance No.
3930, adopted herein, and as which may be modified in the future by the County,
is hereby adopted as the fees in effect in the City, and shall be applicable
within the City to provide for the administration and enforcement of this
Chapter. The County of San Bernardino shall administer and collect these fees
for deposit with the County Treasurer to offset the costs assumed by the County
in administering and enforcing this program.
(§ 1, Ord. 2827, eff. May 4, 2006)
Section 6-4.11. Violations; Penalty.
   (a)   In accordance with Section 33.1406(c) of the San Bernardino County
Code, adopted by reference herein and applicable to this chapter, the letter
grade card posted in accordance with the inspection and grading program shall
not be defaced, marred, camouflaged, hidden or removed. It shall be unlawful to
operate a food establishment unless the letter grade is posted. Removal of the
letter grade card is a violation of this chapter and may result in the
suspension or revocation of the Public Health Permit and shall be punishable as
specified in Section 33.0112 of the San Bernardino County Code, which is
adopted by reference herein and applicable to this chapter.
   (b)   In addition, any violation of this section may be punishable in
accordance with OMC
Chapter 2, Title 1.
(§ 1, Ord. 2827, eff. May 4, 2006)
CHAPTER 5: RESERVED
CHAPTER 6: STORMWATER DRAINAGE SYSTEM
Article 1. Authority, Purpose and Policy, Definitions
   
6-6.101   Authority
   
6-6.102   Purpose and objectives
   
6-6.103   Definitions
Article 2. General Conditions and Prohibitions
   
6-6.201   Administration
   
6-6.202   Applicability
   
6-6.203   Notice
   
6-6.204   Connections
   
6-6.205   Protection of the storm drainage system
   
6-6.206   Prohibited discharges
   
6-6.207   Exceptions to the prohibited discharges
   
6-6.208   Compliance with best management practices (BMPs)
   
6-6.209   Affirmative defense
   
6-6.210   Spill containment
   
6-6.211   Immediate notification of accidental discharge
   
6-6.212   Written notification of accidental discharge
   
6-6.213   Authority to inspect
Article 3. Residential Requirements
   
6-6.301   Prohibited discharges
   
6-6.302   Responsibility for illegal discharge of prohibited substances
   
6-6.303   Maintenance of private residential storm drainage systems
Article 4. Industrial and Commercial Requirements
   
6-6.401   Non-stormwater discharges
   
6-6.402   General permit for stormwater discharges from industrial activities
   
6-6.403   Conditional category-notice of non-applicability
   
6-6.404   Best management practices (BMPs)
Article 5. Construction Requirements
   
6-6.501   Stormwater quality management plan (SWQMP)
   
6-6.502   General permit for stormwater discharges from construction activity
   
6-6.503   Non-stormwater discharges
   
6-6.504   Non-stormwater discharge reporting requirements
   
6-6.505   Best management practices
   
6-6.506   WQMP transfer, access, and maintenance agreement
Article 6. Administrative Enforcement Remedies
   
6-6.601   Notice of correction
   
6-6.602   Notice of violation
   
6-6.603   Administrative orders
   
6-6.604   Administrative hearing
   
6-6.605   Administrative civil penalties
   
6-6.606   Compensation for damages
   
6-6.607   Appeals
   
6-6.608   Violations deemed a public nuisance
Article 7. Judicial Enforcement Remedies
   
6-6.701   Legal action
   
6-6.702   Civil penalties
   
6-6.703   Criminal prosecution
   
6-6.704   Falsifying information
Article 8. Fees and Charges
   
6-6.801   Basic assessment unit
   
6-6.802   Stormwater pollution abatement charge
   
6-6.803   Business inspection fees
Article 9. General Clauses
   
6-6.901   Severability
   
6-6.902   City's right of revision
Article 1. Authority, Purpose, Policy and Definitions
Sec. 6-6.101. Authority.
   This chapter is enacted pursuant to authority conferred by an Areawide Urban
Stormwater Run-Off Permit [NPDES Permit No. CAS618036, Order No. R8-2002-0012]
issued by the California Regional Water Quality Control Board Santa Ana Region
pursuant to § 402(p) of the Clean Water Act.
(§ 2, Ord. 2755, eff. April 4, 2002)
Sec. 6-6.102. Purpose and Objectives.
   (a)   The purpose of this chapter is to ensure the health, safety and
general welfare of the residents of the City of Ontario by prescribing
regulations to effectively prohibit non-stormwater discharges into the City's
stormwater drainage system and to specifically achieve the following
objectives:
      (1)   Control discharges from spills, dumping or disposal of materials
other than stormwater;
      (2)   Reduce the discharge of pollutants in all stormwater discharges to
the maximum extent practicable;
      (3)   Protect and enhance the water quality of local, State and Federal
watercourses, water bodies, ground water and wetlands in a manner pursuant to
and consistent with the Clean Water Act.
(§ 2, Ord. 2755, eff. April 4, 2002)
Sec. 6-6.103. Definitions.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   (a)   “Adjustment” means a determination that the volumetric amount of
stormwater which enters the stormwater drainage system from a premise is deemed
to be a defined mount substantially different from the average stormwater
drainage.
   (b)   “Area-wide urban stormwater runoff permit” means the current, regional
NPDES permit issued by the California Regional Water Quality Control Board,
Santa Ana Region, to the San Bernardino County Flood Control District, San
Bernardino County and sixteen (16) incorporated cities discharging stormwater
into the Upper Santa Ana River Basin for the regulation of stormwater
discharges from municipal separate storm sewer systems.
   (c)   “Average stormwater drainage” means the average amount of stormwater
drainage which enters the stormwater drainage system from a premise, based on
runoff factors established by the San Bernardino County Flood Control District.
   (d)   “Basic assessment unit (BAU)” means the proportionate runoff from the
average single-family parcel. The average single-family residential parcel has
an area of 0.1666 acres (7,200 square feet) and a runoff factor of 0.695. The
level of runoff from this type of property is referred to as a Basic Assessment
Unit and is used to establish user class equivalency.
   (e)   “BMP” means any Best Management Practice, Best Management Guideline,
or Best Management Requirement as adopted by any Federal, State, regional or
local agency to prevent or reduce the pollution of Waters of the United States.
BMPs also include treatment requirements, operating procedures, and practices
to control: plant site runoff, spillage or leaks; sludge or waste storage and
disposal; or drainage from raw material or chemical storage.
   (f)   “City” or “the City” means to the City of Ontario, California.
   (g)   “City engineer” means the City Engineer for the City of Ontario, or
the Engineer's designee.
   (h)   “Construction activity” means any activity used in the process of
developing, redeveloping, enhancing, or maintaining land, including but not
limited to: land disturbance, building construction, paving and surfacing,
storage and disposal of construction related materials.
   (i)   “Contamination” means the same as defined in the Porter-Cologne Water
Quality Control Act; “contamination” is an impairment of the quality of waters
of the state by waste to a degree which creates a hazard to the public health
through poisoning or through the spread of disease. “Contamination” includes
any equivalent effect resulting from the disposal of waste whether or not
waters of the state are affected.
   (j)   “Compliance schedule” means the time period allowed by the City for a
discharger to achieve compliance with the City's stormwater regulations. The
“compliance schedule”shall contain specific dates by which adequate treatment
facilities, devices, or other related equipment and/or procedures must be
installed or implemented.
   (k)   “Developed parcel” means any lot or parcel of land altered from its
natural state by the construction, creation, and addition of impervious area,
except public streets or highways.
   (l)   “Developer” means a person, firm, corporation, partnership, or
association who proposes to develop, develops, or causes to be developed real
property for himself or for others except that employees and consultants of
such persons or entities, acting in such capacity, are not developers.
   (m)   “Dewatering” means the removal and disposal of surface water or
groundwater for purposes of preparing a site for construction.
   (n)   “Discharge” means any release, spill, leak, flow or escape of any
liquid including sewage, wastewater or stormwater, semi-solid or solid
substance onto the land or into the City's stormwater drainage system.
   (o)   “Discharger” means any person, property owner or occupant of a unit,
building, premise or lot in the City who discharges or causes to be discharged
any of the substances listed in division (n) of this section, directly or
indirectly, into the City's stormwater drainage system.
   (p)   “EPA” means the Environmental Protection Agency of the United States
of America.
   (q)   “General permit for stormwater discharges from construction activity”
means astatewide General NPDES Permit that regulates all stormwater discharges
associated with construction projects that disturb five (5) acres or more of
land or which result in the disturbance of less than five (5) acres, but which
are part of a larger common plan of development or sale.
   (r)   “General permit for stormwater discharges from industrial activities”
means a statewide General NPDES Permit that regulates stormwater discharges
associated with industrial activities that are listed in 40 CFR 122.26 (b)
(14).
   (s)   “Hearing officer” means the City's Engineer or his or her designee,
who presides, at the administrative hearings authorized by this chapter and
issues final decisions on matters raised therein.
   (t)   “Illegal discharge” means any discharge (or seepage) into the City's
stormwater drainage system that is not composed entirely of stormwater except
for the authorized discharges listed in §
6-6.207 of this chapter. Illegal discharges include the improper disposal of
wastes into the stormwater drainage system.
   (u)   “Illicit connection” means either of the following:
      (1)   Any drain or conveyance, whether on the surface or subsurface,
which allows an illegal discharge to enter the stormwater drainage system
including but not limited to any conveyance which allows non-stormwater
discharges including sewage, process wastewater and wash water to enter the
stormwater drainage system and any connections to the stormwater drainage
system from indoor drains and sinks, regardless of whether said drain or
connection had been previously allowed, permitted or approved by a government
agency; or
      (2)   Any drain or conveyance connected to the stormwater drainage
system, that is not permitted pursuant to a valid NPDES Permit or which has not
been documented in plans, maps or equivalent records approved by the City.
   (v)   “Maximum extent practicable (MEP)” means the maximum level of
pollutant reductions or stormwater runoff reductions that must be achieved by
treatment, infiltration or a combination of treatment, infiltration and Best
Management Practices, taking into account equitable considerations of
synergistic, additive, and competing factors, including but not limited to,
gravity of the problem, fiscal and technical feasibility, public health risks,
societal concern, and social benefits, to effectively limit the discharge of
pollutants or stormwater runoff into the City's stormwater drainage system.
   (w)   “National pollutant discharge elimination system (NPDES)” means the
EPA's national program under the Clean Water Act to eliminate discharges of
pollution into waters of the United States.
   (x)   “New development” means land disturbing activities; structural
development, including construction or installation of a building or structure,
creation of impervious surfaces; and land subdivision.
   (y)   “NPDES permit” means any permit issued pursuant to the Federal Clean
Water Act.
   (z)   “Non-structural BMPs” means any schedules of activities, prohibitions
of practices, maintenance procedures, managerial practices or operational
practices that aim to prevent stormwater pollution by reducing the potential
for contamination at the source of pollution.
   (aa)   “Notice of intent (NOI)” means a form provided by the State Water
Resources Control Board that is required to be completed and submitted in order
to obtain coverage under one of the State's NPDES General Stormwater Permits
prior to the start of certain business activities or construction activities.
   (ab)   “Non-stormwater” means any water discharging to the City's stormwater
drainage system that does not originate from precipitation events.
   (ac)   “Nuisance” means any condition described by all of the following:
      (1)   Is injurious to health, or is indecent or offensive to the senses,
or an obstruction to the free use of property, so as to interfere with the
comfortable enjoyment of life or property.
      (2)   Affects at the same time an entire community or neighborhood, or
any considerable number of persons, although the extent of the annoyance or
damage inflicted upon individuals may be unequal.
      (3)   Occurs during, or as a result of, the treatment or disposal of
wastes.
   (ad)   “Permit” means any permit issued by the City.
   (ae)   “Permittee” means the San Bernardino County Flood Control District;
San Bernardino County; and each of the sixteen (16) cities in San Bernardino
County discharging stormwater drainage into the Upper Santa Ana River Basin and
regulated by the Areawide Urban Stormwater Run-Off Permit.
   (af)   “Person” means any individual, partnership, committee, entity,
association, corporation, public agency, and any other organization, or group
of persons public or private; the masculine genders shall include the feminine,
the singular shall include the plural where indicated by the context.
   (ag)   “pH” means the measure of the hydrogen ion concentration of water and
the standard by which the acidity or alkalinity of a water sample is
determined.
   (ah)   “Pollutant” means, but is not limited to, any liquid, solid or semi-
solid substances or combination thereof, which causes a nuisance or contributes
to a condition of contamination or pollution of the City's stormwater runoff,
stormwater drainage system or the impairment or degradation of waters of the
state, including but not limited to the following:
      (1)   Floatable materials (such as floatable plastics or wood products,
and metal shavings, or materials forming films, foam or scum);
      (2)   Household waste (such as trash, cleaners, toxic or hazardous
chemicals, yard wastes, animal fecal materials, used oil, coolant, gasoline and
other vehicle fluids);
      (3)   Metals and non-metals, including compounds of metals and non-
metals;
      (4)   Petroleum hydrocarbons (such as fuels, lubricants, surfactants,
waste oils, solvents, coolants and grease);
      (5)   Domestic sewage from sewer line overflows, septic tanks, porta-
potties, boats and recreational vehicles;
      (6)   Animal wastes (such as wastes from confinement facilities, kennels,
pens, stables, and show facilities);
      (7)   Substances having a pH less than 6.5 or greater than 8.5, or
unusual coloration, turbidity or odor;
      (8)   Materials causing an increase in biochemical oxygen demand,
chemical oxygen demand or total organic carbon;
      (9)   Materials containing base/neutral or acid extractable organic
compounds;
      (10)   Waste materials and wastewater generated on construction sites
from construction activities (such as painting and staining; use of sealants
and glues; use of lime; use of wood preservatives and solvents; disturbance of
asbestos fibers, paint flakes or stucco fragments; application of oils,
lubricants, vehicle maintenance, construction equipment washing, concrete
pouring and cleanup; use of concrete detergents; steam cleaning or sand
blasting; use of chemical degreasing or diluting agents; and chlorinated water
from potable line flushing;
      (11)   Those pollutants defined in § 1362 (6) of the Federal Clean Water
Act; and
      (12)   Any other constituent or material, including but not limited to
pesticides, herbicides, fertilizers, eroded soils, sediment and particulate
materials, in quantities that have been determined by the State or EPA to
adversely affect the beneficial uses of waters of the State.
   (ai)   “Redevelopment” means the creation or addition of impervious surfaces
or the making of improvements to an existing structure on an already developed
site; replacement of impervious surfaces that are not part of a routine
maintenance activity; and land disturbing activities related with structural or
impervious surfaces.
   (aj)   “Sewage” means the wastewater of the community derived from
residential, agricultural, commercial, or industrial sources, including
domestic sewage, and industrial wastewater.
   (ak)   “SIC (Standard Industrial Classification)” means the statistical
classification standard underlying all establishment-based Federal economic
statistics classified by industry. The Standard is published in the SIC Manual,
1987, Office of Management and Budget.
   (al)   “Stormwater” means rain water, snowmelt runoff, and associated
surface runoff and drainage.
   (am)   “Stormwater drainage system” means all of the property involved in
the operation of the stormwater drainage collection and disposal system for the
City, including, but not limited to, conduits, natural or artificial drains,
channels and watercourses, together with appurtenances, pumping stations and
equipment which is tributary to the regional stormwater runoff system.
   (an)   “Stormwater pollution prevention plan (SWPPP)” means the plan as
described in the General Construction Activity Stormwater Permit as issued by
the State Water Resources Control Board on August 19, 1999, and as may be
amended, or the General Industrial Activities Stormwater Permit as issued on
April 17, 1997, and as may be amended, which specifies BMPs that will prevent
pollutants from contacting stormwater and all products of erosion from moving
off site into receiving waters.
   (ao)   “Stormwater quality management plan (SWQMP)” means a plan required of
new development/redevelopment projects, outlining appropriate non-structural
and structural BMPs, including stormwater infiltration and treatment devices
that will be implemented and installed to prevent pollutants from being
discharged into the City's stormwater drainage system, during and after
construction.
   (ap)   “Structural BMPs” means any structural facility designed and
constructed to remove pollutants from stormwater runoff or prevent pollutants
from contacting stormwater. Examples are canopies, structural enclosures,
sediment basins, catch basin inlet filters, grassy swales, and sand and oil
interceptors.
   (aq)   “Violation” means a breach of any provision of this chapter.
   (ar)   “Waters of the State” means any surface water or groundwater,
including saline waters, within the boundaries of the State.
(§ 2, Ord. 2755, eff. April 4, 2002)
Article 2. General Conditions and Prohibitions
Sec. 6-6.201. Administration.
   The City Engineer shall administer, implement and enforce the provisions of
this chapter. Any powers granted to or duties imposed upon the City Engineer,
may be delegated by the City Engineer to persons authorized by the Engineer and
in the employ of the City of Ontario.
(§ 2, Ord. 2755, eff. April 4, 2002)
Sec. 6-6.202. Applicability.
   This chapter shall apply to all dischargers, including all residents as well
as commercial, industrial and construction enterprises, to the City's
stormwater drainage system, and to dischargers outside the City who, by
agreement with the City, utilize the City's stormwater drainage system.
(§ 2, Ord. 2755, eff. April 4, 2002)
Sec. 6-6.203. Notice.
   Unless otherwise provided herein, any notice required by this chapter shall
be in writing and served in person, by first class, registered or certified
mail. Notice shall be deemed to have been given at the time of deposit, postage
or prepaid, in a facility regularly serviced by the United States Postal
Service.
(§ 2, Ord. 2755, eff. April 4, 2002)
Sec. 6-6.204. Connections.
   (a)   The discharge or diversion of stormwater or non-stormwater is
permissible when the connection to the City's stormwater drainage system is
made in accordance with a valid construction permit, approved construction
plan, and, if applicable, an NPDES Stormwater Permit and the discharge is not
prohibited under §
6-6.206 of this chapter.
   (b)   It is prohibited to establish, use maintain and/or continue any
illicit drainage connections to the City's stormwater drainage system. This
prohibition is retroactive and applies to connections made in the past,
regardless of whether the connection was made under a permit or other
authorization or whether the connection was permissible under the law or
practices applicable or prevailing at the time of the connection.
   (c)   Construction permits are required for the construction or modification
of any storm drain or conveyor of drainage waters and appurtenant items within:
      (1)   Dedicated easements, rights-of-way, or public place and/or
facility.
      (2)   Private property so as it may directly or indirectly discharge into
the City's stormwater drainage system. Indirect discharges include, but are not
limited to, under sidewalk drains, driveway approaches, and unrestricted sheet
flow.
(§ 2, Ord. 2755, eff. April 4, 2002)
Sec. 6-6.205. Protection of the stormwater drainage system.
   Without the prior written approval of the City's Engineer, no person shall
construct, modify or cause to be constructed or modified any structure,
facility or appurtenant items which may alter the normal functioning of the
City's stormwater drainage system, including any action which may alter the
capacity, fall, or structural integrity of a storm drain, channel or related
structures.
(§ 2, Ord. 2755, eff. April 4, 2002)
Sec. 6-6.206. Prohibited discharges.
   It is prohibited to:
   (a)   Discharge non-stormwater directly or indirectly to the City's
stormwater drainage system, or any street, lined or unlined drainage channel
which leads to the City's storm drain or directly or indirectly into any waters
of the State unless such discharge is authorized by either a separate NPDES
permit or as otherwise specified in §
6-6.207 of this chapter, if such discharge is permitted by a NPDES permit or is
generally exempted, but causes the City to violate any portion of its NPDES
permits for stormwater discharges, such discharge is also prohibited;
   (b)   Discharge stormwater into the City's stormwater drainage system
containing pollutants that have not been reduced to the maximum extent
practicable;
   (c)   Throw, deposit, leave, maintain, keep, or permit to be thrown,
deposited, placed, left or
maintained, any refuse, garbage, sediment or other discarded or abandoned
objects, articles, and accumulations, in or upon any street, alley sidewalk,
storm drain, inlet, catch basin, conduit or other drainage structures, business
place, or upon any public or private lot of land in the City, so that the same
may be and/or may become a pollutant.
   (d)   Throw or deposit any refuse, garbage or any other pollutants into any
fountain, pond, lake, stream or any other body of water in a park or elsewhere
within the City.
   (e)   Discharge any of the following types of waste into the City's
stormwater drainage system:
      (1)   Sewage;
      (2)   Surface cleaning wash water resulting from mopping, rinsing,
pressure washing or steam cleaning of gas stations, and vehicle service
businesses or any other business;
      (3)   Discharges resulting from the cleaning, repair, or maintenance of
any type of equipment, machinery, or facility including motor vehicles,
concrete mixing equipment, portable toilet servicing, etc.;
      (4)   Wash water from mobile auto detailing and washing, steam and
pressure cleaning, carpet cleaning, drapery and furniture cleaning, etc.;
      (5)   Waste water from cleaning municipal, industrial, commercial,
residential areas (including parking lots), streets, sidewalks, driveways,
patios, plazas, work yards and outdoor eating or drinking areas, containing
chemicals or detergents and without prior sweeping, etc.;
      (6)   Stormwater runoff from material or waste storage areas containing
chemicals, fuels, grease, oil or other hazardous materials or contaminated
equipment;
      (7)   Discharges from pool or fountain water containing chlorine,
biocides, acids or other chemicals; pool filter backwash containing debris and
chlorine;
      (8)   Pet waste, yard waste, debris, sediment, etc.;
      (9)   Restaurant wastes such as grease, mop water, and wash water from
cleaning dishes, utensils, laundry, floors, floor mats, trash bins, grease
containers, food waste, etc.;
      (10)   Chemicals or chemical waste;
      (11)   Medical wastes;
      (12)   Blow down or bleed water from cooling towers and boilers,
regenerative brine waste from water softeners or reverse osmosis treatment
systems;
      (13)   Materials or chemical substances that cause damage to the City's
stormwater drainage system;
      (14)   Any other material that causes or contributes to a condition of
contamination, nuisance or pollution in the City's storm drainage system or
causes a violation of any waste disposal regulations, waste discharge
requirements, water quality standards or objectives adopted by the State Water
Resources Control Board, Regional Water Quality Control Board, EPA, San
Bernardino County Fire Hazmat, San Bernardino County Flood Control District or
any other public agency with jurisdiction.
(§ 2, Ord. 2755, eff. April 4, 2002)
Sec. 6-6.207. Exceptions to the prohibited discharges.
   (a)   The following discharges of non-stormwater into the City's storm
drainage system are generally exempt from the Prohibited Discharges listed in §
6-6.206 of this chapter. However, items 12 through 22, below, have been
identified as potential significant sources of pollutants and require coverage
under the Regional Board's De Minimus Permit as well as prior approval by the
City's Engineering Department, Environmental Section, before discharge (see
*note below):
       (1)   Discharges covered by NPDES permits or written clearances issued
by the Regional or State Board;
      (2)   Landscape irrigation, lawn watering, and irrigation water;
      (3)   Water from crawl space pumps;
      (4)   Air conditioning condensation;
      (5)   Non-commercial car washing;
      (6)   Rising ground waters and natural springs;
      (7)   Ground water infiltration as defined in 40 CFR 35.2005 (20) and
uncontaminated pumped ground water;
      (8)   Water flows from riparian habitats and wetlands;
      (9)   Water flows generated from emergency response and/or fire fighting
activities, however, appropriate BMPs shall be implemented to the extent
practicable; BMPs must be implemented to reduce pollutants from non-emergency
fire fighting flow;
      (10)   Waters not otherwise containing wastes as defined in Cal. Water
Code § 13050(d),
      (11)   Other types of discharges identified and recommended by the City
and approved by the Regional Water Quality Control Board.
      (12)   *Potable water line testing or flushing and other discharges from
potable water sources;
      (13)   *Water from fire hydrant testing and flushing using appropriate
BMPs;
      (14)   *Water from passive foundation drains or passive footing drains;
      (15)   *Dechlorinated swimming pool discharges;
      (16)   *Diverted stream flow;
      (17)   *Wastes associated with well installation, development, test
pumping and purging;
      (18)   *Aquifer testing wastes;
      (19)   *Discharges from hydrostatic testing of vessels, pipelines, tanks,
etc.;
      (20)   *Discharges from the maintenance of potable water supply
pipelines, tanks, reservoirs, etc.;
      (21)   *Discharges from the disinfection of potable water supply
pipelines, tanks, reservoirs, etc.;
      (22)   *Discharges from potable water supply systems resulting from
system failures, pressure releases, etc.;
   *Note: The City of Ontario requires that a “Non-Stormwater Discharge
Notification Form be submitted to the Engineering Department for approval of
these discharges, five days prior to any planned discharges or, as soon as
possible, for any unplanned discharges. The Notification Form is available from
the Engineering Department counter. Monitoring may also be required for these
discharges.
   The Regional Board may issue Waste Discharge Requirements for discharges
exempted from NPDES requirements, if identified to be a significant source of
pollutants. The Executive Officer of the Board may also add categories of non-
stormwater discharges that are not significant sources of pollutants or remove
categories of non-stormwater discharges listed above based upon a finding that
the discharges are a significant source of pollutants. In this case, the list
of exempted discharges, above, would be adjusted accordingly.
(§ 2, Ord. 2755, eff. April 4, 2002)
Sec. 6-6.208. Compliance with best management practices (BMPs).
   Any person undertaking any activity or operation in the City of Ontario that
could potentially cause or contribute to stormwater pollution or a discharge of
non-stormwater shall comply with all applicable Best Management Practices
(BMPs) as listed in the California Stormwater Best Management Practice
Handbooks or the current, San Bernardino County Stormwater Program's “Report of
Waste Discharge”, to reduce pollutants in stormwater runoff and reduce non-
stormwater discharges to the City's stormwater drainage system to the maximum
extent practicable or to the extent required by law.
(§ 2, Ord. 2755, eff. April 4, 2002)
Sec. 6-6.209. Affirmative defense.
   A discharger shall have an affirmative defense in any action brought against
it alleging a violation of §
6-6.206 of this chapter where the discharger can demonstrate it did not know or
have reason to know that its discharge, alone or in conjunction with a
discharge or discharges from other sources, would cause violation of this
chapter or the Areawide Urban Stormwater Runoff Permit.
(§ 2, Ord. 2755, eff. April 4, 2002)
Sec. 6-6.210. Spill containment.
   Persons storing chemicals or chemical waste outdoors shall be required to
install spill containment subject to requirements established by the City
Engineer and Federal, State and County Standards. Persons storing any other
materials or equipment that are potential sources of stormwater pollution are
also required to install spill containment. No person shall operate a spill
containment system that could allow incompatible materials and/or wastes to
mix, thereby creating hazardous or toxic substances in the event of failure of
one or more containers.
   Spill containment systems shall consist of a system of dikes, walls,
barriers, berms and/or other devices designed to contain the spillage of the
liquid contents of the containers stored in them and to minimize the buildup of
stormwater from precipitation, and run-on from roof drainage and outside areas.
If the spill containment system does not have a roof which covers the entire
contained area, the spill containment system shall have the capacity to contain
precipitation from at least a twenty-four (24) hour, twenty-five (25) year
rainfall event plus ten percent (10%) of the total volume of the material
stored there or the volume of the largest container, whichever is greater.
Spill containment systems shall also be constructed of impermeable and non-
reactive materials to the materials and/or wastes being contained.
   Spilled and/or leaked materials and/or wastes and any accumulated
precipitation shall be removed from the spill containment system in as timely a
manner as is necessary to prevent the overflow of the spill containment system.
Unless otherwise approved by the City Engineer, all chemicals or wastes
discharged within the spill containment system shall be disposed of in
accordance with all applicable Federal, State, and local rules, regulations,
and laws, and shall not be discharged into the City's sanitary sewer system,
stormwater drainage system or onto the ground.
(§ 2, Ord. 2755, eff. April 4, 2002)
Sec. 6-6.211. Immediate notification of accidental discharge.
   Protection of the City's stormwater drainage system from the accidental
discharge of prohibited materials or wastes is the responsibility of the person
or persons in charge of such material. Detailed plans showing facilities and
operating procedures to provide this protection shall be submitted to the City
for review, and shall be approved by the City Engineer prior to any
construction. All new and existing dischargers shall complete such a plan.
Review and approval of such plans and operating procedures shall not relieve
the discharger from the responsibility to modify his or her facility as
necessary to meet the requirements of this chapter.
   A notice shall be permanently posted in a prominent place advising employees
whom to contact in the event of an accidental discharge. Employers shall ensure
that all employees are advised of the emergency notification procedures. In the
event of an accidental discharge, it is the responsibility of the discharger to
immediately telephone and notify the proper authorities.
   All discharges released into the City's stormwater drainage system,
including a street or gutter, shall be immediately reported to the City's
Engineering Department and Fire Department. All discharges that pose a threat
to human health or the environment shall be reported to the Executive Officer
of the California Regional Water Quality Control Board within twenty-four (24)
hours by telephone or e-mail and followed with a written report of the spill
event within five (5) days. At a minimum, all sewage spills over one thousand
(1,000) gallons and all reportable quantities of hazardous materials or
hazardous waste shall be reported within twenty-four (24) hours.
(§ 2, Ord. 2755, eff. April 4, 2002)
Sec. 6-6.212. Written notification of accidental discharge.
   Within five (5) working days following an accidental discharge into the
City's stormwater drainage system, the person or persons in charge of the
material and/or waste which was accidentally discharged shall submit a written
report to the City Engineer. The report shall describe in detail the type and
volume of the material and/or waste and the cause of the discharge. The report
shall also describe in detail all corrective actions taken and measures to be
taken to prevent future occurrences.
   Such notification of the accidental discharge shall not relieve the user of
any fines or civil penalties incurred as a result of the event or any other
liability which may be imposed by this chapter or other applicable laws.
(§ 2, Ord. 2755, eff. April 4, 2002)
Sec. 6-6.213. Authority to inspect.
   (a)   The City Engineer or his or her designated representative shall be
authorized, at any reasonable time, to enter the premises of any discharger to
the City's stormwater drainage system to determine compliance with the
provisions of this chapter, and to:
      (1)   Conduct inspection, monitoring, and/or other authorized duties to
enforce the provisions of this chapter;
      (2)   Review any records, reports, test results or other information
required to enforce the provisions of this chapter. Such review may include the
necessity to photograph, videotape, or copy any applicable information; and
      (3)   Inspect any chemicals, materials, wastes, storage areas, storage
containers, and waste generating processes, treatment facilities, and discharge
locations. Such inspection may include the necessity to photograph or videotape
any applicable chemicals, materials, wastes, storage areas, storage containers,
waste generating processes, treatment facilities, and discharge locations.
   (b)   The City Engineer or his or her designated representative shall
provide adequate identification when entering the premises of any discharger.
If such entry is refused or cannot be obtained, the City Engineer shall have
recourse to every remedy provided by law to secure lawful entry and inspection
of the premises.
   (c)   If the City Engineer has reasonable cause to believe that non-
stormwater discharge conditions on or emanating from the premises are of a
nature so as to require immediate inspection to safeguard public health or
safety, the City Engineer shall have the right to immediately enter and inspect
said property and may use any reasonable means required to effect such entry
and make such inspection, regardless if said property is occupied or unoccupied
and regardless if formal permission to inspect said property has been obtained.
   (d)   Where a discharger has instituted security measures requiring proper
identification and clearance before entry onto the premises, the discharger
shall make all necessary arrangements with its security agents in order that,
upon presentation of such identification, the City Engineer or his or her
designated representative(s) shall be permitted to enter the premises without
delay, for the purpose of performing their authorized duties. For facilities,
which require special clearances to conduct inspections, it shall be the
responsibility of the discharger to obtain all necessary clearances on behalf
of the City so that the inspection is not impaired.
(§ 2, Ord. 2755, eff. April 4, 2002)
Article 3. Residential Requirements
Sec. 6-6.301. Prohibited discharges.
   In addition to the General Prohibitions in §
6-6.206 of this chapter, it is prohibited to discharge any of the following to
any street, gutter, alley, sidewalk, storm drain inlet, catch basin, conduit or
other drainage structures, business place, or upon any public or private lot of
land in the City, so that the same may be and/or may become a pollutant:
   (a)   Animal waste, soil, leaves, plant and tree cuttings, grass clippings,
weeds, dead trees, fertilizer, soil amendments or mulch, and pesticides;
   (b)   Concrete or cement waste, brick and tile work wastes, plaster and
drywall tool cleanup water, waste paint or painting cleanup water, asphalt or
asphalt cleanup solvents or slurry from saw cutting concrete or asphalt and
other construction waste;
   (c)   Domestic sewage including wastewater from sinks, washing machines,
dishwashers, toilets, campers, motorhomes or trailers;
   (d)   Chemicals, degreasers, bleach, steam cleaning or pressure washing
wastewater;
   (e)   Motor oil, antifreeze, gasoline, diesel, kerosene, solvents, battery
acid, brake fluid, transmission fluid, power steering fluid, engine cleaning
compounds, engine or parts cleaning washwater or rinsewater and any other
vehicular fluids;
   (f)   Water softener brine waste, or any other waste water from other
household water treatment systems;
   (g)   Waste water from draining swimming pools, ponds or fountains which
contain chlorine biocides, acids or other chemicals, pool filter backwash
containing debris and chlorine;
   (h)   Discharges from acid cleaning of swimming pools, ponds or fountains or
filter cleaning from the same;
   (i)   Any other material that causes or contributes to a condition of
contamination, nuisance or pollution in the City's storm drainage system or
causes a violation of any waste disposal regulations, waste discharge
requirements, water quality standards or objectives adopted by the State Water
Resources Control Board, Regional Water Quality Control Board.
(§ 2, Ord. 2755, eff. April 4, 2002)
Sec. 6-6.302. Responsibility for illegal discharge of prohibited substances.
   The property owner(s) of a lot or parcel from which an illegal discharge
originates shall be ultimately responsible for all abatement and cleanup costs
associated with the discharge, at his own expense, if the responsible party
cannot be located. Likewise, if the tenant of a multi-family residential unit
has discharged a prohibited material or waste into the City's storm drainage
system or has caused the contamination of stormwater runoff from the property
by his activities and the City Engineer cannot determine the responsible party
or residential unit responsible, the owner of the property from which the
discharge originated, shall be responsible for the cleanup and abatement costs
to mitigate the condition. Additionally, a property owner will be responsible
for all cleanup costs and damages to the City's storm drainage system from a
contractor's activities, if the contractor was hired by the owner and cannot be
located.
(§ 2, Ord. 2755, eff. April 4, 2002)
Sec. 6-6.303. Maintenance of private residential storm drainage systems.
   (a)   All private residential storm drainage inlets, underdrains and gutters
shall be inspected annually and cleaned prior to the beginning of the rainy
season if there is evidence of one or more of the following conditions:
      (1)   The sediment/debris storage volume is twenty-five percent (25%) or
more full;
      (2)   There is evidence of illegal discharge;
      (3)   Accumulated sediment or debris impairs the hydraulic function of
the facility.
   (b)   Private streets shall also be swept and maintained as needed to
prevent sediment, gardening waste, trash, litter and other contaminants from
entering the City's storm drainage system.
(§ 2, Ord. 2755, eff. April 4, 2002)
Article 4. Industrial and Commercial Requirements
Sec. 6-6.401. Non-stormwater discharges.
   All non-stormwater discharges associated with industrial and commercial
activities that discharge into the City's stormwater drainage system are
prohibited except as permitted by an individual user's NPDES Stormwater Permit
or §
6-6.207 of this chapter.
(§ 2, Ord. 2755, eff. April 4, 2002)
Sec. 6-6.402. General permit for stormwater discharges from industrial
activities.
   (a)   All businesses who own or operate facilities described in 40 CFR
122.26(b)(14)(i)-(xi) are required to obtain coverage under the State's General
Permit for Discharges of Stormwater Associated with Industrial Activities, at
least fourteen (14) days prior to the startup of business activities. All
listed businesses are required to submit a completed Notice of Intent (NOI)
form, site map and application fee to the State Water Resources Control Board
(SWRCB). The SWRCB also requires the listed businesses to prepare a Stormwater
Pollution Prevention Plan (SWPPP), retain a copy of the SWPPP on site and
comply with all the requirements of the general permit. Copies of the NOI form
are available from the City's Engineering Department, Environmental Section.
   (b)   The City of Ontario requires that all businesses that have filed an
NOI for coverage under the State's General Permit and have received a Waste
Discharge Identification Number (WDID) from the State Water Resources Control
Board, either mail, FAX or hand deliver a copy of the WDID letter from the
State to the Engineering Department, Environmental Section as proof of filing.
(§ 2, Ord. 2755, eff. April 4, 2002)
Sec. 6-6.403. Conditional category - Notice of non-applicability.
   (a)   Businesses who own or operate facilities described in 40 CFR 122.26(b)
(14)(xi) may prepare a “NOTICE OF NON-APPLICABILITY” in lieu of an NOI if they
can certify on this form provided by the State Water Resources Control Board
that there is no manufacturing process, material, equipment or product storage
outside in an area that is exposed to stormwater runoff. The “Notice of Non-
Applicability” must document all of the following:
      (1)   All prohibited non-stormwater discharges have been eliminated or
otherwise permitted;
      (2)   All significant materials related to industrial activity (including
waste materials) are not exposed to stormwater or authorized non-stormwater
discharges;
      (3)   All industrial activities and industrial equipment are not exposed
to stormwater or authorized non-stormwater discharges;
      (4)   There is no exposure of stormwater to significant materials
associated with industrial activity through other direct or indirect pathways
such as from industrial activities that generate dust and particulates.
   (b)   Businesses in this category are required to submit the Notice of Non-
Applicability to the local office of the California Regional Water Quality
Control Board, Santa Ana Region, and are required to maintain the above
documentation on-site at all times. They are also required to re- evaluate and
re-certify once a year that the conditions above are continuously met. Copies
of the “Notice of Non-Applicability” form are available from the City's
Engineering Department, Environmental Section.
(§ 2, Ord. 2755, eff. April 4, 2002)
Sec. 6-6.404. Best management practices (BMPs).
   (a)   All businesses, regardless of permit status, shall implement all
applicable BMPs, as listed in the California Stormwater Best Management
Practice Handbooks or the current, San Bernardino County Stormwater Program's
Report of Waste Discharge, to reduce pollutants in stormwater runoff and reduce
non-stormwater discharges to the City's stormwater drainage system to the
maximum extent practicable. All structural controls shall also be maintained to
effectively prevent pollutants from contacting stormwater or remove pollutants
from stormwater runoff to the maximum extent practicable. Maintenance records
for structural and treatment devices, including waste hauling receipts shall be
kept for a period of five (5) years and made available to the City's inspector,
upon request.
   (b)   If structural or treatment controls are not functioning as designed or
are not effective in reducing stormwater pollutants or non-stormwater
discharges to the maximum extent practicable, the City will require that the
control device be repaired, rebuilt or replaced.
(§ 2, Ord. 2755, eff. April 4, 2002)
Article 5. Construction Requirements
Sec. 6-6.501. Stormwater quality management Plan (SWQMP).
   Prior to the issuance of any grading or building permit, all qualifying land
development/redevelopment projects, shall submit and have approved a Stormwater
Quality Management Plan (SWQMP) to the City Engineer on a form provided by the
City. The SWQMP shall identify all BMPs that will be incorporated into the
project to control stormwater and non-stormwater pollutants during and after
construction and shall be revised as necessary during the life of the project.
The SWQMP submittal applies to construction projects covered by the NPDES
General Construction Permit as well as construction projects less than five (5)
acres. Qualifying development/redevelopment projects include:
   (a)   Home subdivisions of ten (10) units or more. This includes single
family residences, multi-family residences, condominiums, apartments, etc.;
    (b)   Commercial developments of one hundred thousand (100,000) square feet
or more. This includes non-residential developments such as hospitals,
educational institutions, recreational facilities, mini- malls, hotels, office
buildings, warehouses, and light industrial facilities;
   (c)   Vehicle maintenance shops (SIC codes 5013, 5014, 5541, 7532-7534,
7536-7539);
   (d)   Food service businesses developing five thousand (5,000) square feet
or more of land area;
   (e)   All hillside developments on ten thousand (10,000) square feet or
more, which are located on areas with known erosive soil conditions or where
the natural slope is twenty-five percent (25%) or more;
   (f)   Developments of two thousand five hundred (2,500) square feet of
impervious surface or more adjacent to (within two hundred (200) feet) or
discharging directly into environmentally sensitive areas such as areas
designated in the Ocean Plan as areas of special biological significance or
water bodies listed on the CWA Section 303(d) list of impaired waters;
   (g)   Parking lots of five thousand (5,000) square feet or more exposed to
stormwater. “Parking lot” is defined as land area or facility for the temporary
storage of motor vehicles;
   (h)   All re-development projects adding five thousand (5,000) square feet
or more of impervious surface on an already developed site. This includes
additional buildings and/or structures, extension of an already existing
building footprint and construction of parking lots, etc.
(§ 2, Ord. 2755, eff. April 4, 2002)
Sec. 6-6.502. General permit for stormwater discharges from construction
activity.
   (a)   Any developer/owner engaging in construction activities which disturb
five (5) acres or more of land shall apply for coverage under the General
Stormwater Permit for Construction Activity with the State Water Resources
Control Board (SWRCB). Any developer/owner engaging in construction activities
which disturb less than five (5) acres but are part of a larger common plan of
development or sale that is greater than five (5)acres must also apply for
coverage under the General Stormwater Permit for Construction Activity with the
State Water Resources Control Board (SWRCB). “Construction activity” includes,
but is not limited to: clearing, grading, demolition, excavation, construction
of new structures, and reconstruction of existing facilities involving removal
and replacement that results in soil disturbance. The owner of the land where
the construction activity is occurring is responsible for obtaining coverage
under the permit. Owners may obtain coverage under the General Permit by
completing a “Notice of Intent” form (NOI) and mailing the form along with a
vicinity map and the appropriate fee to the office of the California State
Water Resources Control Board. The NOI form and checklist of items to submit to
the state is available from the State Water Resources Control Board in
Sacramento, California or from the City's Engineering Department, Environmental
section. In addition, the owner shall also prepare a Stormwater Pollution
Prevention Plan (SWPPP) in accordance with State requirements.
   (b)   Prior to obtaining any City-issued grading and/or construction permits
the developer/owner shall provide evidence of compliance with the General
Construction Permit by providing a copy of the Waste Discharger's
Identification Number (WDID) to the City's Engineering Department.
(§ 2, Ord. 2755, eff. April 4, 2002)
Sec. 6-6.503. Non-stormwater discharges.
   (a)   Discharges of non-stormwater from construction activities are
generally prohibited except for those discharges listed in §
6-6.207 of this chapter or any discharges authorized by the City Engineer or
the Regional Water Quality Control Board (RWQCB). The City and the RWQCB will
allow the discharge of certain non-stormwater discharges from construction
sites provided that they are in compliance with the discharge limitations
specified in the current General Waste Discharge Requirements for De Minimus
Discharges issued by the Regional Water Quality Control Board, Santa Ana
Region.
   (b)   The following discharges are authorized provided they are in
compliance with the permit:
      (1)   Construction dewatering wastes;
      (2)   Wastes associated with well installation, development, test pumping
and purging;
      (3)   Aquifer testing wastes;
      (4)   Dewatering wastes from subterranean seepage, except for discharges
from utility company vaults;
      (5)   Discharges resulting from hydrostatic testing of vessels,
pipelines, tanks, etc.;
      (6)   Discharges resulting from the maintenance of potable water supply
pipelines, tanks, reservoirs, etc.;
      (7)   Discharges resulting from the disinfection of potable water supply
pipelines, tanks, reservoirs, etc.;
      (8)   Discharges from potable water supply systems resulting from system
failures, pressure releases, etc.;
      (9)   Discharges from fire hydrant testing or flushing.
(§ 2, Ord. 2755, eff. April 4, 2002)
Sec. 6-6.504. Non-stormwater discharge reporting requirements.
   Authorized non-stormwater discharges under §
6-6.503 shall be reported to the City Engineer at least five (5) days prior to
a planned discharge. Unplanned discharges of non-stormwater into the City's
storm drainage system shall be reported as soon as possible and before any
discharge is initiated. The City's Engineering Department, Environmental
Section will provide a “Non-Stormwater Discharge Notification Form” for any
developer that is proposing to discharge any non-stormwater from a construction
site. The Non-Stormwater Discharge Notification Form must be submitted to the
Engineering Department, Environmental Section, for these discharges, at least
five (5) days prior to any planned discharge or as soon as possible for any
unplanned discharge. Monitoring may also be required for these discharges. If
the City provided form is not utilized, a report shall be submitted prior to
discharge which includes the following information:
   (a)   Type of proposed discharge;
   (b)   Estimated average and maximum daily flow rate;
   (c)   Frequency and duration of discharge;
   (d)   A description of the proposed treatment system (if appropriate);
   (e)   A description of the path from the point of discharge to the nearest
storm drain inlet. All discharges shall be monitored daily for flow volume and
shall be recorded in a daily log by the person responsible for the discharge.
Discharges shall also be sampled during the first thirty (30) minutes of each
discharge and weekly thereafter for continuous discharges for chlorine and
total suspended solids. Monitoring data for flow, chlorine and suspended solids
and any other required constituents shall be reported to the City's Engineering
Department, Environmental section on a weekly basis.
(§ 2, Ord. 2755, eff. April 4, 2002)
Sec. 6-6.505. Best management practices.
   All construction projects which could potentially have an adverse impact on
the City's stormwater drainage system or waters of the state shall install and/
or implement appropriate construction and post- construction BMPs, as listed in
their SWQMP or the “California Stormwater Best Management Practice Handbook”,
to reduce pollutants to the maximum extent practicable or to the extent
required by law.
(§ 2, Ord. 2755, eff. April 4, 2002)
Sec. 6-6.506. WQMP transfer, access, and maintenance agreement.
   The City Manager or his or her designee is authorized to sign all water
quality management plan access, transfer and maintenance agreement documents
entered into by the City with project proponents for the on-going and long-term
maintenance of all approved stormwater treatment devices, structures and
administrative policies designed to minimize the detrimental effects of new
development projects on receiving waters, including effects caused by increased
pollutant loads and changes in hydrology.
(§ 1, Ord. 2849, eff. February 16, 2007)
Article 6. Administrative Enforcement Remedies
Sec. 6-6.601. Notice of correction (NOC).
   Whenever the City Engineer or his designee finds that any discharger has the
potential to violate or has already violated any prohibition, limitation or
requirement contained in this chapter, any NPDES stormwater permit or the Basin
Plan, the City may serve upon such person a written Notice of Correction
stating the nature of the violation and the necessary actions that must be
implemented to correct the situation. The NOC shall stipulate a time period by
which the problem must be corrected and the penalties for non-compliance.
(§ 2, Ord. 2755, eff. April 4, 2002)
Sec. 6-6.602. Notice of violation.
   When the City Engineer or his or her authorized representative finds that
any discharger has failed to comply with a Notice of Correction or has violated
or continues to violate any prohibition, limitation or requirement contained in
this chapter, any NPDES stormwater permit or the Basin Plan, the City may serve
upon such person a written Notice of Violation stating the nature of the
violation and the penalties for non-compliance. At a minimum, the Notice of
Violation shall require that the discharger submit to the City Engineer, within
a time period specified in the notice, a plan indicating the cause of the
violation and corrective actions which will be taken to prevent recurrence. A
discharger shall be guilty of a separate offense for every day during any
portion of which any violation of any provision of this chapter is committed,
continued, or permitted by the discharger. Pursuant to Cal. Gov't Code §
53069.4 and 36900(b) the following violation assessments will apply to the
issuance of a Notice of Violation by the City Engineer or his or her authorized
representative:
   (a)   A first Notice of Violation shall be issued for a first violation of
this chapter and shall be punishable by a fine not exceeding One Hundred
Dollars ($100.00);
   (b)   A second Notice of Violation shall be issued for a second violation of
this same ordinance within one year and shall be punishable by a fine not
exceeding Two Hundred Dollars ($200.00);
   (c)   A third Notice of Violation shall be issued for a third violation of
this same ordinance within one (1) year and shall be punishable by a fine not
exceeding Five Hundred Dollars ($500.00). Each additional violation of the same
ordinance within one (1) year shall also be punishable by a fine of Five
Hundred Dollars ($500.00).
(§ 2, Ord. 2755, eff. April 4, 2002)
Sec. 6-6.603. Administrative orders.
   The City Engineer may require compliance with any prohibition, limitation or
requirement contained in this chapter, any NPDES stormwater permit or the Basin
Plan, by issuing an Administrative Order, enforceable in a court of law or by
directly seeking court action. Administrative orders may include Compliance
Orders, Stop Work Orders, Cease and Desist Orders, Termination of Service
Orders and Immediate Termination of Service Orders.
   (a)   Compliance orders. The City Engineer or his or her designee may issue
a Compliance Order to any discharger who fails to correct a violation of this
chapter, any NPDES stormwater permit or the Basin Plan. The order shall be in
writing, specify the violation(s) and require appropriate compliance measures
within a specified time period. The Compliance Order may include the following
terms and requirements:
      (1)   Specific steps and time schedules for compliance as reasonably
necessary to eliminate an existing prohibited discharge or illegal connection
or to prevent the imminent threat of a prohibited discharge;
      (2)   Specific requirements for containment, cleanup, removal, storage,
installation of overhead covering or proper disposal of any pollutant having
the potential to contact stormwater runoff;
      (3)   Installation of stormwater treatment devices, containment
structures, wash racks and addition and removal of stormwater drains;
      (4)   Any other terms or requirements reasonably calculated to prevent
imminent threat of or continuing violations of this chapter, including, but not
limited to requirements for compliance with best management practices guidance
documents promulgated by any federal, state or regional agency.
   The City Engineer or his or her designee may adopt a proposed compliance
schedule submitted by the user or may adopt a revised compliance schedule if in
his judgement, the proposed compliance schedule would allow the user to cause
harm to the receiving waters and/or the City's storm drainage system.
   A Compliance Order shall require the discharger to pay a One Thousand Dollar
($1,000) penalty fee to the City for the issuance thereof.
   (b)   Stop work order. The City Engineer or Building Official may serve a
written Stop Work Order on any person engaged in doing or causing to be done,
new construction, tenant improvements, alterations or additions, if:
      (1)   No construction permit has been granted by the City;
      (2)   Work has begun prior to the submittal of a written Stormwater
Quality Management Plan (SWQMP) and subsequent approval by the City Engineer or
his or her designee; or,
      (3)   Violations of this article are found at the site of the new
construction, tenant improvements, alterations or additions.
   Any person served a Stop Work Order shall stop such work forthwith until
written authorization to continue is received from the City Engineer or
Building Official. A Stop Work Order shall require the discharger to pay a One
Thousand Dollar ($1,000) penalty fee to the City for the issuance thereof.
   (c)   Cease and desist order. When the City Engineer or his or her designee
finds that any industrial and/or commercial discharger has violated or
threatens to violate any prohibition, limitation or requirement contained in
this chapter, any NPDES stormwater permit or the Basin Plan, or NPDES
Stormwater Permit, the City may issue a Cease and Desist Order directing the
discharger to:
      (1)   Immediately discontinue any illicit connection or prohibited
discharge to the City's stormwater drainage system;
      (2)   Immediately contain or divert any flow of water off the property,
where the flow is occurring in violation of any provision of this chapter;
      (3)   Immediately discontinue any other violation of this chapter.
   A Cease and Desist Order shall require the discharger to pay a One Thousand
Dollar ($1,000) penalty fee to the City for the issuance thereof.
   (d)   Termination of service. When the City Engineer finds any industrial
and/or commercial discharger, who has a direct connection into the City's
stormwater drainage system or has violated an Administrative Order, the City
Engineer may terminate storm drain service to the discharger. The discharger
shall be liable for all costs for termination of storm drain service incurred
by the City. This provision is in addition to any other statues, rules or
regulations authorizing termination of service for delinquency payment or for
any other reasons. Storm drain service shall be re-instituted by the City
Engineer after the discharger has complied with all the provisions of the
Administrative Order. The discharger shall also be liable for all costs for re-
instituting storm drain service.
   (e)   Immediate termination of service. The City Engineer may immediately
suspend storm drain service and any non-stormwater discharge permit when such
suspension is necessary, in the opinion of the City Engineer, to stop an actual
or threatened discharge which presents or may present an imminent or
substantial endangerment to the health or welfare of persons or the
environment, or which significantly or could significantly cause pollution to
the receiving waters, ground and/or storm drainage system of the City. Any
industrial and/or commercial discharger notified that their storm drain service
has been suspended shall immediately cease and eliminate the discharge into the
City stormwater drainage system.
   In the event of failure to comply voluntarily with the Termination of
Service Order, the City Engineer shall take appropriate steps, including
immediate severance of all applicable storm drain connections. All persons
responsible for a discharge that may endanger the health or welfare of the
community or the environment shall be liable for all costs incurred by the City
in terminating storm drain service. Storm drain service shall be re-instituted
by the City Engineer after the actual or threatened discharge has been
eliminated. A detailed written statement, submitted by the industrial and/or
commercial discharger, describing the cause of the harmful contribution and the
measures to prevent any future occurrence, shall be submitted to the City
Engineer within ten (10) working days of the date of storm drain service
termination.
(§ 2, Ord. 2755, eff. April 4, 2002)
Sec. 6-6.604. Administrative hearing.
   (a)   Any discharger may request, or the City Engineer may order, an
administrative heating, at which time, a discharger who causes or allows, or
who has caused or allowed, an unauthorized discharge to enter into the City's
stormwater drainage system or who continues to allow a violation of this
chapter to exist, may show cause why a proposed enforcement action should not
be taken against him. The City Manager, or the City Manager's designee, shall
preside over the administrative heating, at which time each party, including
the discharger and the City Engineer or his or her designee, shall have the
right to present evidence.
   (b)   A Notice of Hearing shall be served on the discharger specifying the
time and place of the hearing and referencing the specific violation and/or
violations of this chapter, the reasons why the action is to be taken and the
proposed enforcement action, directing the discharger to show cause before the
Hearing Officer why the proposed enforcement action should not be taken. The
Notice of Hearing shall be served personally or by registered or certified
mail, return receipt requested at least ten (10) working days prior to the
hearing. Service of the Notice of Hearing may be made on any agent or officer
of the discharger.
(§ 2, Ord. 2755, eff. April 4, 2002)
Sec. 6-6.605. Administrative civil penalties.
   (a)   Pursuant to Cal. Gov't Code §§ 54739 and 54740.5, the City Engineer
may issue an administrative complaint to any person who violates this chapter,
any prohibition or limitation thereof or any compliance order, cease and desist
order, stop work order or injunction. The administrative complaint shall allege
the act or failure to act that constitutes the violation, the proposed civil
penalty, and the authority under which it is imposed.
   (b)   The administrative complaint, served on the alleged violator by
personal delivery or by certified mail, shall inform the person served that a
hearing before the City Engineer shall be conducted within sixty (60) days of
the service of the complaint. The right to a hearing may be waived by the
person who has been issued the administrative complaint, in which case the City
shall not conduct a hearing. A person dissatisfied with the decision of the
City Engineer may appeal to the City Council of the City of Ontario within
thirty (30) days of notice of the Engineer's decision.
   (c)   If after the hearing, or appeal, if any, it is found that the person
has violated reporting or discharge requirements, the City Engineer or City
Council may assess a civil penalty against that person. In determining the
amount of the civil penalty, the City Engineer or City Council may take into
consideration all relevant circumstances, including, but not limited to, the
extent of harm caused by the violation, the economic benefit derived through
any noncompliance, the nature and persistence of the violation, the length of
time over which the violation occurs and corrective action, if any, attempted
or taken by the discharger.
   (d)   Civil penalties may be assessed as follows:
      (1)   In an amount which shall not exceed Three Thousand Dollars ($3,000)
for each day for failing or refusing to timely comply with any compliance order
established by the City;
      (2)   In an amount which shall not exceed Five Thousand Dollars ($5,000)
per violation for each day of discharge in violation of any discharge
limitation, area-wide urban runoff permit condition, or requirement issued,
reissued or adopted by the City;
      (3)    In an amount which shall not exceed Ten Dollars ($10.00) per
gallon for discharges in violation of any stop work order, cease and desist
order or other orders, or prohibition issued, reissued, or adopted by the City.
      (4)   The amount of any civil penalties imposed under this section which
have remained delinquent for a period of sixty (60) days shall constitute a
lien against the real property of the discharger from which the discharge
originated resulting in the imposition of the civil penalty. The lien provided
herein shall have no force and effect until recorded with the County Recorder
and when recorded shall have the force and effect and priority of a judgement
lien and continue for ten (10) years from the time of recording unless sooner
released, and shall be renewable in accordance with the provisions of Cal. Code
of Civil Procedure §§ 683.110 to 683.220, inclusive.
      (5)   All monies collected under this section shall be deposited in a
special account of the City and shall be made available for the monitoring,
treatment, and control of discharges into the City's storm drainage system or
for other mitigation measures.
   (e)   Unless appealed, an order imposing administrative civil penalties
shall become effective and final upon issuance thereof, and payment shall
become due within thirty (30) days of issuance of an invoice by the City of
Ontario. Copies of these orders shall be served by personal service or by
registered mail upon the party served with the administrative complaint and
upon other persons who appeared at the hearing and requested a copy.
   (f)   The City may, at its option, elect to petition the Superior Court to
confirm any order establishing civil penalties and enter judgement in
conformity therewith in accordance with the provisions of Cal. Code of Civil
Procedure §§ 1285 to 1287.6, inclusive.
(§ 2, Ord. 2755, eff. April 4, 2002)
Sec. 6-6.606. Compensation for damages.
   Any person who damages monitoring equipment, has the potential to affect or
affects human health or the environment, discharges pollutants into the City's
storm drainage system which causes or has the potential to cause increased
maintenance of the system, non-routine inspection or sampling of the system,
system blockages or other damage or interference in the City's stormwater
drainage system, or causes any other damages, including the imposition of fines
or penalties on the City by Federal, State or local regulatory agencies, shall
be liable to the City for all damages and additional costs, including fines and
penalties. An administrative fee, which shall be fixed by the City Manager
based on the City's current overhead cost allocation percentage, shall be added
to these charges and shall be payable to the City within thirty (30) calendar
days of invoicing.
(§ 2, Ord. 2755, eff. April 4, 2002)
Sec. 6-6.607. Appeals.
   Any decision of the City Engineer may be appealed. An appeal must be
initiated within ten (10) working days after receipt of the notice of any
decision or action by filing, with the City Engineer, a letter of appeal
briefly stating therein the basis for such appeal. The heating on appeal shall
be held on a date no more than fifteen (15) working days after receipt of the
letter of appeal. The appellant shall be given at least five (5) working days
notice of the time and place of the hearing. The City Manager, or the City
Manager's designee, shall provide the appellant and any other interested party
the reasonable opportunity to be heard and in order to show cause why the
determination of City Engineer should not be upheld. Within forty-five (45)
working days of the hearing, the City Manager, or the City Manager's designee,
shall make a written decision regarding the appeal. The decision of the City
Manager, or the City Manager's designee, shall be final. The imposition of
fines or penalties shall be stayed during the appeal period unless the City
Engineer determines that such a stay would threaten the public safety, health
or welfare.
(§ 2, Ord. 2755, eff. April 4, 2002)
Sec. 6-6.608. Violations deemed a public nuisance.
   (a)   In addition to the penalties established by this chapter, any threat
to public health, safety or welfare shall be declared and deemed a public
nuisance. Such public nuisance may be summarily abated and/or remedied by the
City Engineer, and/or civil action to abate, enjoin or otherwise compel the
cessation of such nuisance may be taken by the City Attorney.
   (b)   The cost of such abatement, remediation and/or restoration shall be
borne by the owner, lessee or tenant of the property causing the violation. The
cost thereof shall be a lien upon and against the property and such lien shall
continue in existence until the same shall be paid.
(§ 2, Ord. 2755, eff. April 4, 2002)
Article 7. Judicial Enforcement Remedies
Sec. 6-6.701. Legal action.
   (a)   The City Attorney may commence an action for appropriate legal,
equitable or injunctive relief in the Municipal or Superior Court of the County
against any person who has violated or continues to violate any provision of
this chapter, the Basin Plan, Federal or State discharge standards or permit
conditions, or who violates the requirements of any Administrative Order.
   (b)   In addition to the penalties provided in this chapter, the City
Engineer may recover all reasonable attorney fees, court costs, court
reporter's fees, expenses of litigation by appropriate suit of law against the
person(s) found to have violated any provision of this chapter or the orders,
rules, regulations and permits issued thereunder and other expenses associated
with enforcement activities, including sampling and monitoring expenses, and
the cost of any actual damages incurred by the City of Ontario.
(§ 2, Ord. 2755, eff. April 4, 2002)
Sec. 6-6.702. Civil penalties.
   (a)   Persons who continue to violate any provision of this chapter shall be
liable to the City for a maximum civil penalty of Twenty-Five Thousand Dollars
($25,000) but not less than Three Thousand Dollars ($3,000) per violation per
day. In the case of a monthly or other long-term average discharge limit,
penalties shall accrue for each day during the period of the violation.
   (b)   In determining the amount of civil liability, the court shall take
into account all relevant circumstances, including, but not limited to, the
extent of harm caused by the violation, the magnitude and duration of the
violation, any economic benefit gained through the discharger's violation,
corrective actions by the discharger, the compliance history of the discharger,
and any factor as justice requires.
   (c)   Filing a suit for civil penalties shall not be a bar against, or a
prerequisite for taking any other action against a discharger. The City may
institute further legal action to collect such penalties in the event that the
violator of this chapter fails or refuses to pay said penalty within thirty
(30) days from the date that it has been assessed.
(§ 2, Ord. 2755, eff. April 4, 2002)
Sec. 6-6.703. Criminal prosecution.
   (a)   Any person who willfully or negligently violates any provision of this
chapter or permit conditions, or who violates any Administrative Order or any
other provision of this chapter is guilty of a misdemeanor, which, upon
conviction, is punishable by a fine of not less than Three Thousand Dollars
($3,000) and/or by imprisonment for a period of not more than six (6) months.
Each such person shall be deemed guilty of a separate offense for every day
during any portion of which any violation of any provisions of this chapter is
committed, continued or permitted by such discharger, and shall be punishable
therefore as provided by this section.
   (b)   Any person who knowingly makes any false statements, representations,
or certifications in any application, record, report, plan, or other
documentation filed, or required to be maintained, pursuant to this chapter,
stormwater permit, or order issued hereunder, or who falsifies, tampers with,
or knowingly renders inaccurate any monitoring device or method required under
this ordinance shall, upon conviction, be punished by a fine of not less than
Three Thousand Dollars ($3,000) per day of violation or by imprisonment or by
both.
(§ 2, Ord. 2755, eff. April 4, 2002)
Sec. 6-6.704. Falsifying information.
   Any person who knowingly makes any false statement, representation, record,
report, plan or other document filed with the City, or who falsifies, tampers
with or knowingly renders inaccurate monitoring devices or methods required
under this chapter, shall have violated this chapter and shall be guilty of a
misdemeanor.
(§ 2, Ord. 2755, eff. April 4, 2002)
Article 8. Fees and Charges
Sec. 6-6.801. Basic assessment unit (BAU).
   (a)   A BAU represents the proportionate stormwater runoff from the average
single family residential parcel. The average single family residential parcel
has an area of 0.1666 acres (7,200 square feet) and a runoff factor of 0.695.
The level of runoff from this type of property is referred to as one Basic
Assessment Unit and is used to establish user class equivalency. All single
family residential are assessed one BAU. Each residential living unit that has
a separate water service meter shall be classified as a single family unit. All
other living units shall be classified as multiple family units.
   (b)   The following computations shall be used to determine the number of
BAUs for all land uses except single family residential:
   BAU = (Area of Parcel in Acres) x (Land Use Runoff
   Factor)
   (0.1666 Acres x 0.695)
   (c)   All developed parcels are classified according to their stormwater
runoff factor. This is a numeric value for each land use based upon the County
of San Bernardino land use standards and directly relates to the land use of
the particular property. Excluding single family residential, ten (10) land
uses are identified and recognized for varying runoff factors. These factors
are applied in the computation of the number of BAUs associated with any
developed parcel, and are as follows:
Land Use Runoff Factor
Land Use                  Runoff Factor
Single Family Residential N/A
Multi-Family Residential
   Condominiums        0.766
   Apartments          0.766
   Mobile Homes        0.775
Commercial/Services       0.820
   Industrial          0.820
   schools             0.699
Group Quarters            0.766
Other Residential         0.594
Institutional             0.820
Vacant Buildings          0.820
 
(§ 2, Ord. 2755, eff. April 4, 2002)
Sec. 6-6.802. Stormwater pollution abatement charge.
   (a)   The stormwater pollution abatement charge shall be collected on a bi-
monthly basis and based on the rates and formulas as set forth in §
6-6.801. The monthly stormwater pollution abatement charge for each Basic
Assessment Unit associated with a given parcel of developed land within the
City is One Dollar ($1.00).
   (b)   If a discharger disagrees with his or her assigned land use, the
discharger may appeal to the City Engineer by presenting proper certification
of actual land use conditions. The Engineer shall verify the new land use,
apply the new runoff factor and compute a new number of BAUs associated with
said parcel. The new BAUs shall be used as the basis for appropriate billing
and a billing adjustment shall be applied. The changes in the billing records
shall be effective on the first day of the current billing cycle.
(§ 2, Ord. 2755, eff. April 4, 2002)
Sec. 6-6.803. Business inspection fees.
   Business inspection fees shall be collected on an annual basis, along with
the Business License Tax for those businesses requiring regular compliance
inspections under the Areawide Urban Storm Water Run-Off Permit. Affected
businesses shall include industrial businesses subject to the California
Statewide General NPDES Permit for Storm Water Discharges Associated with
Industrial Activities, commercial businesses listed in the Areawide Urban Storm
Water Run-Off Permit and other industrial and commercial sites/sources that the
City determines may contribute a significant pollutant load to the Municipal
Separate Storm Sewer System. The inspection fee shall pay for inspection time
including the preparation of inspection reports, review of written Storm Water
Pollution Prevention Plans, storm water runoff sampling activities, enforcement
response and follow-up as needed. The inspection fees shall be adopted by
resolution and shall be subject to periodic review and revision by resolution,
as part of the City's updated and modified schedule of service fees, inspection
fees and processing fees.
(§ 1, Ord. 2813, eff. July 21, 2005)
Article 9. General Clauses
Sec. 6-6.901. Severability.
   If any provisions, paragraph, word, section or article of this chapter is
invalidated by any court of competent jurisdiction, the remaining provisions,
paragraph, words, sections, and other chapters, shall not be affected and shall
continue in full force and effect.
(§ 2, Ord. 2755, eff. April 4, 2002)
Sec. 6-6.902. City's right of revision.
   The City Council may establish by ordinance and/or resolution more stringent
limitations and requirements related to discharges into the City's stormwater
drainage system, if deemed necessary.
(§ 2, Ord. 2755, eff. April 4, 2002)
CHAPTER 7: PUBLIC SEWER SYSTEM
Article 1. General Provisions
Sec.
6-7.101   Authorization
Sec.
6-7.102   Purpose and objectives
Sec.
6-7.103   Administration
Sec.
6-7.104   Applicability
Sec.
6-7.105   Regional pretreatment agreement
Sec.
6-7.106   Ordinance definitions
Sec.
6-7.107   Permit definitions
Sec.
6-7.108   Protection from damage
Sec.
6-7.109   Falsifying information
Article 2. Prohibitions and Discharge Limits
Sec.
6-7.201   Prohibited Discharges
Sec.
6-7.202   Rainwater or unpolluted water
Sec.
6-7.203   Radioactive wastes
Sec.
6-7.204   Garbage grinders
Sec.
6-7.205   Hauled wastes
Sec.
6-7.206   Water treatment devices
Sec.
6-7.207   Medical wastes
Sec.
6-7.208   Spent solutions and sludges
Sec.
6-7.209   Dilution
Sec.
6-7.210   Bypass
Sec.
6-7.211   Prohibited discharge locations
Sec.
6-7.212   Local discharge limits
Article 3. Permits
Sec.
6-7.301   Industrial wastewater permit
Sec.
6-7.302   Applications
Sec.
6-7.303   Permit conditions
Sec.
6-7.304   Duration
Sec.
6-7.305   Change of permit conditions
Sec.
6-7.306   Non-transferability
Sec.
6-7.307   National Categorical Pretreatment Standards
Article 4. Facilities
Sec.
6-7.401   Drawing submittal requirements
Sec.
6-7.402   Pretreatment facilities
Sec.
6-7.403   Monitoring facilities
Sec.
6-7.404   Interceptors
Sec.
6-7.405   Secondary spill containment
Article 5. Monitoring, Reporting, Notification and Inspection Requirements
Sec.
6-7.501   Monitoring
Sec.
6-7.502   Plans and reporting
Sec.
6-7.503   Total toxic organics/solvent management plan (TTO/SMP)
Sec.
6-7.504   Baseline monitoring reports (BMRs)
Sec.
6-7.505   Ninety (90) day compliance reports
Sec.
6-7.506   Slug discharge control plan
Sec.
6-7.507   Periodic reports on continued compliance
Sec.
6-7.508   Pollution prevention plan
Sec.
6-7.509   Notifications
Sec.
6-7.510   Signatory requirements
Sec.
6-7.511   Record-keeping requirements
Sec.
6-7.512   Public access to information and confidentiality
Sec.
6-7.513   Inspection/right-of-entry
Article 6. Enforcement
Sec.
6-7.601   Purpose and scope
Sec.
6-7.602   Determination of non-compliance
Sec.
6-7.603   Non-compliance fees
Sec.
6-7.604   Notice of violation
Sec.
6-7.605   Show cause order
Sec.
6-7.606   Compliance agreement
Sec.
6-7.607   Cease and desist order
Sec.
6-7.608   Permit suspension revocation
Sec.
6-7.609   Injunction
Sec.
6-7.610   Civil penalties
Sec.
6-7.611   Criminal penalties
Sec.
6-7.612   Appeal
Sec.
6-7.613   Additional emergency remedial measures
Sec.
6-7.614   Cumulative remedies
Sec.
6-7.615   Termination of services
Sec.
6-7.616   Public nuisance
Sec.
6-7.617   Cost
Sec.
6-7.618   Recovery of cost incurred by City
Sec.
6-7.619   Financial security
Sec.
6-7.620   Appeals to the Administrator
Sec.
6-7.621   Judicial review
Sec.
6-7.622   Affirmative defense
Article 7. Schedule of Fees and Charges
Sec.
6-7.701   Revenues
Sec.
6-7.702   Equivalent dwelling units (EDU)
Sec.
6-7.703   Sewer revenue charge rates
Sec.
6-7.704   Industrial wastewater permit fees
Sec.
6-7.705   Industrial wastewater non-compliance fees
Sec.
6-7.706   Capital capacity reimbursement account (CCRA) fee
Sec.
6-7.707   Sanitary sewer installation policy and the setting of sewer
connection fees (Repealed)
Sec.
6-7.708   Interagency wastewater connection requirements and agreement
Sec.
6-7.709   Discrepancies between actual and reported wastewater strength and
flow
Article 1. General Provisions
Sec. 6-7.101. Authorization.
   This chapter is enacted pursuant to authority conferred by law including,
but not limited to, Cal. Health & Safety Code, §§ 5400 to 5474, Cal. Gov't
Code, §§ 54725 to 54740, and 66000 to 66003, Cal. Code of Regulations, Title
22, the Federal Clean Water Act, 33 U.S.C. 1251, et seq., the Code of Federal
Regulations, the Porter Cologne Act, the Resource Conservation and Recovery Act
(RCRA), 42 U.S.C. 6901, et seq. and the National Pollutant Discharge
Elimination System Permits issued by the Regional Water Quality Control Board,
Santa Ana Region, to the Inland Empire Utilities Agency (IEUA).
(§ 3, Ord. 2755, eff. April 4, 2002)
Sec. 6-7.102. Purpose and objectives. 
   (a)   This chapter sets forth uniform requirements for users that directly
or indirectly connect to the City of Ontario's sewerage system and IEUA's
regional sewage system, and enables the City to comply with all applicable
state and federal laws, including the Clean Water Act of 1977, the General
Pretreatment Regulations set forth at 40 Code of Federal Regulations (CFR),
Part 403, the National Pretreatment Standards set forth at 40 CFR Chapter I,
Subchapter N, Parts 405-499, the California Water Code, and subsequent
amendments to each.
   (b)   It is the intent of this chapter to recognize that the Inland Empire
Utilities Agency with its approved pretreatment program is designated as the
control authority over wastewater discharges within its service area including
the City of Ontario, and holder of the National Pollutant Discharge Elimination
System (NPDES) permit. As such, the City of Ontario is committed to
administering and enforcing pretreatment regulations and ensuring consistency
in the implementation of the pretreatment requirements under the review of the
Inland Empire Utilities Agency.
   (c)   The primary objectives of this chapter are:
      (1)   To prevent the introduction of pollutants into the City of Ontario
sewerage system, which would otherwise interfere with the operation and
maintenance of the collection system or with the wastewater pretreatment
facilities or contaminate the resulting sludge;
      (2)   To prevent the introduction of pollutants into the City of
Ontario's sewerage collection and IEUA's regional sewage system which would
otherwise pass-through said system inadequately treated, into receiving waters
or the atmosphere, or otherwise be incompatible with the system;
      (3)   To protect the health of the public and the City of Ontario and
IEUA operations and maintenance personnel;
      (4)   To improve the opportunity to recycle and reclaim wastewaters and
biosolids from the sewerage system; and
      (5)   To provide for the equitable distribution of the cost of the
sewerage system, pretreatment programs, and all related services through the
establishment of fair and equitable fees and charges.
   (d)   This chapter provides for the regulation of direct and indirect
contributors to the City of Ontario's sewerage system through the issuance of
individual wastewater discharge permits or discharge authorizations to certain
non-domestic sewer users, in order to regulate the quantity and quality of
wastewater discharges, imposes pretreatment requirements, authorizes monitoring
and enforcement activities; requires user reporting; assumes that existing
customers' capacity will not be preempted, and provides for the setting of fees
by the City of Ontario for the equitable distribution of costs resulting from
the program established herein.
(§ 3, Ord. 2755, eff. April 4, 2002, as amended by § 2, Ord 3190, eff. October
7, 2021)
Sec. 6-7.103. Administration. 
   Except as otherwise provided in this chapter, the Administrator shall
administer, implement, direct and cause enforcement of the provisions of this
chapter. Whenever any power is granted to or a duty is imposed upon the
Administrator, the power may be exercised or the duty may be performed by a
user authorized by the Administrator.
(§ 3, Ord. 2755, eff. April 4, 2002)
Sec. 6-7.104. Applicability.
   This chapter shall apply to all users of the City's sewerage facilities
within the City, and to users outside the City who are, by permit, contract, or
agreement with the City, users of the City's sewerage facilities.
(§ 3, Ord. 2755, eff. April 4, 2002)
Sec. 6-7.105. Regional pretreatment agreement.
   The City of Ontario adopted an agreement known as the Regional Pretreatment
Agreement, entered into by and among IEUA, the City of Ontario and the cities
of Chino, Chino Hills, Fontana, Montclair, Upland, and the Cucamonga County
Water District. Said agreement is hereby adopted and incorporated by reference
as if fully set forth herein. Copies of the said agreement are on file with the
City Clerk of the City of Ontario.
(§ 3, Ord. 2755, eff. April 4, 2002)
Sec 6-7.106. Ordinance definitions.
   Unless the context specifically indicates otherwise, the following terms and
phrases, as used in this chapter, shall have the meanings hereinafter
designated. The definitions in this chapter are included for reference purposes
and are not intended to narrow the scope of definitions set forth in federal or
state law or regulations. Words used in this chapter in the singular may
include the plural and the plural may include the singular. Use of masculine
shall also mean feminine and neutral.
   (a)   "Administrator" or "City Manager" means the chief administrative
officer of the City of Ontario or their authorized designee.
   (b)   "Approval Authority" means the California Regional Water Quality
Control Board, Santa Ana Region.
   (c)   "Authorized industrial representative" means:
      (1)   If the user is a corporation:
         (i)   A president, secretary, treasurer, or vice-president of the
corporation in charge of a principal business function, or any other person who
performs similar or decision-making functions for the corporation; or
         (ii)   The manager of one (1) or more manufacturing, production, or
operation facilities, provided, the manager is authorized to make management
decisions that govern the operation of the regulated facility, including having
the explicit or implicit duty of making major capital investment
recommendations, and initiate and direct other comprehensive measures to assure
long-term environmental compliance with environmental laws and regulations; can
ensure that the necessary systems are established or actions taken to gather
complete and accurate information for control mechanism requirements; and where
authority to sign documents has been assigned or delegated to the manager in
accordance with corporate procedures.
      (2)   A general partner or proprietor if the user is a partnership or
sole proprietorship respectively; or
      (3)   If the user is a federal, state, or local government facility: a
director or highest official appointed or designated to oversee the operation
and performance of the activities of the government facility, or their
designee; or
      (4)   A duly authorized representative of the individual designated in §
6-7.106(c)(1), (c)(2), or (c)(3) above, if
         (i)   The authorization is made in writing by the individual described
in §
6-7.106(c)(1), (c)(2), or (c)(3) above;
         (ii)   The authorization specifies either an individual or a position
having responsibility for the overall operation of the facility from which the
industrial discharge originates, such as the position of plant manager,
operator of a well, or well field superintendent, or a position of equivalent
responsibility, or having overall responsibility for environmental matters for
the company;
         (iii)   The written authorization is submitted to the Administrator;
and
      (5)   If the authorization under §
6-7.106(c)(4) above is no longer accurate because a different individual or
position has responsibility for the overall operation of the facility, or
overall responsibility for environmental matters for the company, a new
authorization satisfying the requirements of (4) above must be submitted to the
Administrator prior to or together with any reports to be signed by an
authorized representative.
   (d)   "Best Management Practices (BMP)" are defined at Title 40 Code of
Federal Regulations 403.3(e) as schedules of activities, prohibitions of
practices, maintenance procedures, and other management practices to implement
the general and specific prohibitions listed in 40 CFR 403.5(a)(1) and (b).
BMPs also include pretreatment requirements, operating procedures, and
practices to control plant site runoff, spillage or leaks, sludge or waste
disposal, or drainage from raw materials storage.
   (e)   "Biosolids" means the non-hazardous and recyclable organic matter
resulting from the treatment of wastewater.
   (f)   "Biochemical oxygen demand (BOD)" means a test method which measures
the organic strength of the wastewater. The BOD test measures the amount of
oxygen consumed by the microorganisms in the wastewater as they stabilize
decomposable organic matter under aerobic conditions. The BOD test is a five
(5) day test where the wastewater is kept at twenty degrees centigrade (20°C)
and the results are expressed in milligrams per liter (mg/L).
   (g)   "Brine" means wastewater saturated with or containing large amounts of
salt, especially of sodium chloride.
   (h)   "Business" means an industrial or commercial enterprise.
   (i)   "Bypass" means the intentional diversion of wastestreams from any
portion of a user's pretreatment facility.
   (j)   "Capital capacity reimbursement account fee" or "CCRA fee" are
capacity charges within the meaning of Cal. Gov't Code § 66013.
   (k)   "Capital facilities fee" means the prevailing unit cost per EDU fee,
based on the EDU value as established in this chapter, and adjacent sewer line
size.
   (l)   "Categorical industrial user (CIU)" means any industrial user subject
to categorical pretreatment standards under 40 CFR 403.6 and 40 CFR Chapter I,
Subchapter N. For this purpose, a user is deemed to be a CIU when it meets the
applicability requirements for a specific category and is subject to
pretreatment standards for existing sources or pretreatment standards for new
sources.
   (m)   "Categorical pretreatment standard" or "National Categorical
Pretreatment Standard" or "Federal Categorical Pretreatment Standards" or
"categorical standards" or "pretreatment standards" refers to any regulation
containing pollutant discharge limit promulgated by EPA in accordance with
Sections 307(b), (c) and (d) of the Clean Water Act (33 U.S.C. 1317), which
applies to a specific category of industrial users, and which appears in 40 CFR
Chapter I, Subchapter N, Parts 403-471. This term includes prohibitive
discharge limit established pursuant to 40 CFR 403.5 and any local limits.
   (n)   "Clean Water Act " or "Act" or "the Act" means the Federal Water
Pollution Control Act, also known as the Clean Water Act, as amended, 33 U.S.C.
1251, et seq., and the regulations adopted thereto. The Clean Water Act is the
primary federal law that protects our nation's waters, including lakes, rivers,
aquifers and coastal areas.
   (o)   "Clean Water Enforcement and Pollution Prevention Act of 1999" means
the California law which authorizes regional, state boards and POTWs to require
mandatory penalties and implementation of pollution prevention plans for
various types of effluent violations.
   (p)   "Code of Federal Regulations (CFR)" means a publication of the United
States Government that contains all of the proposed and finalized federal
regulations, including environmental regulations.
   (q)   "Collection system" means the combined pipes, conduits, manholes, and
other structures, usually underground, whose purpose is to convey sanitary
wastewater.
   (r)   "Community sewer system" means all facilities owned, controlled or
operated by an IEUA contracting agency for the purpose of collecting and
conducting sewage to a delivery point, including collector sewers conducting
sewage from the originating premises, trunk sewers conveying sewer from
tributary collector sewers or other trunk sewers and any facilities appurtenant
to the foregoing.
   (s)   "Compatible pollutants" means those pollutants such as biochemical
oxygen demand (BOD), total suspended solids (TSS), and ammonia that are
normally removed by the POTW treatment processes.
   (t)   "Compliance schedule" means the time period allowed by the City for a
user to comply with permit conditions or discharge requirements.
   (u)   "Composite sample" means a collection of individual samples taken on a
time or flow interval basis, and usually combined to give an average
representative sample for the sample period.
   (v)   "Constituent" means any chemical element, compound, or mixture that is
either suspended or dissolved in the wastewater stream.
   (w)   "Contracting agency" means any sewerage collection agency located, in
whole or in part, within the boundaries of the IEUA which has entered into a
service contract with the IEUA.
   (x)   "Control authority" means IEUA or the City of Ontario acting on behalf
of IEUA.
   (y)   "Conventional pollutants" means those pollutants which are usually
found in domestic, commercial, or industrial wastewaters such as biochemical
oxygen demand, suspended solids, pathogenic organisms, pH, and oil & grease.
   (z)   "Daily discharges" means the amount of discharge measured during a
calendar day.
   (aa)   "Daily maximum" means the maximum allowable discharge limit of a
pollutant during a calendar day. Where daily maximum limits are expressed in
units of mass, the daily discharge is the total mass discharged over the course
of the day. Where daily maximum limits are expressed in terms of a
concentration, the daily discharge is the arithmetic average measurement of the
pollutant concentration derived from all measurements taken that day.
   (bb)   "Dilution" means increasing the use of process water, or otherwise
attempting to decrease the concentration of pollutants in a discharge as a
partial or complete substitute for adequate treatment to achieve compliance
with a pretreatment standard or pretreatment requirement.
   (cc)   "Discharge" means sewerage or wastewater which is released into or
allowed to enter the public sewerage system.
   (dd)   "Discharge limit" means the maximum concentration levels at which
specific pollutants are allowed to be discharged.
   (ee)   "Discharge permit" means formal authorization by the City,
stipulating the conditions under which a user's wastewater may be released to
the City's sewerage system.
   (ff)   "Disposal facility" or "disposal facilities" means any site where
hazardous waste is intentionally placed and at which the waste will remain
after closure.
   (gg)   "Domestic wastewater" means the liquid and solid waste derived from
the ordinary living processes of humans, free from industrial wastewater, and
of such character as to permit satisfactory treatment and disposal by
conventional sewerage treatment processes.
   (hh)   "ELAP" means Environmental Laboratory Accreditation Program.
   (ii)   "Environmental Protection Agency (EPA)" means the federal agency
charged by law with carrying out and obtaining compliance with the Clean Water
Act of 1977 and other federal environmental laws and promulgating, interpreting
and enforcing regulations implementing such statutes.
   (jj)   "Equivalent dwelling unit (EDU)" represents the wastewater flow from
a single-family residential household as defined in the regional contract.
   (kk)   "Existing source" means an industrial discharger that was in
construction or operation prior to the EPA proposing pretreatment standards for
the industrial category. The pretreatment standards will be applicable to such
source if the category is thereafter promulgated in accordance with Section 307
of the Act.
   (ll)   "Fee" means any charge made to the user for the use of the sewerage
system and shall include, but not be limited to, capital facilities fee, CCRA
fees, sewer assessment fee, connection and frontage fee, industrial wastewater
permit fee, sampling fee, inspection fee, noncompliance fee, oversize sewer
fee, monthly sewer service charge, regional sewer capacity fees, and other user
fees.
   (mm)   "Frontage fee" means the actual costs incurred by the City for
connecting a property to the sewer system which is reimbursable by the property
owner. The frontage fee is based on the sewer main size, as established in §
6-7.707, multiplied by the length, in feet, of the sewer frontage of a lot or
parcel.
   (nn)   "General Plan" means the City of Ontario's comprehensive policy
document that informs future land use decisions. It establishes land use
designations and policies that identify a range of zoning options that can be
applied to property.
   (oo)   "Grab sample" means a single sample collected at a particular time
and place which represents the wastestream at that time and place only, and
which does not exceed a fifteen (15)-minute duration.
   (pp)   "Hazardous substance" means any substance designated under 40 CFR
Part 116 pursuant to § 311 of the Act.
   (qq)   "Hazardous waste" shall be as defined in 40 CFR Part 261.3 or Title
22, Cal. Code of Regulations.
   (rr)   "Hydrolysis" means the reduction of the body of a deceased person or
animal to its essential organic components and bone fragments by using heat or
heat and applied pressure, water, and potassium hydroxide or sodium hydroxide
either before or after processing of the remains after removal from the
hydrolysis chamber.
   (ss)   "Industrial user (IU)" means any user, business, or facility that
discharges or causes a discharge of non-domestic waste directly or indirectly
into the City sewerage system.
   (tt)   "Industrial wastewater" or "industrial waste" means any waste or
substance spilled, discharged, flowing, or allowed to escape from any
producing, manufacturing, processing, chemical, waste or materials storage
area, institutional, governmental, or agricultural operation or from any other
operation, or from the development, recovery or processing of any material
resource. Industrial wastewater includes but is not limited to waste and/or
wastewater resulting from equipment maintenance and cleaning, product coating,
coloring, painting, plating, treating, degreasing or cleaning, heating and
cooling systems, and water treatment devices. Industrial wastewater does not
include domestic wastewater and unpolluted water as defined in this chapter.
Any wastewater that is hauled by truck, rail or other means, and discharged
into the sewerage system, shall be considered industrial wastewater, regardless
of the original source.
   (uu)   "Inland Empire Utilities Agency (IEUA)" shall be defined as the
regional sewer treatment agency. IEUA as the control authority is also
responsible for jointly administering the provisions of this chapter.
   (vv)   "Interceptor" means a treatment system designed, constructed and
operated for the purpose of removing and retaining sand, oil, and grease from
wastewater by differential gravity separation before discharge to the sewerage
system. This term shall include both oil and grease interceptors and sand and
oil interceptors.
   (ww)   "Interference" means a discharge that alone or in conjunction with a
discharge or discharges from other sources:
      (1)   Inhibits or disrupts the POTW, its treatment processes or
operations, or its sludge processes, use or disposal; and
      (2)   Is a cause or threatens to cause, a violation of any requirement of
the POTW's NPDES permit (including an increase in the magnitude or duration of
a violation) or of the prevention of sewerage sludge use or disposal in
compliance with the following statutory provisions and ordinance or permits
issued hereinafter (or more stringent state or local regulations): Section 405
of the Clean Water Act, the Solid Waste Disposal Act (SWDA) [including Title
II, more commonly referred to as the Resource Conservation and Recovery Act
(RCRA), and including state regulations contained in any state sludge
management plan prepared pursuant to Subtitle D of SWDA], the Clean Air Act,
the Toxic Substances Control Act, and the Marine Protection, Research and
Sanctuaries Act.
   (xx)   "Industrial wastewater discharge" or "discharge authorization" or
"non-domestic wastewater" means the permitted discharges from an industrial or
commercial source.
   (yy)   "Local limit" means specific discharge limit developed and enforced
by the City and IEUA upon industrial or commercial facilities to implement the
general and specific discharge prohibitions listed in 40 CFR 403.5(a)(1) and
(b).
   (zz)   "Lower explosive limit" means the point where the concentration of a
gas-in-air is sufficiently large to result in an explosion if an ignition
source (sufficient ignition energy) is present.
   (aaa)   "Mass emission rate" or "mass limit" means the weight of material
discharged to the sewerage system during a given time interval. Unless
otherwise specified, the mass emission rate shall mean pounds per day of a
particular constituent or combination of constituents.
   (bbb)   "May" is permissive.
   (ccc)   "Milligrams per liter (mg/L)" means one (1) milligram of a pollutant
in one (1) liter of water or wastewater and can also be expressed as parts per
million.
   (ddd)   "Monitoring facility" means any structure approved by the
Administrator to provide a convenient access point for monitoring the quantity
and quality of a user's wastewater.
   (eee)   "Monthly average" means the sum of all daily discharges measured
during a calendar month divided by the number of daily discharges measured
during that month.
   (fff)   "Municipal Code" means laws that are enacted and enforced by the
City of Ontario.
   (ggg)   "National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (NPDES) Permit"
means a permit issued by state or federal agencies pursuant to § 402 of Act (33
U.S.C. 1432).
   (hhh)   "New source" means:
      (1)   Any building, structure, facility or installation from which there
is or may be a discharge of pollutants, the construction of which commenced
after the publication of proposed pretreatment standards under § 307(c) of the
Act which will be applicable to such source if such pretreatment standards are
thereafter promulgated in accordance with that section, provided that:
         (i)   The building, structure, facility or installation is constructed
at a site at which no other source is located;
         (ii)   The building, structure, facility or installation totally
replaces the process or production equipment that causes the discharge of
pollutants at an existing source; or
         (iii)   The production or wastewater generating processes of the
building, structure, facility or installation are substantially independent of
an existing source at the same site. In determining whether these are
substantially independent, factors such as the extent to which the new facility
is integrated with the existing plant, and the extent to which the new facility
is engaged in the same general type of activity as the existing source should
be considered.
      (2)   Construction on a site at which an existing source is located
results in a modification rather than a new source if the construction does not
create a new building, structure, facility or installation meeting the criteria
of paragraphs (1)(ii) or (1)(iii) above, but otherwise alters, replaces, or
adds to existing process or production equipment.
      (3)   Construction of a new source as defined under this paragraph has
commenced if the owner or operator has:
         (i)   Begun, or caused to begin as part of a continuous onsite
construction program:
            (A)   Any placement, assembly, or installation of facilities or
equipment; or
            (B)   Significant site preparation work including clearing,
excavation, or removal of existing buildings, structures, or facilities which
is necessary for the placement, assembly, or installation of new source
facilities or equipment; or
         (ii)   Entered into a binding contractual obligation for the purchase
of facilities or equipment which are intended to be used in its operation
within a reasonable time. Options to purchase or contracts which can be
terminated or modified without substantial loss, and contracts for feasibility,
engineering, and design studies do not constitute a contractual obligation
under this paragraph.
   (iii)   "Non-compatible pollutants" means those pollutants that are not
removed by the sewage treatment plant or compatible pollutants in excessive
quantities or concentrations. These pollutants may be toxic and cause waste to
pass-through or interfere with sewage treatment systems.
   (jjj)   "Occupant" means the tenant, renter or lessee of property who is the
recipient of other utility services provided by the City and is responsible by
utility application, agreement or by other means for the payment of said
utility services.
   (kkk)   "Owner" means the legal person or business who owns the parcel of
real property, except when the legal person or business or said real property
is such due to the holding of a mortgage, note or other such security, in which
case the "owner" shall be deemed to be a beneficiary of said parcel of real
property.
   (lll)   "Pass-through" means a discharge that passes through the POTW to the
waters of the state in concentrations which, alone or in conjunction with other
discharges, cause an NPDES permit violation, including an increase in the
magnitude or duration of the violation.
   (mmm)   "Permittee" means a user, business, or company who has received a
permit to discharge wastewater into the City sewerage system subject to the
requirements and conditions established by the City.
   (nnn)   "pH" means a measure of the acidity or alkalinity of a solution,
expressed in standard units.
   (ooo)   "Pollutant" means any substance which contributes to or causes the
impairment of the beneficial recycling of water or sludge. Pollutants include
but are not limited to: dredged spoil, solid waste, incinerator residue, filter
backwash, sewerage, garbage, sludge, munitions, medical wastes, chemical
wastes, biological materials, radioactive materials, heat, wrecked or discarded
equipment, rock, sand, cellar dirt, industrial, municipal, and agricultural
waste, and certain characteristics of wastewater (e.g. pH, temperature, TSS,
turbidity, color, COD, BOD, toxicity, or odor).
   (ppp)   "Pollution" means the man-made or man-induced degradation of the
chemical, physical, biological, and/or radiological integrity of water.
   (qqq)    "Pretreatment" or "treatment" means the reduction of the amount of
pollutants, the elimination of pollutants, or the alteration of the nature of
pollutant properties in wastewater to a less harmful state prior to or in lieu
of discharging or otherwise introducing such pollutants to a POTW. The
reduction or alteration can be obtained by physical, chemical or biological
processes, or process changes by other means except as prohibited by 40 CFR
403.6(d).
   (rrr)   "Pretreatment facility" or "pretreatment facilities" means an
industrial wastewater regional treatment plant consisting of one (1) or more
treatment devices designed to remove sufficient pollutants from wastewaters to
allow a user to comply with EPA, state or local effluent limitations for legal
discharge to a POTW.
   (sss)   "Pretreatment program" means a program required by the IEUA NPDES
permit to remove some pollutants from non-domestic wastewater before it is
discharged into the sewer system.
   (ttt)   "Pretreatment requirements" means any substantive or procedural
requirement related to pretreatment imposed on a user, other than a
pretreatment standard.
   (uuu)   "Process wastewater" means any wastewater contaminated by human
activities including but not limited to that originating from manufacturing,
agriculture, processing, rinsing, washing or producing.
   (vvv)   "Public agency" means the State of California or any city, county,
district, other local authority or public body within the State of California.
   (www)   "Public sewer system," "public sewer," "sewerage system," or
"regional sewerage system" means any sewerage facility which is located in and
maintained by the City or IEUA. The public sewer does not include the non-
reclaimable waste system.
   (xxx)   "Publicly owned treatment works (POTW)" means all sewerage
facilities used for collecting, conveying, pumping, treating, and disposing of
sewerage, whether these facilities are operated and maintained by the City or
IEUA.
   (yyy)   "Regional sewer capacity fees" means capacity charges within meaning
of Cal. Gov't Code § 66013.
   (zzz)   "Regional sewerage service contract" or "regional contract" means
the agreement between IEUA and the public agencies in the Chino Basin area, to
provide for the acquisition, improvement, and expansion of regional sewerage
facilities for collecting, conveying, pumping, treating, and disposing of
sewerage from each of the public agencies in the IEUA service area.
   (aaaa)   "Regional treatment plant" means the regional water recycling plant
operated by IEUA as part of the regional sewerage system.
   (bbbb)   "Regulatory agencies" means any or all agencies regulating the
City, including, but not limited to, the Environmental Protection Agency, the
State Water Resources Control Board, the Regional Water Quality Control Board
and the IEUA.
   (cccc)   "Resource Conservation and Recovery Act (RCRA)" means a federal act
that regulates the generation, storage, transportation and disposal of
federally defined hazardous wastes from "cradle to grave".
   (dddd)   "Self-regenerating water softening appliance" means a water
softening device located within, or adjacent to, a user located within the IEUA
service area and which discharges to a community sewer system that is tributary
to the regional sewerage system owned and operated by IEUA, whereby the
capability of the appliance to remove hardness from water is renewed by the on-
site application of a brine to the active softening or conditioning material
contained therein, followed by a subsequent rinsing of the active softening or
conditioning material.
   (eeee)   "Serious violation" means any waste discharge that exceeds the
effluent limitations for a Group II Pollutant, as specified in Appendix A to 40
CFR 123.45, by twenty percent (20%) or more or for a Group I Pollutant, as
specified in Appendix Z to 40 CFR 123.45, by forty percent (40%) or more.
   (ffff)   "Sewage" means the individual or community wastewater derived from
residential, agricultural, commercial, or industrial sources.
   (gggg)   "Sewer" means a conduit for removing waste matter and drainage
water through mains and laterals within the public right-of-way or recorded
utility easement, including appurtenances such as manholes and clean-outs.
   (hhhh)   "Sewer factor" means a value used to calculate the sewer assessment
fee based on the levels of BOD and TSS in a user's wastewater, and the
estimated volume of the wastewater. If unknown, the volume of the wastewater
may be estimated using the number of fixtures in the proposed building.
   (iiii)   "Sewer service charge" means a fee applied to metered water use to
obtain money for constructing and maintaining sewers and regional treatment
plants, and for treating sewage which is discharged into the sewer system.
   (jjjj)   "Sewerage facility" or "sewerage facilities" means any and all
facilities used for collecting, conveying, pumping, treating, and disposing of
sewage.
   (kkkk)   "Shall" is mandatory.
   (llll)   "Significant industrial user (SIU)" means:
      (1)   All industrial users subject to categorical pretreatment standards
covered under 40 CFR 403.6 and 40 CFR Chapter I, Subchapter N; and
      (2)   Any other industrial user that: Discharges an average of twenty-
five thousand (25,000) gallons per day or more of process wastewater to the
POTW (excluding sanitary, noncontact cooling and boiler blowdown wastewater);
contributes a process wastestream which makes up five percent (5%) or more of
the average dry weather hydraulic or organic capacity of the POTW regional
treatment plant; or is designated as such by the Administrator on the basis
that the industrial user has a reasonable potential for adversely affecting the
POTW's operation or for violating any pretreatment standard or pretreatment
requirement (in accordance with 40 CFR 403.8(f)(6)).
   (mmmm)   "Significant non-compliance" means a significant industrial user
(or any industrial user which violates paragraphs (3), (4) or (8) below) is in
significant non-compliance if its violation meets one (1) or more of the
following criteria:
      (1)   Chronic violations of wastewater discharge limit, defined here as
those in which sixty-six percent (66%) or more of all measurements taken for
the same pollutant parameter during a six (6) month period exceed (by any
magnitude) a numeric pretreatment standard or pretreatment requirement,
including instantaneous limits.
      (2)   Technical review criteria (TRC) violations, defined here as those
in which thirty-three percent (33%) or more of all of the measurements taken
for the same pollutant parameter during a six (6) month period equal or exceed
the product of the numeric pretreatment standard or pretreatment requirement
including instantaneous limits, multiplied by the applicable TRC;
      (3)   Any other discharge violation of a pretreatment standard or
pretreatment requirement as defined by 40 CFR 403.3(l) (daily maximum, long-
term average, instantaneous limit, or narrative standard) that the POTW
determines has caused, alone or in combination with other discharges,
interference or pass through (including endangering health of POTW personnel or
the general public);
      (4)   Any discharge of a pollutant that has caused endangerment to the
human health, welfare or to the environment or has resulted in the
Administrator's exercise of emergency authority to halt or prevent such a
discharge;
      (5)   Failure to meet, within ninety (90) days of the scheduled date, a
compliance schedule milestone contained in a wastewater discharge permit or
enforcement order for starting construction, completing construction, or
attaining final compliance;
      (6)   Failure to provide within forty-five (45) days after the due date,
any reports such as baseline monitoring reports, ninety (90) day compliance
reports, periodic self-monitoring reports, and reports on compliance with
compliance schedules;
      (7)   Failure to accurately report noncompliance; or
      (8)   Any other violation or group of violations, which may include a
violation of best management practices, which the Administrator or IEUA
determines will adversely affect the operation or implementation of the local
pretreatment program.
   (nnnn)   "Single-family residential" means all developed parcels with one
(1) single-family detached housing unit, and/or any residential unit that is
served water by an individual water meter.
   (oooo)   "Sludge" means any solid, semi-solid or liquid decant, substrate
from any utility service, or pretreatment facility.
   (pppp)   "Slug load" or "slug discharge" is any discharge of a non-routine,
episodic nature, including but not limited to an accidental spill or a non-
customary batch discharge, which has a reasonable potential to cause
interference or pass-through, or in any other way violate the POTW's
regulations, local limits or NPDES permit conditions.
   (qqqq)   "Spill containment" means a City approved protection system
installed by the user to prevent the discharge of non-compatible pollutants
into the sewer system.
   (rrrr)   "State Water Resources Control Board" means the California Water
Pollution Control Agency with overall pretreatment responsibility through
delegation agreements with the EPA.
   (ssss)    "Technical review criteria (TRC)" is an EPA term that defines the
magnitude of a discharge limit violation. To determine whether the TRC limit
has been exceeded, one must multiply the daily maximum or average limit by the
applicable federal value of 1.4 for conventional pollutants (BOD, TSS, fats,
oils & greases) or 1.2 for all other pollutants except pH.
   (tttt)   "Total suspended solids (TSS)" means the total matter that is
suspended in water or wastewater and is expressed in milligrams per liter (mg/
L).
   (uuuu)   "Total toxic organics (TTO)" means the sum of all toxic organic
compounds present in an industrial user's process discharge at concentrations
greater than 0.01 mg/L and listed under 40 CFR Chapter I, Subchapter N.
   (vvvv)   "Toxic organics management plan (TOMP)" or "solvent management plan
(SMP)" means an organized strategy for keeping track of all solvents delivered
to a site, their storage, generation, use, and disposal. A TOMP or SMP
addresses both the prevention of toxic organics discharge to the sewerage
system or the environment and the control of spills and leaks. It also ensures
against the deliberate dumping of solvents.
   (wwww)   "Toxic pollutant" means those pollutants or combinations of
pollutants, including disease-causing agents, which after discharge and upon
exposure, ingestion, inhalation or assimilation into any organism, either
directly from the environment or indirectly by ingestion through food chains,
will, on the basis information available to the administration of EPA, cause
death, disease, behavioral abnormalities, cancer, genetic mutations,
physiological malfunction (including malfunctions in reproduction) or physical
deformations, in such organism or their offspring.
   (xxxx)   "Unpolluted water" means water to which no pollutant has been added
either intentionally or accidentally.
   (yyyy)   "Upset" means an exceptional incident in which there is
unintentional and temporary non-compliance with discharge limit as specified on
the user's permit because of factors beyond the reasonable control of the user.
An "upset" does not include non-compliance to the extent caused by operational
error, improperly designed pretreatment facilities, inadequate treatment
devices, lack of preventative maintenance or careless or improper operation.
   (zzzz)   "User" or "discharger" means any person, industry or establishment
which discharges or causes to be discharged any wastewater directly or
indirectly to the sewer system and shall also mean an owner or occupant whether
private, governmental, or otherwise of a unit, building, premise or lot in the
City.
   (aaaaa)   "Volatile" means natural (plant or animal origin) or synthetic
substances that are capable of being evaporated or changed to a vapor at
relatively low temperatures.
   (bbbbb)   "Waste manifest" means the receipt which is retained by the
generator of hazardous wastes as required by the state and/or the federal
government pursuant to RCRA or the California Hazardous Materials Act, or that
receipt which is retained by the generator for recyclable wastes or non-
hazardous wastes as required by the City.
   (ccccc)   "Waste hauler" means any user carrying on or engaging in vehicular
transport of waste.
   (ddddd)   "Wastewater" or "waste" means any discarded substance in any form
(liquid, semi-solid, solid or gaseous) that has the potential of being disposed
of or entering the sewer.
   (eeeee)   "Wastewater factor (WF)" means a value used to calculate the
monthly sewer service charge based on the levels of BOD and TSS in a user's
wastewater, and the estimated volume of the wastewater. The volume of the
wastewater is estimated from the user's waste consumption using a fixed
percentage.
(§ 3, Ord. 2755, eff. April 4, 2002, as amended by § 11, Ord. 2816, eff.
December 1, 2005, § 2, Ord. 2945, eff. January 6, 2012, and § 2, Ord. 3190,
eff. October 7, 2021)
Sec 6-7.107. Permit definitions.
   Unless the context specifically indicates otherwise, the following terms and
phrases, as used in permits issued under this chapter, shall have the meanings
hereinafter designated. The definitions in this chapter are included for
reference purposes and are not intended to narrow the scope of definitions set
forth in federal or state law or regulations. Words used in this chapter in the
singular may include the plural and the plural may include the singular. Use of
masculine shall also mean feminine and neutral.
   (a)   "Batch process" means a treatment process in which a tank or vessel is
filled, the wastewater (or solution) is treated or checked to ensure that
discharge standards are met, and is then released to the sewerage system. A
batch process is intermittent, not continuous.
   (b)   "Flammable liquid" means a liquid which by itself, or any component of
it present in greater than one percent (1%) concentration, has a flashpoint
below one hundred degrees Fahrenheit (100°F) or thirty-eight degrees Centigrade
(38°C).
   (c)   "Hazardous materials management plan" means a document prepared by an
industry which contains copies of safety data sheets (SDS) as well as
additional information regarding the storage, handling, and disposal of all
chemicals used on site by the industry.
   (d)   "Indirect discharge" means the release or introduction of pollutants
into the City's sewerage system from any non-domestic source regulated under §
307(b), (c) or (d) of the Act, which may include septage. These discharges are
subject to the City's Municipal Code.
   (e)   "Industrial cost recovery (ICR)" means a charge to all users of the
sewerage system equal to the portion of the federal grant used for the
construction of the regional sewage treatment plant allocable to industrial
users.
   (f)   "Inspector" means a person authorized by the Administrator to inspect
any development or facility that is discharging or has the potential to
discharge wastewater into the sewerage system.
   (g)   "Instantaneous maximum allowable discharge limit" means the maximum
concentration of a pollutant allowed to be discharged at any time, determined
from the analysis of any discrete or composited sample collected, independent
of the industrial flow rate and the duration of the sampling event.
   (h)   "Maximum extent practicable (MEP)" means taking into account equitable
considerations of synergistic, additive, and competing factors, including but
not limited to, gravity of the problem, fiscal feasibility, public health
risks, societal concern, and social benefits.
   (i)   "Non-contact cooling water" means water used for cooling that does not
come into direct contact with any raw material, intermediate product, waste
product, or finished product.
   (j)   "Nonintegrated facility" means industrial sources that generate
wastewaters from different categorical and non-categorical (ancillary)
processes, but do not combine the wastestreams prior to pretreatment or
discharge to the sanitary system.
   (k)   "Non-reclaimable wastewater system (NRWS)" means a sewerage line that
is owned and operated by IEUA primarily for the disposal of non-reclaimable
wastewater (brine).
   (l)   "Prohibition and discharge limits" means absolute prohibitions against
the discharge of certain substances; these prohibitions appear in §
6-7.201 of this chapter.
   (m)   "Safety data sheets (SDS)" formerly known as material safety data
sheets means a document normally developed by a chemical manufacturer or
formulator, which provides pertinent information about a chemical substance or
mixture. The SDS is required to be available to employees and inspectors when a
chemical substance is used or found in the workplace.
   (n)   "Sewer service connection fee" means a sewer fee consisting of a
frontage fee, a capital facilities fee, one-time assessment fee, or a
combination thereof.
   (o)   "Single pass non-contact cooling water" means water that has no direct
contact with any raw material or product, and which is used only once for the
purpose of cooling, and then is discarded or discharged.
   (p)   "Single pass non-contact heating water" means water that has no direct
contact with any raw material or product, and which is used only once for the
purpose of heating, and then is discarded or discharged.
(§ 2, Ord. 3190, eff. October 7, 2021)
Sec 6-7.108. Protection from damage.
   No person shall maliciously, willfully, or negligently break, damage,
destroy, impair the usefulness, uncover, deface, or tamper with any structure,
appurtenance, or equipment which is a part of the community sewer system.
(§ 2, Ord. 3190, eff. October 7, 2021)
Sec 6-7.109. Falsifying information.
   No person shall knowingly make false statements, representation, or
certification in any application, record, report, plan, or other document
provided to the City or required to be maintained pursuant to this chapter, or
falsify, tamper with, or knowingly render any monitoring device or method
required under this chapter. The reports and other documents required to be
submitted or maintained by this chapter shall be subject to the provisions of
18 U.S.C. Section 1001 relating to fraud and false statements, Section 309(c)
(4) of the Act, as amended, governing false statements, representation or
certification and Section 309(c)(6) of the Act regarding authorized industrial
representatives.
(§ 2, Ord. 3190, eff. October 7, 2021)
Article 2. Prohibition and Discharge Limits
Sec. 6-7.201. Prohibited discharges.  
   (a)   General prohibitions. No user shall introduce or cause to be
introduced into the sewerage system or POTW: any pollutant(s) or wastewater
which causes pass-through or interference. These general prohibitions and the
specific prohibitions listed below in paragraph (b) of this section apply to
each user introducing pollutants into the sewerage system and the POTW whether
or not the user is subject to other National Categorical Pretreatment Standards
or any national, state, or local pretreatment requirements.
   (b)   Specific prohibitions. No user shall introduce or cause to be
introduced into the sewerage system or POTW the following pollutants,
substances, or wastewater:
      (1)   Fuels, gasoline, kerosene, naphtha, aromatics, benzene, toluene,
xylene, ethers, alcohols, ketones, aldehydes, esters, cyclic hydrocarbons,
olefins, paraffin hydrocarbons, solvents, or any other liquid, solid or gas
which causes or is capable of causing, either alone or by interaction with
other substances, a fire or explosive hazard, impairment of the effective
maintenance or operation of the POTW, or in any other way, may cause danger to
the life or safety of any user, damage to private properties or the sewerage
facilities in the City of Ontario or the POTW. Prohibited materials include,
but are not limited to, any wastestream with a closed-cup flash-point of less
than one hundred forty degrees Fahrenheit (140°F) or sixty degrees Centigrade
(60°C) using the test methods specified in 40 CFR 261.21; by Federal Regulation
40 CFR 403.5 (b)(1);
      (2)   Any discharge which, alone or in combination with other wastes,
results or may result in the presence of toxic gases, vapors or fumes within
the City of Ontario sewerage system or the POTW in quantities that cause or may
cause acute worker health and safety problems;
      (3)   Any discharge containing toxic or poisonous solids, liquids, or
gases in such quantities that alone or in combination with other waste
substances, may create a hazard for humans, animals or the local environment,
interfere with any wastewater treatment process, cause a public nuisance, or
cause any hazardous condition to occur in the sewerage system. Toxic pollutants
shall include, but are not limited to, any pollutant identified pursuant to §
307(a) of the Act;
      (4)   Any amount of a hazardous substance or toxic pollutant;
      (5)   Pollutants which result in the presence of toxic gases, vapors, or
fumes within the POTW in a quantity that may cause acute worker health and
safety problems;
      (6)   Any substance or matter which will cause corrosive damage to any
structures, equipment, or other physical facilities of the wastewater
collection system or pretreatment facility, but in no case discharges with a pH
of less than 5.0 or greater than 12.5 units;
      (7)   Pollutants or wastewater that would cause a violation of any
statute or rule, regulation, or ordinance of any public agency or regulatory
agency having jurisdiction over the discharge of wastewater from the City of
Ontario's sewerage system;
      (8)   Pollutants that interfere with the effluent or any other treatment
process, residues, sludges or scums; or cause biosolids to be unsuitable for
beneficial reuse, reclamation or disposal;
      (9)   Any solid or viscous substance or other matter of such quality,
size, or quantity which could cause obstruction to the flow in the sewer or be
detrimental to regional treatment plant operations. These materials include any
solid greater than three-eighths (3/8) inches in any dimension, including, but
not limited to, animal guts or tissues, ashes, asphalt, bones, cinders,
concrete, dead animals, earth, entrails, fatty acids, feathers, gas tar, glass,
glass-grinding, gravel, grass clippings, grease and oil, hair, hides or
fleshing, industrial process shavings, lubricating oil, metal filings, metal,
milk cartons or other similar paper products either whole or ground or garbage
which does not pass through a three-eighths (3/8) inch screen, mud, offal,
paunch manure, paper cups, paper dishes, polishing wastes, plaster, plastics,
rags, residues from refining or processing of fuel, sand, shavings, sharps,
spent grains, spent hops, spent lime, stone or marble dust, straw, tar, waste
paper, whole blood, diatomaceous earth, and wood.
      (10)   Petroleum oil, non-biodegradable cutting oil, refined petroleum
products, dispersed biodegradable oils, fats and greases, such as lard, tallow,
vegetable oil, or products of mineral oil origin, in amounts that will cause
interference or pass-through, obstruct flows within the collection system, or
contributes to or causes a sanitary sewer overflow;
      (11)   Wastewater having a temperature that will inhibit biological
activity at the POTW, resulting in interference, but in no case wastewater that
causes the temperature at the introduction of the POTW to exceed one hundred
four degrees Fahrenheit (104°F) (forty degrees Centigrade (40°C)) unless the
approval authority, upon request of the POTW, approves alternate temperature
limits;
      (12)   Pollutants, including oxygen-demanding pollutants (BOD) released
in a discharge at a flow rate and/or pollutant concentration which, either
singly or by interaction with other pollutants, will cause interference with
the POTW;
      (13)   Pollutants that cause discoloration, pass-through, interference,
or any other condition which affects the quality of the POTW effluent in such a
manner that receiving water quality requirements established by regulatory
agencies or discharge authorization;
      (14)   Any quantity of pesticides, polychlorinated biphenyls, herbicides,
algaecides, or fertilizers which causes an interference, an upset, or a pass-
through at the POTW;
      (15)   Any drainage from a vehicle radiator;
      (16)   Any recognizable portions of the human or animal anatomy;
      (17)   Any wastes which cause excessive incrustations, scale, or
precipitates on sewer walls; or having any detrimental characteristics that may
cause damage to the City of Ontario's sewerage system or injury to service and
maintenance personnel;
      (18)   Any strongly odorous waste or waste tending to create odors;
      (19)   Noxious or malodorous liquids, gases, solids, or other wastewater
which, either singly or by interaction with other wastes, are sufficient to
create a public nuisance or a hazard, or to prevent entry into the sewers for
maintenance or repair;
      (20)   Any infectious waste except where prior written approval for such
discharges is given by the Administrator. Such waste shall be rendered non-
infectious prior to discharge if the infectious waste is deemed to pose a
threat to the public health and safety, or will result in any violation of
applicable waste discharge requirements;
      (21)   Any waste containing substances that may precipitate, solidify,
gel, polymerize, or become viscous at temperatures between forty degrees
Fahrenheit (40°F)and one hundred degrees Fahrenheit (100°F);
      (22)   Any waste generated outside the City of Ontario unless otherwise
approved by the Administrator.
      (23)   Any excessive amounts of deionized water, steam condensate,
distilled water, or single pass cooling water;
      (24)   Any trucked or hauled pollutants, except at discharge points
designated by the Administrator;
      (25)   Sludges, screenings, or other residues from the pretreatment of
industrial wastes;
      (26)   Any emulsifying agent which suspends or emulsified fat, grease or
oil and is specifically used to prevent oil and grease buildup in any gravity
separation device or interior plumbing;
      (27)   Any wastewater that causes alone, or in conjunction with other
sources, the local POTW's effluent to fail a toxicity test;
      (28)   Any detergents, surface-active agents (surfactants), or other
substances that causes excessive foaming in the sewer collection system or at
the POTW;
      (29)   Any wastewater containing excessive quantities of bromide causing,
alone or in conjunction with other sources, the regional treatment plant's
effluent to violate the NPDES permit for chloro-dibromomethane or dichloro-
bromomethane;
      (30)   Any wastewater containing excessive quantities of 2,3,7,8-TCDD
(Dioxin);
      (31)   Hydrolysate;
      (32)   Unused, unwanted, or expired pharmaceuticals (both over the
counter and prescription- only medications), except in accordance with federal
and state regulations, or in the absence of such regulations, using best
management practices;
      (33)   Any septic waste originating from chemical toilets;
      (34)   Any quantity of wastewater flow in excess of permitted limits or
purchased capacity;
      (35)   Any wastewater containing excessive quantities of 1,2,3
trichloropropane; and
      (36)   Pollutants, substances, or wastewater prohibited by § 6-7.201
shall not be processed or stored in such a manner that they could be discharged
to the sewerage system.
   (c)   When specific limits must be developed by the City or POTW:
      (1)   The Administrator developing a pretreatment program pursuant to 40
CFR 403.8 shall develop and enforce specific limits to implement the
prohibitions listed in paragraphs (a) and (b) of this section. The
Administrator shall continue to develop these limits as necessary and
effectively enforce such limits.
      (2)   Where pollutants contributed by user(s) result in interference or
pass-through, and such violation is likely to recur, the Administrator shall
develop and enforce specific effluent limits for industrial user(s), and all
other users, as appropriate, which, together with appropriate changes in the
POTW regional treatment plant's facilities or operation, are necessary to
ensure renewed and continued compliance with the POTW's NPDES permit or sludge
use or disposal practices.
      (3)   Specific effluent limits shall not be developed and enforced
without individual notice to persons or groups who have requested such notice
and an opportunity to respond.
      (4)   The Administrator, or IEUA may develop best management practices
(BMPs) to implement paragraphs (c)(1) and (c)(2) of this section. Such BMPs
shall be considered local limits and pretreatment standards for the purposes of
this part and Section 307(d) of the Act.
   (d)   Where specific prohibitions or limits on pollutants or pollutant
parameters are developed by either the Administrator or IEUA in accordance with
paragraph (b) above, such limits shall be deemed pretreatment standards for the
purposes of Section 307(d) of the Act.
   (e)   The Administrator shall develop, apply, and enforce specific limits or
best management practice requirements as necessary to implement the
prohibitions listed in § 6-7.201 and to comply with sewage quality standards
that are imposed on it by the local POTW. Where specific prohibitions or best
management practices are developed by the Administrator, such limits shall be
deemed and enforceable as pretreatment standards.
   (f)   EPA enforcement actions under Section 309(f) of the Clean Water Act.
      (1)   If, within thirty (30) days after notice of an interference or pass
through violation has been sent by EPA to the POTW, and to persons or groups
who have requested such notice, the POTW fails to commence appropriate
enforcement action to correct the violation, EPA may take appropriate
enforcement action under the authority provided in Section 309(f) of the Clean
Water Act.
(§ 3, Ord. 2755, eff. April 4, 2002, as amended by § 3, Ord. 2945, eff. January
6, 2012, and § 2, Ord. 3190, eff. October 7, 2021)
Sec. 6-7.202. Rainwater or unpolluted water. 
   It in unlawful for any user to discharge or cause to be discharged to the
sewerage system any rainwater, stormwater, groundwater, street drainage,
subsurface drainage, roof drainage, yard drainage, yard fountains, ponds or
lawn sprays, or any other unpolluted water. Any discharges from swimming pools,
wading pools, or therapy pools in which chlorine may be present, may be
permitted by the Administrator to discharge to the sewerage system. If
permission is granted for the discharge of such water into the sewerage system,
the user shall provide for restricted flow and pay any applicable fees.
(§ 3, Ord. 2755, eff. April 4, 2002)
Sec. 6-7.203. Radioactive wastes. 
   It is unlawful for a user to discharge, or cause to be discharged, any
radioactive waste into the sewerage system except:
   (a)   When the user is authorized to use radioactive materials by the State
Department of Health Services or other governmental agency empowered to
regulate the use of radioactive materials;
   (b)   When the radioactive waste is discharged in strict conformity with
current California Radiation Control Regulations as set forth in Title 17 of
the Cal. Code of Regulations;
   (c)   When the user is in compliance with all rules and regulations of all
other applicable regulatory agencies; and
   (d)   When an industrial wastewater permit has been obtained from the City.
(§ 3, Ord. 2755, eff. April 4, 2002)
Sec. 6-7.204. Garbage grinders. 
   (a)   The installation of any garbage grinder with a motor of one and one-
half (1½) horsepower or greater shall be subject to the review and approval of
the Administrator. Such grinders must shred the waste to a degree that all
particles are carried freely under normal flow conditions prevailing in the
sewerage system or pass through a three-eighth (3/8) inch screen.
   (b)   Matter from garbage grinders shall not be discharged into a public
sewer except matter that is generated in preparation of food normally consumed
on the premises, or where the permittee has obtained a permit for a specific
use from the Administrator, and agrees to undertake whatever wastewater
treatment and self-monitoring is required. Garbage grinders shall not be used
for grinding plastic, paper products, inert materials, or garden refuse.
(§ 3, Ord. 2755, eff. April 4, 2002, as amended by § 2, Ord. 3190, eff. October
7, 2021)
Sec. 6-7.205. Hauled wastes. 
   No user shall discharge wastewater delivered by vehicular transport, rail
car, or dedicated pipeline directly or indirectly to the sewerage system except
where authorized by the Administrator. Discharge of chemical toilet wastes from
airplanes and mobile recreation units into the sewer shall be permitted only at
locations specified by the Administrator. Discharge of hauled wastes from
septic tanks or cesspools, or any source other than chemical toilet wastes,
directly or indirectly into the sewerage system, shall be prohibited. Users
seeking a domestic waste hauler permit shall complete and file an application
with the IEUA.
(§ 3, Ord. 2755, eff. April 4, 2002)
Sec. 6-7.206. Water treatment devices. 
   The installation, replacement, or enlargement of any self-regenerating water
softening appliance which discharges into the community sewer system that is
tributary to the regional sewerage system is not permitted. This section shall
not apply to any portable exchange water softener of the type that is
regenerated off-site at a lawfully regulated location. The Inland Empire
Utilities Agency may make available to residential owner of (operational) self-
regenerating water softeners a voluntary rebate program to compensate them for
the reasonable value for removal and disposal of the self-regenerating water
softening appliance.
(§ 3, Ord. 2755, eff. April 4, 2002, as amended by § 2, Ord. 3190, eff. October
7, 2021)
Sec. 6-7.207. Medical wastes. 
   (a)   No user shall discharge solid wastes from hospitals, clinics, offices
of medical doctors, convalescent homes medical laboratories or other medical
facilities to the sewerage system including, but not limited to, hypodermic
needles, syringes, instruments, utensils or other paper and plastic items of a
disposable nature except where prior written approval for such discharges is
given by the Administrator.
   (b)   The City shall have the authority to require that any discharge of an
infectious waste to the sewer be rendered non-infectious prior to discharge if
the infectious waste is deemed to pose a threat to the public health and
safety, or will result in any violation of applicable waste discharge
requirements.
(§ 3, Ord. 2755, eff. April 4, 2002)
Sec. 6-7.208. Spent solutions and sludges. 
   Spent solutions, sludges, and materials of quantity or quality in violation
of, or prohibited by this chapter, or any permit issued under this chapter must
be disposed of in a legal manner at a legally acceptable point of disposal as
defined by the City or appropriate Regulatory Agency. All waste manifests shall
be retained for a minimum of three (3) years, and made available to the City
upon request.
(§ 3, Ord. 2755, eff. April 4, 2002)
Sec. 6-7.209. Dilution. 
   (a)   Except where authorized to do so by an applicable pretreatment
standard or pretreatment requirement, it is unlawful for any user to increase
the use of process water or dilute a discharge as a partial or complete
substitute for adequate treatment to achieve compliance with a pretreatment
standard or requirement. Whenever dilution is authorized, the Administrator may
impose mass limits on the user.
   (b)   When a wastestream regulated by a categorical standard is combined
prior to treatment with other wastestreams, either regulated or non-regulated,
the Administrator shall apply a combined wastestream formula to calculate an
alternate discharge limit.
(§ 3, Ord. 2755, eff. April 4, 2002, as amended by § 2, Ord. 3190, eff. October
7, 2021)
Sec. 6-7.210. Bypass. 
   (a)   Bypass is prohibited unless:
      (1)   Bypass was unavoidable to prevent loss of life, personal injury, or
severe property damage;
      (2)   There were no feasible alternatives to the bypass, such as the use
of auxiliary treatment facilities, retention of untreated wastes, or
maintenance during normal periods of equipment downtime. This condition is not
satisfied if adequate back-up equipment should have been installed in the
exercise of reasonable judgement to prevent a bypass which occurred during
normal periods of equipment downtime or preventative maintenance; and
      (3)   The user submitted notices as required under subsection (b) of this
section.
   (b)   If a user knows in advance of the need for a bypass, the user shall
submit prior notice to the Administrator, at least ten (10) days prior to the
date of the anticipated bypass. After considering its potential adverse
effects, an anticipated bypass may be approved by the Administrator if the
three (3) conditions that are listed in subsection (a) of this section, are
met.
   (c)   In case of an unanticipated bypass that causes or may cause a
violation of an industrial wastewater permit or any applicable pretreatment
standard, the user shall notify the Administrator and IEUA pursuant to §
6-7.509.
(§ 3, Ord. 2755, eff. April 4, 2002, as amended by § 2, Ord. 3190 , eff.
October 7, 2021)
Sec. 6-7.211. Prohibited discharge locations. 
   (a)   No user, except City of Ontario personnel involved in maintenance
functions of the sewerage system, shall discharge any wastewater directly into
a manhole or other opening in a sewer other than through an approved building
sewer, unless approved by the Administrator upon written application by the
user and payment of any applicable fees and charges established herein.
   (b)    No user shall circumvent or obviate the intent or purpose of this
chapter by discharging, or causing to be discharged, into any storm drain,
stormwater channel, stormwater drainage system facility, or natural
watercourse, whether currently carrying water or not, or into any pipe, public
street, or waterway leading to such drain, channel, facility, or natural
watercourse, any material, waste, or wastewater, not including unpolluted
water, which is prohibited or restricted as to its discharge into the public
sewer system.
   (c)   No user shall deposit or discharge into any sump which is not
impermeable or into any pit or well, or onto the ground:
      (1)    Acids or caustics, whether neutralized or not;
      (2)   Excessively saline wastes (electrical conductivity greater than
2,000 umhos/cm);
      (3)   Any material, waste, or wastewater, which by seeping underground or
by being leached or by reacting with soil is detrimental to the surface or
ground water; and
      (4)   Violates waste disposal requirements, waste discharge requirements,
as adopted by the Regional Water Quality Control Board, Santa Ana Region, State
Water Resources Control Board, the Department of Environmental Health Services,
the Environmental Protection Agency, or any other Regulatory Agency with
appropriate jurisdiction.
(§ 3, Ord. 2755, eff. April 4, 2002)
Section. 6-7.212. Local discharge limits. 
   (a)   Local limits are established to protect against pass through and
interference. No SIU shall discharge wastewater to the public sewer in excess
of the local limits that are established by the IEUA and/or adopted by the
City. It is unlawful for an SIU to discharge wastewater to the public sewer
that exceeds the local limits and/or Title 40 of the Code of Federal
Regulations (the more stringent regulations apply) or which will result in the
inability of the local POTW to meet its NPDES wastewater discharge permit
requirements and/or its effluent limitations. Modifications of the local limits
may be necessary to meet the requirements for discharge to the POTW or for
basin groundwater recharge.
   (b)   Wastewater discharged to the sewerage system by a categorical
industrial user shall be limited to the stricter of the discharge limit listed
under subsection (a) of this section, and/or Title 40 of the Code of Federal
Regulations for applicable categorical standards.
   (c)   The Administrator may specify a mass limit for any pollutant in the
user's industrial wastewater permit. Any mass limit shall be based on the local
discharge limit or Federal Categorical Pretreatment Standards, whichever is
stricter, and the user's average daily wastewater discharge. The average daily
wastewater discharge shall be based on the previous twelve (12) months of
operation or other representative data. The Administrator may revise the mass
limit previously established in the user's permit at any time, based on the
user's current or anticipated operating data, and the City's ability to comply
with the regional contract and the requirements of any other regulatory agency.
The excess use of water to establish an artificially high flow rate for mass
emission rate determination is prohibited.
   (d)   In order for the POTW to remain in uninterrupted compliance with
mandated changes in federal, state or local wastewater pretreatment
requirements, the City Council shall adopt any required changes to the City's
wastewater discharge local limits.
   (e)   The Administrator may specify an electrical conductivity limit of one-
thousand two-hundred and eighty (1,280) micro Ohms per centimeter in lieu of
the TDS local limit, if there is reason to believe that there may be
significant interference with the analytical procedure to determine TDS.
(§ 3, Ord. 2755, eff. April 4, 2002, as amended by § 2, Ord. 2913, eff. January
1, 2010, and by § 2, Ord. 3190, eff. October 7, 2021)
Article 3. Permits
Sec. 6-7.301. Industrial wastewater permit. 
   (a)   To provide for the maximum public benefit for the use of the City
sewerage system, written authorization to use said facilities is required. This
written authorization shall be in the form of a discharge permit. No vested
right shall be given by issuance of permits provided for in this section. The
City reserves the right to establish by Municipal Code or in wastewater
discharge permits, more stringent standards or requirements on discharges to
the City's sewerage facilities if deemed appropriate by the Administrator.
   (b)   The permit for industrial wastewater discharge or discharge
authorization shall require compliance with applicable National Pretreatment
Standards and requirements, state discharge requirements, and local limits and
requirements. It may also require pretreatment of industrial wastewaters before
discharge, restriction of peak flow discharges, discharge of certain
wastewaters only to specified sewers of the City, relocation of the point of
discharge, prohibition of discharge of certain wastewater components,
restriction of discharge to certain hours of the day, payment of additional
charges to defray increased costs of the City created by the wastewater
discharge, and such other conditions as may be required to effectuate the
purpose of this ordinance. It is unlawful to discharge industrial wastewaters
in excess of the quantity or quality limitations set by the permit for
industrial wastewater discharge or discharge authorization. Any person desiring
to discharge wastewaters or use facilities which are not in conformance with
the industrial wastewater discharge permit or discharge authorization shall
apply to the City Administrator for an amended industrial wastewater discharge
permit or discharge authorization.
   (c)   Industrial wastewater discharge permits will be issued in one (1) of
eight (8) forms and is dependent upon the type of discharger, volume, and
discharge characteristics. A user may not require a permit if it does not meet
the definition of an SIU, discharges domestic waste only and/or has been
determined by the Administrator to have little potential to adversely affect
the operation and maintenance of the sewerage system, the POTW, and poses no
threat to system worker or the public welfare. The eight (8) discharge permit
types are:
      (1)   Class I Wastewater Discharge Permit issued to significant
industrial users and categorical users:
         (i)   Any user subject to Federal Categorical Pretreatment Standards
under 40 CFR 403.6 and 40 CFR Chapter I, Subchapter N;
         (ii)   Any user having industrial flows equal to or greater than
twenty-five thousand (25,000) gallons per day (excluding sanitary, non- contact
cooling and boiler blow down wastewater);
         (iii)   Any user contributing a process wastestream which makes up
five percent (5%) or more of the average dry weather hydraulic or organic
capacity of the POTW regional treatment plant; and
         (iv)   Any user designated as such by the Administrator on the basis
that the industrial user has a reasonable potential for adversely affecting the
operation of the regional treatment plant or for violating any pretreatment
standard or pretreatment requirement; and
      (2)   Class II Wastewater Discharge Permit issued to any user that does
not fit the definition of an SIU, but has the potential to negatively affect
the City sewerage system, the local POTW, or endanger worker welfare, and to
any user discharging wastewater other than domestic waste only, where the
Administrator has determined that a Class II permit is required.
      (3)   Class IIF Wastewater Discharge Permit issued to:
         (i)   Facilities that are engaged in food preparation for consumption
by the public desiring to discharge wastewater into the City sewerage system,
and have been determined to have a reasonable potential to negatively affect
the City of Ontario collection system or POTW;
      (4)    Class IIZ Wastewater Discharge Permits are issued to any
industrial user who is performing operations that are subject to categorical
pretreatment standards, but does not discharge federally regulated wastewater
to sewer, and only discharges unregulated wastewater that would normally be
covered under a Class II type permit into the sewerage system.
      (5)    Class III permits are issued to targeted non-SIU commercial sector
groups to regulate the conventional pollutants only.
      (6)   Class IIIZ Industrial Wastewater Permit issued to any industrial
user who is performing operations that are subject to categorical pretreatment
standards, but does not discharge federally regulated wastewater to sewer, and
only discharges unregulated wastewater that would normally be covered under a
Class III type permit into the sewerage system.
      (7)   Class IZ Industrial Wastewater Permit issued to any user who is
subject to categorical pretreatment standards, and does not discharge
industrial waste, and only discharges domestic waste into the sewerage system.
      (8)   Temporary Industrial Wastewater Discharge Permit issued to:
         (i)   Any user discharging wastewater temporarily from industrial
operations;
         (ii)   Any user who has a discharge of unpolluted water whereby no
alternative method of disposal is available.
   (d)   No user of the City sewerage system requiring a permit shall discharge
wastewater without obtaining a wastewater discharge permit. The determination
for requiring a wastewater discharge permit is made by the Administrator or
their designee. Any user that fits the definition of a significant industrial
user, or having otherwise been determined to have a reasonable potential to
adversely affect the operation and maintenance of the sewerage system, the
POTW, or poses a threat to worker welfare, or has been determined in need of
one by the Administrator is required to obtain a permit.
   (e)   All users of the City's sewerage system proposing to discharge
industrial waste directly or indirectly into the sewerage system, where a
potential exists to interfere with the operation and maintenance of the sewer
system or with the pretreatment facilities shall obtain a wastewater discharge
permit from the City Administrator or their designee by filing an application
pursuant to §
6-7.302 and paying the applicable fees pursuant to §
6-7.704. These wastes will include all wastewater discharges which are required
to be regulated by federal laws or regulations, State of California mandates,
or local ordinances.
   (f)   All wastewater discharge permits shall be expressly subject to all
provisions of this chapter and all other regulations, charges for use, and fees
established by the City. Wastewater discharge permit conditions shall be
enforced by the City of Ontario and Inland Empire Utilities Agency in
accordance with this chapter and applicable state and federal regulations.
   (g)   Categorical pretreatment standards may be adjusted to reflect the
presence of pollutants in the industrial user's intake water in accordance with
40 CFR § 403.15. Any industrial user wishing to obtain credit for intake
pollutants must make application to the Administrator. Upon request of the
industrial user, the applicable pretreatment standard will be calculated on a
"net" basis (i.e., adjusted to reflect credit for pollutants in the intake
water) if the requirements of 40 CFR 403.15(b) are met.
(§ 3, Ord. 2755, eff. April 4, 2002, as amended by § 12, Ord. 2816, eff.
December 1, 2005, § 4, Ord. 2945, eff. January 6, 2012, and § 2, Ord. 3190,
eff. October 7, 2021)
Sec. 6-7.302. Applications.
   (a)   Users seeking to obtain an industrial wastewater discharge permit
shall complete and file with the City, prior to commencing discharge, an
application and survey on the forms prescribed by the City. The applicant may
be required to submit, in units and terms appropriate for evaluation and in
sufficient time to allow proper and thorough evaluation, the following
information:
      (1)   Name, address, SIC number(s) and/or NAISC number(s), and a
description of the manufacturing process or service activity;
      (2)   (Whichever is applicable) name, address of any and all principals/
owner/major shareholders of company; Articles of Incorporation; most recent
report of the Secretary of State; business license;
      (3)   Volume of wastewater to be discharged;
      (4)   Name of individual who can be served with notices other than
officers of corporation;
      (5)   Name and address of property owner, landlord and/or manager of the
property;
      (6)   Wastewater constituents and characteristics as required by the
City. These constituents and characteristics shall be determined by an ELAP
certified laboratory selected by the discharger and acceptable to the City;
      (7)   Time and duration of discharge;
      (8)   Number of employees and average hours of work per employee per day;
      (9)   Waste minimization and water conservation practices;
      (10)   Production records, if applicable;
      (11)   Waste manifests, if applicable;
      (12)   Tons of cooling tower capacity, if applicable;
      (13)   EPA Hazardous Waste Generator Number, if applicable;
      (14)   The location for monitoring all wastes covered by the permit;
      (15)   Flow measurement information showing the measured average daily
and maximum daily flow, in gallons per day, to the POTW from regulated process
streams and other streams, as necessary, to allow use of the combined
wastestream formula set forth in 40 CFR 403.6(e).
      (16)   Any other information as specified.
      (17)   Special studies may be required in the processing of an
application, or an individual wastewater discharge permit update. In the event
a special study is required, the City shall notify the applicant or the user in
writing, of the need for a special study, and what parameters the study should
address. If the City performs the study, the applicant or user shall deposit
with the City the estimated cost of performing the study. All costs shall be
borne by the applicant or user. Final costs will be based upon actual costs
incurred by the City.
      (18)   Any environmental control permits held by or for the facility
including permits issued by the San Bernardino County Department of
Environmental Health Services, State of California, and South Coast Air Quality
Management District.
   (b)   Applicants may be required to submit site plans, floor plans,
mechanical and plumbing plans, and details to show all sewers, spill
containment, clarifiers, pretreatment equipment, and appurtenances by size,
location, and elevation for evaluation, and all points of discharge.
   (c)   Applicants may also be required to submit information related to the
applicant's business operations, processes, and potential discharge as may be
requested by the City to properly evaluate the permit application.
   (d)   After evaluation of the data, the City and/or Inland Empire Utilities
Agency may issue a wastewater discharge permit, subject to terms and conditions
set forth in this chapter and as otherwise determined by the Administrator to
be appropriate to protect the City's sewerage facilities.
   (e)   The permit application may be denied if the applicant fails to
establish to the City's satisfaction, that adequate pretreatment equipment is
included within the applicant's plans to ensure that the discharge limit will
be met or if the applicant has, in the past, demonstrated an inability to
comply with applicable discharge limit.
(§ 3, Ord. 2755, eff. April 4, 2002, as amended by § 13, Ord. 2816, eff.
December 1, 2005, and § 2, Ord. 3190, eff. October 7, 2021)
Sec. 6-7.303. Permit conditions. 
   (a)   All industrial wastewater discharge permits shall be subject to all
provisions of this chapter, all other applicable regulations, and user charges
and fees established by the City. In addition, all permits may be subject to
the following:
      (1)   Limits on the average and maximum wastewater constituents,
characteristics and mass limits. The Administrator may impose mass emission
rate limitations on users where the imposition of such limitations is
appropriate;
      (2)   Limits on the average and maximum rate and time of discharge
requirements for flow regulations and equalization;
      (3)   Requirements for the installation, operation, and maintenance of a
pretreatment system and equipment;
      (4)   Requirements to operate and maintain the pretreatment system using
a qualified and certified operator as determined by the Administrator;
      (5)   Requirements for installation, operation, and maintenance of
monitoring, monitoring/ surveillance facilities, pH control, and/or flow
monitoring which comply with the BMP;
      (6)   Specifications for monitoring programs which may include sampling
locations, frequency of sampling, numbers and types of samples, standards for
tests and reporting schedules;
      (7)   Compliance time schedules;
      (8)   Requirements for submission of technical reports, discharge
reports, production data, and/or waste manifests;
      (9)   Requirements for maintaining and retaining industrial records
relating to wastewater discharge as specified by the City. These records shall
be made available to City and IEUA personnel upon request;
      (10)   Requirements for notification of the City of any new introduction
of wastewater constituents or any substantial change in the volume or character
of the wastewater constituents being introduced into the City's sewerage
system;
      (11)   Requirements for notification of slug discharges;
      (12)   Requirements to self-monitor;
      (13)   Requirements to maintain various discharge logs;
      (14)   Requirements to inventory key pretreatment system equipment;
      (15)   Requirements to separate all domestic wastewater from bathrooms,
showers, drinking fountains, from all industrial wastewater until the
industrial wastewaters have passed through any required pretreatment
facilities;
      (16)   Requirements to consolidate all industrial flows into one (1)
location for purposes of monitoring and determining compliance with the permit
and this chapter;
      (17)   Requirements to notify the Administrator, up to forty-eight (48)
hours prior to the commencement of any batch discharge. Notification shall
include the date, time and location of proposed batch discharge;
      (18)   Other conditions as deemed appropriate by the Administrator to
ensure compliance with this chapter;
      (19)   Requirements to develop a compliance schedule by each industrial
user for the installation of technology required to meet applicable
pretreatment standards and pretreatment requirements; and
      (20)   Requirements for submission of all notices and self-monitoring
reports from industrial users as are necessary to assess and assure compliance
by industrial users with pretreatment standards and pretreatment requirements,
including but not limited to the reports required in 40 CFR 403.12.
(§ 3, Ord. 2755, eff. April 4, 2002, as amended by § 14, Ord. 2816, eff.
December 1, 2005, and § 2, Ord. 3190, eff. October 7, 2021)
Sec. 6-7.304. Duration. 
   An industrial wastewater permit shall be issued for a specified time period,
not to exceed five (5) years. An industrial wastewater permit may be issued for
a period of less than five (5) years at the discretion of the Administrator.
Each individual wastewater discharge permit will indicate a specific date upon
which it will expire. Under special circumstances, the Administrator may at his
or her option extend the permit duration for an additional time period not to
exceed one (1) year for permits that have been issued for a duration period of
four (4) years or less. The user shall apply for renewal of the permit no more
than one hundred twenty (120) or later than sixty (60) days prior to the
expiration date of the permit. After submitting an application for renewal, the
permit shall automatically be extended until the Administrator makes a
determination on the application for renewal. Any existing user who is
discharging industrial wastewater to the public sewer without a valid
industrial wastewater permit shall apply for a permit within ten (10) working
days from the date of notification of the permit requirement.
(§ 3, Ord. 2755, eff. April 4, 2002, as amended by § 2, Ord. 3190, eff. October
7, 2021)
Sec. 6-7.305. Change of permit conditions. 
   (a)   The user shall submit to the Administrator, within a reasonable time,
any documents or records maintained by the user and requested by the
Administrator to determine whether cause exists for rescinding, modifying,
revoking, reissuing the permit, or to determine compliance with the permit
requirements.
   (b)   The terms and conditions of an issued permit may be subject to
modification and change in the determination of the City and IEUA during the
life of the permit for good cause, including, but not limited to, the following
reasons:
      (1)   Changes in the user's current or anticipated pretreatment system
operating data;
      (2)   Changes in the City's sewerage system's and IEUA's treatment plant
current or anticipated operating data;
      (3)   Changes in the requirements of regulatory agencies which affect the
City and IEUA's treatment plant;
      (4)   To incorporate any new or revised federal, state, or local
pretreatment standards or requirements;
      (5)   To address significant alterations or additions to the user's
operation, processes, or wastewater volume or character since the date the
wastewater discharge permit was issued;
      (6)   To reflect any change in the City sewerage system that requires
either a temporary or permanent reduction or elimination of the authorized
discharge;
      (7)   In response to information indicating that the permitted discharge
poses a threat to the City's sewerage system, its personnel, IEUA's treatment
plant, or the receiving waters;
      (8)   Violation of any terms or conditions of the industrial wastewater
discharge permit;
      (9)   Misrepresentation or failure to fully disclose all relevant facts
in the wastewater discharge permit application or in any required reporting;
      (10)   Revision of or a grant of variance from Categorical Pretreatment
Standards pursuant to 40 CFR 403.13;
      (11)   To correct typographical or other errors in the industrial
wastewater discharge permit; or
      (12)   To reflect a transfer of the facility ownership or operation to a
new owner or operator as allowed by this chapter.
   (c)   The Administrator shall inform the user of any proposed changes or new
conditions in his permit and shall include a reasonable period of time for
compliance.
   (d)   The user shall have the right to file, with the Administrator, a
written request to reduce monitoring and/or reporting requirements or to have
other permit conditions modified or changed. Any request by the user to modify
the user's industrial wastewater permit shall be processed, if approved by the
Administrator, after payment of applicable fees and charges.
   (e)   The Administrator may deny or condition new or increased contributions
of pollutants, or changes in the nature of pollutants, to the public sewer by
industrial users where such contributions do not meet applicable pretreatment
standards and requirements or where such contributions would cause the City to
violate the Regional Contract, or the POTW to violate its NPDES permit.
   (f)   All permitted discharges must commence within one hundred eighty (180)
days from the effective date of the permit or the permit may be deemed void.
(§ 3, Ord. 2755, eff. April 4, 2002, as amended by § 15, Ord. 2816, eff.
December 1, 2005)
Sec. 6-7.306. Non-transferability. 
   Industrial wastewater discharge permits are issued to a specific user for a
specific operation at a particular location. Such permits shall not be
reassigned, transferred or sold.
(§ 3, Ord. 2755, eff. April 4, 2002)
Sec. 6-7.307. National Categorical Pretreatment Standards.
   (a)   Industrial users subject to a categorical pretreatment standard must
comply with the applicable categorical pretreatment standards found at 40 CFR
Chapter I, Subchapter N, Parts 405-471.
   (b)   When the limits in a categorical pretreatment standard are expressed
only in terms of mass of pollutant per unit of production, the Administrator
may convert the limits to equivalent limitations expressed either as mass of
pollutant discharged per day or effluent concentration for purposes of
calculating effluent limitations applicable to individual significant
industrial users.
   (c)   When wastewater subject to a categorical pretreatment standard is
mixed with wastewater not regulated by the same pretreatment standard, the
Administrator shall impose an alternate limit in accordance with 40 CFR 403.6
(e).
   (d)   The Administrator may convert the mass limits of the categorical
pretreatment standards of 40 CFR Parts 414, 419, and 455 to concentration-based
limits for purposes of calculating limitations applicable to individual
industrial users. The conversion is at the discretion of the Administrator.
   (e)   Once included in its permit, the industrial user must comply with the
equivalent limitations developed in this §
6-7.307 in lieu of the promulgated categorical standards from which the
equivalent limitations were derived.
   (f)   Many categorical pretreatment standards specify one (1) limit for
calculating maximum daily discharge limitations and a second limit for
calculating maximum monthly average, or four (4)-day average, limitations.
Where such pretreatment standards are being applied, the same production or
flow figure shall be used in calculating both the average and the maximum
equivalent limitation.
   (g)   Any industrial user operating under a permit incorporating equivalent
mass or concentration-based limits calculated from a production-based
pretreatment standard shall notify the Administrator within two (2) business
days after the user has a reasonable basis to know that the production level
will significantly change within the next calendar month. Any user not
notifying the Administrator of such anticipated change will be required to meet
the mass or concentration limits in its permit that were based on the original
estimate of the long term average production rate.
(§ 2, Ord. 3190, eff. October 7, 2021)
Article 4. Facilities
Sec. 6-7.401. Drawing submittal requirements.
   Upon request by the City:
   (a)   Applicants or users may be required to submit three (3) copies of
detailed facility plans. The submittal shall be in a form and content
acceptable to the City for review of existing or proposed pretreatment
facilities, spill containment facilities, monitoring facilities, metering
facilities, and operating procedures. The review of the plans and procedures
shall in no way relieve the user of the responsibility of modifying the
facilities or procedures in the future, as necessary to produce an acceptable
discharge and to meet the requirements of this chapter or any requirements of
other Regulatory Agencies.
   (b)   The drawing shall depict as a minimum, the manufacturing process
(waste generating sources), spill containment, monitoring or metering
facilities, and pretreatment facilities.
   (c)   The applicant or user shall submit a schematic drawing of the
pretreatment facilities, piping and instrumentation diagram, and wastewater
characterization report.
   (d)   Users and applicants may also be required to submit for review site
plans, floor plans, mechanical and plumbing plans, and details to show all
sewers, spill containment, clarifiers, and appurtenances by size, location, and
elevation for evaluation.
   (e)   The City may require the drawings be prepared by a California
Registered Chemical, Mechanical, or Civil Engineer.
(§ 3, Ord. 2755, eff. April 4, 2002)
Sec. 6-7.402. Pretreatment facilities. 
   (a)   An industrial wastewater pretreatment facility or device may be
required to restrict or prevent the discharge to the sewerage system of certain
wastewater constituents, or to accomplish any pretreatment result required by
the Administrator.
   (b)   A pretreatment facility which requires engineering design shall have
plans prepared and signed by an engineer of suitable discipline licensed in the
State of California.
   (c)   Detailed plans showing the pretreatment facilities and operating
procedures, and compliance schedules shall be submitted to the City for review
and approval before construction of the facility.
   (d)   The review of such plans and operating procedures will in no way
relieve the permittee from the responsibility of modifying the facility as
necessary to produce an effluent acceptable to the Administrator under the
provisions of this ordinance.
   (e)   Any subsequent changes in the pretreatment facilities or method of
operation shall be reported to and be approved by the Administrator.
   (f)   The Administrator or his/her appointed designee shall have the
authority in negotiation with any industrial permittee, to impose compliance
schedules relating to installation of specific pretreatment equipment, filing
of reports, and achievement of specific discharge conditions.
   (g)   No permittee shall increase the use of process water or in any way
attempt to dilute a discharge as a partial or complete substitute for adequate
treatment to achieve compliance with any local, state, or federal discharge
standard.
   (h)   The user shall establish and maintain a daily operation and
maintenance log for any pretreatment system. The daily operation and
maintenance log shall contain, at a minimum, the following information:
      (1)   The name of the user responsible for the operation of the
pretreatment system, hours of work, and telephone number;
      (2)   Date, time, and a description of all routine maintenance and
calibration of the system;
      (3)   Date and time of any major repair and down time on the system;
      (4)   The emergency or backup system or program instituted while the
pretreatment system was out of operation; and
      (5)   The estimated daily operational efficiency of the pretreatment
system and any other information which may be required to assure compliance
with pretreatment requirements.
      (6)   A food service establishment shall keep records of grease
pretreatment device cleaning, maintenance and grease removal and shall report
on such maintenance to the Administrator when required. The Administrator may
require the permittee to provide results of periodic measurements of its
discharge which may include chemical analysis for oil and grease content and
other constituents.
   (i)   The Administrator may require any user discharging into the sewerage
system to install and maintain, on their property and at their expense, a
suitable storage and flow-control facility to ensure equalization of flow. An
individual wastewater discharge permit may be issued solely for flow
equalization.
   (j)   The user shall at all times properly operate and maintain all
facilities and systems of treatment and control (and related appurtenances)
which are installed or used by the user to achieve compliance with the
conditions of the permit. Proper operation and maintenance also includes
adequate laboratory controls and appropriate quality assurance procedures. This
provision requires the operation of back-up or auxiliary facilities or similar
systems which are installed by an industrial user when the operation is
necessary to achieve compliance with the conditions of the permit.
   (k)   Waste solids and/or liquids containing pollutants removed in the
course of the users pretreatment processes shall be properly disposed of in a
manner such as to prevent any pollutant from such materials from entering the
sewerage system.
   (l)   Whenever deemed necessary, the General Manager may require users to
restrict their discharge during peak flow periods, designate that certain
wastewater be discharged only into specific sewers, relocate and/or consolidate
points of discharge, separate sewage wastestreams from industrial wastestreams,
and such other conditions as many be necessary to protect the POTWS and
determine the user's compliance with the requirements of this ordinance.
   (m)   Users with the potential to discharge flammable substances may be
required to install and maintain an approved combustible gas detection meter.
(§ 3, Ord. 2755, eff. April 4, 2002, as amended by § 2, Ord. 3190, eff. October
7, 2021)
Sec. 6-7.403. Monitoring facilities.
   (a)   Each industrial user shall install and maintain a monitoring facility
for each point-source to the sewerage system. The monitoring facility and its
location are subject to approval by the Administrator.
   (b)   All proposed construction of commercial and/or industrial buildings
shall include plans to install a surveillance/monitoring facility for each
point-source to the sewerage system. The surveillance/monitoring facility and
its location are subject to approval by the Administrator or in accordance with
the City Standard Drawings.
   (c)    When more than one user can discharge into a common private sewer,
the Administrator may require installation of a separate monitoring facility
for each user. Also, when in the judgement of the Administrator, there is a
significant difference in wastewater constituents and characteristics produced
by different operations of a single user, the Administrator may require that a
separate monitoring facility be installed for each segregated wastestream. This
may include, but may not be limited to, segregation of Categorical process
wastestreams from additional wastestreams not subject to categorical standards.
   (d)   City standard drawings establish design requirements, applicable
construction standards, safety devices and specifications for surveillance/
monitoring facilities. The design plans for any required or surveillance/
monitoring facility shall be prepared and signed by an engineer registered in
the State of California. Such plans shall be reviewed and must be approved by
the Administrator prior to any construction of said facility. The approval of
the design of any facility meeting the requirements set forth in this section
or any recommendation or requirements made by the Administrator, shall not
relieve the user from the responsibility of meeting the requirements of this
chapter, and shall not impute any liability to the City for the adequacy of
such facility under the actual conditions of use.
   (e)   If explosive or flammable substances are stored or used on-site, and
such substances have the potential of entering the sewerage system, the user
may be required to install, operate and maintain a combustible gas monitoring
system and facilities to divert the entire wastewater flow to a holding tank
when the combustible gas level is greater than twenty percent (20%) of the
lower explosive limit. These facilities will be provided and maintained at the
user's own cost and expense. A user so notified shall provide detailed gas
monitoring and wastewater diversion plans, including facilities and operating
procedures, to the Administrator for review.
   (f)   If required by the City in writing, the user shall submit construction
plans and/or instrumentation for approval by the City of the following:
      (1)   A pH-recording instrument with a strip chart to record all flows on
a twenty-four (24) hour continuous basis;
      (2)   A conductivity meter with a strip chart to record all flows on a
twenty-four (24) hour continuous basis;
      (3)   A flume, weir, flow meter or similar device approved by the City
and suitable to measure the non-domestic flow rate and total volume on a
continuous basis. The monitoring equipment shall be maintained at all times in
a safe and proper operating condition by the user. All devices used to measure
wastewater flow and quality shall be calibrated at a frequency determined by
the Administrator to ensure their accuracy. The costs of installing and
maintaining such device(s) shall be at the sole expense of the user.
   (g)   Construction of any monitoring facility or device shall be completed
within a time period established by the Administrator.
   (h)   Unrestricted access to the monitoring facility shall be available to
authorized personnel of the City and IEUA at all times. Unreasonable delays in
allowing City or IEUA personnel access to the user's premises shall be a
violation of this chapter.
   (i)   Any temporary or permanent obstruction to safe and easy access to the
monitoring facility or surveillance/monitoring facility shall be promptly
removed by the user at the written or verbal request of the Administrator and
shall not be replaced. The costs of clearing such access shall be borne by the
user.
   (j)   A monitoring facility or surveillance/ monitoring facility may be
required to include a security closure that can be locked by the City during
sampling or upon termination of service.
   (k)   A monitoring facility or surveillance/ monitoring facility shall be
located so that samples can be taken immediately downstream from the
pretreatment facilities, if any exist, or where no treatment is employed,
immediately downstream from the user's wastestream.
   (l)   Any sample taken from the monitoring facility shall be considered
representative of the user's discharge.
   (m)   Users are responsible for cleaning and maintaining the monitoring
facility and equipment. Oils, solids, and other debris removed from the
monitoring facility shall not be discharged to the sewer.
(§ 3, Ord. 2755, eff. April 4, 2002, as amended by § 16, Ord. 2816, eff.
December 1, 2005)
Sec. 6-7.404. Interceptors.
   (a)   A food service establishment discharging grease wastes which, under
the conditions existing in the downstream sewers, could cause or threaten to
cause stoppage or grease accumulations, shall install an approved grease and
oil interceptor and regularly maintain it so as to prevent excessive discharges
of grease and oil into the sewerage system. The costs of installing and
maintaining such device(s) shall be at the sole expense of the user. Any user
who operates, owns or maintains a food service establishment shall cause all
floor drains, floor sinks, sinks, and waste container wash racks to be directed
through the grease and oil interceptor, and shall keep all domestic wastewater
from restrooms, showers, drinking fountains, and condensate (i.e. ice melt, air
conditioning) separate from the food service wastewater until the food service
wastewater has passed through all necessary pretreatment equipment, devices, or
monitoring stations.
   (b)   Each permittee shall be required to provide a collection tank or
container for the purpose of physically segregating oils, greases, and greasy
solids from wash water. Permittees shall establish procedures for personnel to
follow in order to segregate oils, greases, and greasy solids to the collection
container prior to performing any washing and other water cleaning which goes
into the sewers. The permittee shall be responsible for the proper removal and
lawful disposal of the material captured from either the grease pretreatment
devices on wastewater lines or the collection container utilized for the
segregation of oils, greases and greasy solids.
   (c)   Each vehicle wash, vehicle or equipment servicing, industrial
transportation, and/or cleaning facility shall install an appropriate sand,
grease and oil Interceptor of a size and design approved by the Administrator.
Wastewater arising from the cleaning, servicing and repair of vehicles shall
pass through this interceptor before discharge to the sewerage system.
   (d)   If an interceptor is not adequate under the conditions of use, one
which is effective in accomplishing the intended purpose shall be constructed
by the user within a time period established by the Administrator.
   (e)   The design plans for any required interceptor not included in the
Plumbing Code or City standard drawings shall be prepared and signed by an
engineer registered in the State of California and meet the drawing submittal
requirements set forth in §
6-7.401. Such plans shall be reviewed and must be approved by the Administrator
prior to any construction of said device.
   (f)   The interceptor required by this chapter shall be watertight,
structurally sound, durable, properly maintained, and easily accessible for
inspection and cleaning to assure that the accumulation of sand, oil or grease
does not impair the efficiency of the interceptor or pass through the device.
At no time shall any material, debris, obstacle or obstruction be placed in
such a manner as to prevent immediate access to the Interceptor.
   (g)   A user who is required to install and maintain an interceptor shall
keep maintenance records and hauler's manifests for a minimum of three (3)
years. These records shall be made available to the Administrator upon request.
Each vehicle wash and food service facility shall be responsible for the costs
of installing, inspecting, pumping, cleaning and maintaining its grease
interceptor. Cleaning and maintenance must be performed when the total volume
of captured grease and solid material displaces more than twenty percent (20%)
of the total volume of the unit. All vehicle wash and food service facilities
that have grease interceptors shall utilize a licensed grease hauler who has
been permitted for pumping services. Pumping services shall include the initial
complete removal of all contents, including floating materials, wastewater and
bottom sludge and solids from the interceptor. It is unlawful for any grease
waste hauler to reinsert, deposit, pump, place, release, or discharge into a
grease trap, grease interceptor, manhole, cleanout, or other sanitary sewer
appurtenance any materials that the hauler has removed from the grease trap or
grease interceptor, or to cause those materials to be so handled. This
prohibition as it pertains to the reinsertion of material removed from a grease
trap or grease interceptor, shall not apply to a grease waste hauler that has
met all of the conditions that are outlined in both the California Penal Code
Section 374.5(a)(2)(b) and the City of Ontario Public Sewer System Ordinance,
Title 6, Chapter 7, §
6-7.404. Grease interceptor cleaning shall include scraping excessive solids
from the walls, floors, baffles and all pipe work. It shall be the
responsibility of each vehicle wash or food service facility to inspect its
grease interceptor during the pumping procedure to ensure that the interceptor
is properly cleaned out and that all fittings and fixtures inside the
interceptor are in working condition and functioning properly.
   (h)   Each vehicle wash or food service facility shall determine the
frequency at which its grease interceptor(s) shall be pumped according to the
following criteria:
      (1)   When the floatable grease layer exceeds six (6) inches in depth as
measured by an approved dipping method;
      (2)   When the settleable solids layer exceeds eight (8) inches in depth
as measured by an approved dipping method;
      (3)   When the total volume of captured grease and solid material
displaces more than twenty percent (20%) of the capacity of the interceptor as
calculated using an approved dipping method; or
      (4)   When the interceptor is not retaining/ capturing oils and greases;
or the removal efficiency of the device, as determined through sampling and
analysis, is less than eighty percent (80%).
   (i)   Periodic inspection of the interceptor may be performed to determine
compliance with this section. The owner and/or user of the property shall be
subject to enforcement actions if such user fails to maintain the interceptor
and/or keep adequate records.
   (j)   Conditional waivers for the grease and oil interceptor or sand, grease
and oil interceptor requirement shall be granted by the Administrator for food
service establishments or vehicle wash, vehicle or equipment servicing,
industrial transportation and/or cleaning facility determined not to have
adverse effects on the City's sewerage system or the POTW. Conditional waivers
may be revoked for the following reasons:
      (1)   Changes in menu;
      (2)   Falsification of information submitted;
      (3)   Change in operating hours;
      (4)   Changes in equipment used;
      (5)   Changes in the number of vehicles washed; or
      (6)   As determined by the Administrator to have adverse effects on the
City's sewerage system or the POTW.
   (k)   The shared use of a grease interceptor by multiple FSEs and/or other
industrial users is prohibited unless authorization is granted by the
Administrator.
(§ 3, Ord. 2755, eff. April 4, 2002, as amended by § 4, Ord. 2806, eff. January
21, 2005, § 5, Ord. 2945, eff. January 6, 2012, and § 2, Ord. 3190, eff.
October 7, 2021)
Sec. 6-7.405. Secondary spill containment.
   (a)   Upon written notification by the Administrator, the user shall provide
secondary spill containment for stored chemicals or other substances which are
prohibited or regulated by this chapter and which have the potential of
entering the public sewerage system. The user so notified shall submit to the
Administrator detailed secondary spill containment plans, including the
facility's location, dimensions, and type and volume of material or waste
stored.
   (b)   Drawings shall be submitted in accordance with §
6-7.401.
   (c)   The containment system shall be designed and operated as follows:
      (1)   The base shall be free of cracks or gaps, and shall be sufficiently
impervious to contain leaks, spills, or precipitation until the collected
material is detected and removed;
      (2)   The base shall be sloped or the containment system shall be
otherwise designed and operated to drain and remove liquids resulting from
leaks, spills, or precipitation, unless the containers are elevated or are
otherwise protected from contact with accumulated liquids and precipitation;
      (3)   The containment system shall have sufficient capacity to contain
precipitation from, at least a twenty-four (24) hour, twenty-five (25) year
storm plus ten percent (10%) of the aggregate volume of all containers or the
volume of the largest container, whichever is greater plus a freeboard of at
least three (3) inches. Containers that are not used to store chemicals in a
liquid form need not be considered in this determination;
      (4)   Stormwater runoff from adjacent areas shall be prevented from
flowing into the containment system;
      (5)   Spilled or leaked waste and accumulated precipitation shall be
removed from the sump or collection area in as timely a manner as is necessary
to prevent overflow of the collection system. Unless otherwise approved by the
Administrator, all chemicals or wastes discharged within the collection area
shall be disposed of appropriately and not discharged to the sewerage system or
the ground.
   (d)   The user shall submit to the Administrator a written statement, signed
by a professional civil engineer registered in California, indicating that the
containment system is suitably designed to achieve the requirements of this
section.
   (e)   Construction shall be completed within a time period established in a
compliance schedule.
(§ 3, Ord. 2755, eff. April 4, 2002)
Article 5. Monitoring, Reporting, Notification and Inspection Requirements
Sec. 6-7.501. Monitoring. 
   (a)   Periodic measurements of flow rates, flow volumes, and wastewater
characteristics for compliance with any limitations or requirements specified
in the industrial wastewater permit or this chapter shall be performed using
appropriate procedures set forth in 40 CFR Part 136 and 403.12(e), 403.12 (g),
403.12(h) and 122.45(c). Analyses of the constituents and characteristics shall
be by a state-certified laboratory, and at the sole expense of the permittee.
   (b)   A user with large fluctuations in quantity or quality of wastewater
may be required to provide continuous monitoring for some of the wastewater
characteristics.
   (c)   Routine monitoring and sampling shall be conducted at the City-
approved monitoring facility, and during a period of normal business operations
and wastewater flows of the user.
   (d)   Grab and/or composite samples of the industrial wastewater shall be
properly obtained, preserved, and analyzed for the specified wastewater
constituents by a state-certified laboratory.
   (e)   All sampling and analysis for the purposes of providing pollutant
discharge information to the Administrator in self-monitoring and other reports
shall be performed in accordance with the techniques prescribed in the Code of
Federal Regulations at 40 CFR Part 136 and amendments thereto.
   (f)   When 40 CFR Part 136 does not contain sampling or analytical
techniques for the pollutant in question, or where the EPA Administrator
determines that the Part 136 sampling and analytical techniques are
inappropriate for the pollutant in question, sampling and analysis shall be
performed by using validated analytical methods or any other applicable
sampling and analytical procedures, including procedures suggested by the POTW
or other parties, approved by the EPA Administrator.
   (g)   When requested by the Administrator or the user, a split sample will
be provided to the other party to verify the levels of constituents in the
wastewater.
   (h)   It shall be unlawful, and the user shall be held financially
responsible for any damage to, breakage of, or tampering with, any laboratory
or City monitoring equipment while it is in use either in, on, or next to the
monitoring facility of the user.
   (i)   The City or IEUA may inspect and sample the wastewater generating and
disposal facilities of any user to ascertain whether the intent of this chapter
is being met and the user is complying with all requirements. Where a user has
security measures in force, the user shall make necessary arrangements so that,
upon presentation of suitable identification, personnel from the City, IEUA or
laboratory will be permitted to enter without delay for the purpose of
performing their specific responsibilities.
   (j)   The City or IEUA shall have the right to set up on the user's property
or other locations as determined by the City, such devices as are necessary to
conduct sampling or metering operations.
   (k)   Results from all samples taken from the designated monitoring point
shall be reported to the City.
   (l)   If sampling by a user indicates a violation, the user shall notify the
City within twenty-four (24) hours of becoming aware of the violation. The user
shall repeat the sampling and analysis and submit the results of the repeat
analysis to the City within thirty (30) days after becoming aware of the
violation. Resampling by the user is not required if the City or IEUA performs
sampling at the user's facility at least once a month, or if the City or IEUA
performs sampling at the user's facility between the time when the initial
sampling was conducted and the time when the user receives the results of this
sampling, or if the City or IEUA has performed the sampling and analysis in
lieu of the user.
   (m)    If a user monitors any pollutant more frequently than required by the
City, the results of the monitoring shall be included in the periodic reports
on continued compliance.
   (n)   All laboratory reports shall be accompanied by the corresponding
chain-of-custody log. The chain-of-custody shall contain the following
information: sample source; date, time and method of sampling and sample
preservation; type of container used, sampler identification, results of any
field measurement or observation, and any other information related to sample
handling.
   (o)   The reports required in §
6-7.502 below must be based upon data obtained through appropriate sampling and
analysis performed during the period covered by the report, which data are
representative of conditions occurring during the reporting period. The
Administrator shall require that frequency of monitoring necessary to assess
and assure compliance by industrial users with applicable pretreatment
standards and pretreatment requirements. Grab samples must be used for pH,
cyanide, total phenols, oil and grease, sulfide, and volatile organic
compounds. For all other pollutants, twenty-four (24) hour composite samples
must be obtained through flow-proportional composite sampling techniques,
unless time-proportional composite sampling or grab sampling is authorized by
the Administrator. Where time-proportional composite sampling or grab sampling
is authorized by the Administrator, the samples must be representative of the
discharge and the decision to allow the alternative sampling must be documented
in the industrial user file for that facility or facilities. Using protocols
(including appropriate preservation) specified in 40 CFR Part 136 and
appropriate EPA guidance, multiple grab samples collected during a twenty-four
(24) hour period may be composited prior to the analysis as follows: for
cyanide, total phenols, and sulfides the samples may be composited in the
laboratory or in the field; for volatile organics and oil & grease the samples
may be composited in the laboratory. Composite samples for other parameters
unaffected by the compositing procedures as documented in approved EPA
methodologies may be authorized by the Administrator, as appropriate.
   (p)   The City or IEUA may randomly sample and analyze the effluent from
industrial users and conduct surveillance activities in order to identify,
independent of information supplied by industrial users, occasional and
continuing noncompliance with pretreatment standards. The City or IEUA must
inspect and sample the effluent from each significant industrial user at least
once a year.
   (q)   The City or IEUA shall investigate instances of noncompliance with
pretreatment standards and pretreatment requirements, as indicated in the
reports and notices required under § 403.12, or indicated by analysis,
inspection, and surveillance activities described in §
6-7.501(p). Sample taking and analysis and the collection of other information
shall be performed with sufficient care to produce evidence admissible in
enforcement proceedings or in judicial actions.
   (r)   The City shall perform a special investigation for user's with
repeated violations of their discharge limit to identify and access the
noncompliance problems and the required corrective actions. This inspection
includes a comprehensive onsite evaluation of the adequacy of the pretreatment
system, and the user's waste management practices, manufacturing processes, and
waste generating sources.
   (s)   The City shall perform a comprehensive inspection prior to the
issuance of an initial permit or the renewal of a user wastewater discharge
permit. It provides a detailed compliance check as well as information needed
to issue an initial permit or to re-evaluate an expiring permit. These
inspections include evaluation of the manufacturing process and pretreatment
equipment, review of hazardous waste manifests and other disposal documents,
compliance evaluation, measurement of industrial wastewater flows, field
testing of wastewater, and a review of applicable regulations.
(§ 3, Ord. 2755, eff. April 4, 2002, as amended by § 17, Ord. 2816, eff.
December 1, 2005, and § 2, Ord. 3190, eff. October 7, 2021)
Sec. 6-7.502. Plans and reporting.
   The City may require reports for self-monitoring of wastewater constituents
and characteristics of the discharger needed for determining compliance with
any limitation, or requirements as specified in the user's permit, federal
regulations, or this chapter. These reports include:
   (a)   Solvent management plans as described in §
6-7.503;
   (b)   Baseline monitoring reports (BMRs) as described in §
6-7.504;
   (c)   Ninety (90) day compliance reports as described in §
6-7.505;
   (d)   Compliance schedules; for the purpose of meeting federal, state, and
local requirements the following conditions shall apply to the schedule
required by 40 CFR 403.12(b)(7):
      (1)   The schedule shall contain increments of progress in the form of
dates for the commencement and completion of major events leading to the
construction and operation of additional pretreatment required for the
industrial user to meet the applicable categorical pretreatment standards
(e.g., hiring an engineer, completing preliminary plans, completing final
plans, executing contract for major components, commencing construction,
completing construction, etc.);
      (2)   No increment referred to in paragraph (d)(1) of this section shall
exceed nine (9) months; and
      (3)   Not later than fourteen (14) days following each date in the
schedule and the final date for compliance, the industrial user shall submit a
progress report to the Administrator including, at a minimum, whether or not it
complied with the increment of progress to be met on such date and, if not, the
date on which it expects to comply with this increment of progress, the reason
for delay, and the steps being taken by the industrial user to return the
construction to the schedule established. In no event shall more than nine (9)
months elapse between such progress reports to the Administrator.
   (e)   Progress reports;
      (1)   Report on compliance with categorical pretreatment standard
deadline. Within ninty (90) days following the date for final compliance with
applicable categorical pretreatment standards or in the case of a new source
following commencement of the introduction of wastewater into the POTW, any
industrial user subject to pretreatment standards and pretreatment requirements
shall submit to the Administrator a report containing the information described
in paragraphs 40 CFR 403(b)(4)-(6). For industrial users subject to equivalent
mass or concentration limits established by the Administrator in accordance
with the procedures in § 403.6(c), this report shall contain a reasonable
measure of the user's long term production rate. For all other industrial users
subject to categorical pretreatment standards expressed in terms of allowable
pollutant discharge per unit of production (or other measure of operation),
this report shall include the user's actual production during the appropriate
sampling period.
   (f)   Slug discharge control plans as described in §
6-7.506;
   (g)   Periodic reports on continued compliance;
      (1)   All SIUs must, at a frequency determined by the Administrator
submit no less than twice per year (July and January) reports indicating the
nature, concentration of pollutants in the discharge which are limited by
pretreatment standards and the measured or estimated average and maximum daily
flows for the reporting period. In cases where the pretreatment standard
requires compliance with a best management practice (BMP) or pollution
prevention alternative, the user must submit documentation required by the
Administrator or the pretreatment standard necessary to determine the
compliance status of the user;
      (2)   All wastewater samples must be representative of the user's
discharge. Wastewater monitoring and flow measurement facilities shall be
properly operated, kept clean, and maintained in good working order at all
times. The failure of a user to keep its monitoring facility in good working
order shall not be grounds for the user to claim that sample results are
unrepresentative of its discharge.
      (3)   If a user subject to the reporting requirement in this section
monitors any regulated pollutant at the appropriate sampling location more
frequently than required by the Administrator, using the procedures prescribed
in 40 CFR Part 136 and amendments thereto, otherwise approved by EPA, or as
specified in this permit, the results of such monitoring shall be included in
any calculations of actual daily maximum or annual average daily pollutant
discharge concentrations, and annual average daily discharge volume, and the
results shall be reported in the monitoring report submitted to the City. Such
increased monitoring frequency shall also be indicated in the user's self-
monitoring report(s).
      (4)   In addition to the foregoing, the industrial user shall provide all
applicable reports described in the Code of Federal Regulations at 40 CFR
403.12, including, but not limited to: compliance schedules for meeting
categorical pretreatment standards, compliance schedule progress reports,
reports on compliance with categorical pretreatment standard deadlines, and
final compliance reports.
      (5)   All industrial users shall notify the Administrator thirty (30)
days in advance of any substantial change in the volume or character of
pollutants in their discharge, including the listed or characteristic hazardous
wastes for which the industrial user has submitted initial notification under
40 CFR 403.12(p).
         (i)   The Administrator may require the user to submit such
information as may be deemed necessary to evaluate the changed condition,
including the submission of a wastewater discharge permit application per §
6-7.302.
         (ii)   The Administrator may issue an individual wastewater discharge
permit under §
6-7.301 of this chapter or modify an existing wastewater discharge permit under
§
6-7.305 of this chapter in response to changed conditions or anticipated
changed conditions.
      (6)   All periodic reports must be signed and certified in accordance
with §
6-7.510 of this chapter.
   (h)   Notification of the discharge of hazardous waste;
      (1)   The industrial user shall notify the Administrator, the IEUA, the
EPA Regional Waste Management Division Director, and state hazardous waste
authorities in writing of any discharge into the sewerage system and POTW of a
substance, which, if otherwise disposed of, would be a hazardous waste under 40
CFR Part 261. Such notification must satisfy the requirements set forth at 40
CFR 403.12(p).
   (i)   Bypass notification;
      (1)   If a user knows in advance of the need for a bypass, it shall
submit prior notice to the City Administrator and General Manager of IEUA, at
least ten (10) days before the date of the bypass, if possible.
      (2)   A user shall submit oral notice to the City Administrator and
General Manager of IEUA of an unanticipated bypass that exceeds applicable
pretreatment standards within twenty-four (24) hours from the time it becomes
aware of the bypass. A written submission shall also be provided within five
(5) days of the time the user becomes aware of the bypass. The written
submission shall contain a description of the bypass and its cause; the
duration of the bypass, including exact dates and times, and, if the bypass has
not been corrected, the anticipated time it is expected to continue; and steps
taken or planned to reduce, eliminate, and prevent recurrence of the bypass.
The City Administrator and General Manager of IEUA may waive the written report
on a case-by-case basis of the oral report has been received within twenty-four
(24) hours.
      (3)   Notification provided shall not relieve the user of liability for
any expense, loss, damage, or other liability which may be incurred as a result
of damage or loss to the City or IEUA or any other damage or loss to person or
property; nor shall such notifications relieve the user of any fines,
penalties, or other liability which may be imposed under this ordinance or
other applicable law.
   (j)   Other reports as required by the City or IEUA.
      (1)   Quarterly pretreatment program report. A quarterly pretreatment
program report is required by the twentieth calendar day following the end of
each of the quarterly reporting periods specified in the Agency's waste
discharge requirements. Quarterly reports must include at a minimum all self-
monitoring data from SIUSs, including any City monitoring data collected for
SIU compliance determination, summary of SIU inspection records, and a summary
of the City's SIU compliance history.
      (2)   Annual pretreatment program reports. An annual pretreatment program
report is required by the sixtieth calendar day following the end of each
annual reporting period specified in the Agency's waste discharge requirements.
   (k)   The City shall receive and analyze self-monitoring reports and other
notices submitted by industrial users in accordance with the self-monitoring
requirements in 40 CFR 403.12.
   (l)   The City shall obtain remedies for noncompliance by any industrial
user in accordance with §
6-7.610.
   (m)    The City shall enforce pretreatment requirements in accordance with §
6-7.610 of this chapter. Such pretreatment requirements include but are not
limited to, the duty to allow or carry out inspections, entry, or monitoring
activities; any rules, regulations, or orders issued by the Administrator; any
requirements set forth in control mechanisms issued by the Administrator; or
any reporting requirements imposed by the City or these regulations in this
part.
   (n)   The industrial user shall control production or all discharges to the
extent necessary to maintain compliance with categorical pretreatment standards
upon reduction, loss, or failure of its pretreatment facility until the
facility is restored or an alternative method of treatment is provided. This
requirement applies in the situation where, among other things, the primary
source of power of the pretreatment facility is reduced, lost or fails.
   (o)   An upset shall constitute an affirmative defense to an action brought
for noncompliance with categorical pretreatment standards if the requirements
of 40 CFR 403.16(c) are met. In any enforcement proceeding the industrial user
seeking to establish the occurrence of an upset as defined in §
6-7.106(yyyy) shall have the burden of proof.
      (1)   The industrial user is required to report an upset to the
Administrator within twenty-four (24) hours of becoming aware of the upset (if
this information is provided orally, a written submission must be provided
within five (5) days.
   (p)   Industrial users will have the opportunity for a judicial
determination on any claim of upset only in an enforcement action brought for
noncompliance with categorical pretreatment standards.
(§ 3, Ord. 2755, eff. April 4, 2002, as amended by § 18, Ord. 2816, eff.
December 1, 2005, and § 2, Ord. 3190, eff. October 7, 2021)
Sec. 6-7.503. Total toxic organics/solvent management plan (TTO/SMP).
   (a)   Except where other alternative categorical monitoring requirements
apply, a user who is required to monitor for TTO or prohibited organics may
submit the following written and signed certification in lieu of monitoring for
such toxic and prohibited organics:
   "Based on my inquiry of the person or persons directly responsible for
managing compliance with the Pretreatment Standard for Total Toxic Organics
(TTO), I certify that, to the best of my knowledge and belief, no dumping of
concentrated toxic organics into the Wastewaters has occurred since filing the
last Discharge monitoring report. I further certify that this facility is
implementing the solvent management plan submitted to the City."
   In requesting that no monitoring be required, industrial users of POTWs
shall submit a total toxic organics/solvent management plan that specifies to
the City's satisfaction the toxic and prohibited organic compounds used; the
method of disposal used instead of dumping, such as reclamation, contract
hauling, or incineration; and procedures for assuring that toxic and prohibited
organics do not routinely spill or leak into the sewerage system.
   (b)   An updated SMP shall be submitted by the user with the first
monitoring report of the year. The SMP certification statement shall be
submitted by the user with each monitoring report during the year.
   (c)   The user requesting the certification alternative shall monitor for
only those toxic and prohibited organic compounds, which would reasonably be
expected to be discharged to the public sewer.
   (d)   The SMP is subject to approval in writing by the Administrator.
   (e)   Any user with an approved SMP shall still be monitored for compliance
with the TTO standard by the City.
(§ 3, Ord. 2755, eff. April 4, 2002, as amended by § 2, Ord. 3190, eff. October
7, 2021)
Sec. 6-7.504. Baseline monitoring reports (BMRs).
   Within either one hundred eighty (180) days after the effective date of a
categorical pretreatment standard, or the final administrative decision on a
category determination under 40 CFR 403.6(a)(4), whichever is later, existing
categorical industrial users currently discharging to or scheduled to discharge
to the sewerage system and POTW shall submit to the Administrator a baseline
monitoring reports (BMRs), containing information as stipulated in 40 CFR
403.12(b). At least ninety (90) days prior to commencement of their discharge,
new sources, and sources that become categorical industrial users subsequent to
the promulgation of an applicable categorical standard, shall submit to the
Administrator a baseline monitoring report (BMR), containing information as
stipulated in 40 CFR 403.12(b). A new source shall report the method of
pretreatment it intends to use to meet applicable categorical standards. A new
source also shall give estimates of the information requested in 40 CFR 403.12
paragraphs (b)(4) and (5).
(§ 3, Ord. 2755, eff. April 4, 2002, as amended by § 2, Ord. 3190, eff. October
7, 2021)
Sec. 6-7.505. Ninety (90) day compliance reports. 
   Ninety (90) Day Compliance Reports are required of significant industrial
users following the date for final compliance with an applicable categorical
standard or for new sources, following commencement of wastewater discharge.
Ninety (90) Day Compliance Reports must contain information stipulated in 40
CFR 403.12(b)(4-6).
(§ 3, Ord. 2755, eff. April 4, 2002)
Sec 6-7.506. Slug discharge control plan. 
   Upon written notification by the Administrator, the user shall submit a Slug
Discharge Control Plan. The plan shall be updated every two (2) years and shall
contain at a minimum, the following:
   (a)   A description of discharge practices, including non-routine batch
discharges;
   (b)   A description of stored chemicals;
   (c)   Procedures for immediately notifying the City of any accidental or
slug discharge, as required by §
6-7.509; and
   (d)   Procedures to prevent adverse impact from any accidental or slug
discharge. Such procedures include, but are not limited to; inspection and
maintenance of storage areas, handling and transfer of materials, loading and
unloading operations, control of plant site runoff, worker training, building
of containment structures or equipment, measures for containing toxic organic
pollutants, including solvents, and/or measures and equipment or emergency
response.
(§ 3, Ord. 2755, eff. April 4, 2002)
Sec 6-7.507. Periodic reports on continued compliance. 
   The City of Ontario may require reports for self- monitoring of wastewater
constituents and characteristics of the discharger needed for determining
compliance with any limitation, or requirements as specified in the user's
permit, Federal regulations, or this chapter. Monitoring reports of the
analyses of wastewater constituents and characteristics shall be in a manner
and form approved by the City and shall be submitted upon request of the City.
When applicable, the self-monitoring requirements and frequency of reporting
shall be set forth in the user's permit. All sample analyses must follow the
requirements set forth in 40 CFR 136. The analyses of wastewater constituents
and characteristics and the preparation of the monitoring report shall be at
the sole expense of the user. Failure by the user to perform any required
monitoring and/or submit monitoring reports required by the City shall be a
violation of this chapter, may result in a determination that the user is in
significant non-compliance, and be cause for the City to initiate all necessary
tasks and analyses to determine the wastewater constituents and characteristics
for any limitations and requirements specified in the user's permit or in this
chapter. The user shall be responsible for any and all expenses of the City in
undertaking such monitoring analyses and preparation of reports.
(§ 3, Ord. 2755, eff. April 4, 2002)
Sec. 6-7.508. Pollution prevention plan.
   A user may be required, pursuant to Cal. Water Code § 13263.3, to implement
a pollution prevention plan if any of the following apply:
   (a)   A user is determined to be a chronic violator or the State Board,
Regional Board, or the City determines that pollution prevention could assist
in achieving compliance;
   (b)   A user significantly contributes, or has the potential to
significantly contribute, to the creation of a toxic hot spot as defined in
Cal. Water Code § 13391.5;
   (c)   The State Board, a Regional Board, or a POTW determines pollution
prevention is necessary to achieve a water quality objective.
   (d)   A Pollution Prevention Plan shall include all of the following:
      (1)   An analysis of one (1) or more of the pollutants, as directed by
the State Board, a Regional Board, the City, or IEUA, that the user discharges
into the sewerage system, a description of the sources of the pollutants, and a
comprehensive review of the processes used by the user that result in the
generation and discharge of the pollutants;
      (2)   An analysis of the potential for pollution prevention to reduce the
generation of the pollutants, including the application of innovative and
alternative technologies and any adverse environmental impacts resulting from
the use of those methods;
      (3)   A detailed description of the tasks and time schedules required to
investigate and implement various elements of pollution prevention techniques;
      (4)   A statement of the user's pollution prevention goals and
strategies, including priorities for short-term and long-term action;
      (5)   A description of the user's existing pollution prevention methods;
      (6)   A statement that the user's existing and planned pollution
prevention strategies do not constitute media pollution transfers unless clear
environmental benefits of such an approach are identified to the satisfaction
of the State Board, the Regional Board, the City, or IEUA and information that
supports that statement;
      (7)   Proof of compliance with the Hazardous Waste Source Reduction and
Management Review Act of 1989 (Article 11.9 (commencing with § 258244.12 of
Chapter 6.5 of Division 20 of the Cal. Health & Safety Code) if the user is
also subject to that Act;
      (8)   An analysis, to the extent feasible, of the relative costs and
benefits of the possible pollution prevention activities;
      (9)   A specification of, and rationale for, the technically feasible and
economically practicable pollution prevention measures selected by the
discharger for implementation.
   (e)   The State Board, a Regional Board, the City or IEUA may require the
user subject to a pollution prevention plan to comply with the pollution
prevention plan developed by the user after providing the opportunity for
comment at a public proceeding with regard to that plan and also to comply with
other requirements of the Clean Water Enforcement and Pollution Prevention Act
of 1999.
(§ 3, Ord. 2755, eff. April 4, 2002, as amended by § 19, Ord. 2816, eff.
December 1, 2005)
Sec. 6-7.509. Notifications.
   (a)   Accidental discharge.
      (1)   In the event the user is unable to comply with any of the permit
conditions due to a breakdown of equipment, accidents caused by human error or
acts of God, or the discharge will exceed the discharge limitations in the
permit, the user shall notify the City and IEUA by immediately telephoning as
soon as the user has knowledge of the incident:
         City of Ontario: Utilities (909)395-2678 Monday-Friday 8:00 a.m. to 5:
00 p.m.
         Fire (909) 983-5911 All other hours.
         Inland Empire Utilities Agency: POTW (909) 947-4131 Anytime.
      (2)   The user shall confirm the notification in writing as soon as
possible, but no later than five (5) working days from the telephone
notification. Written notification shall state the date of the incident,
reasons for the discharge or spill, steps that were taken to immediately
correct the problem, and steps being taken to prevent the problem from
recurring.
      (3)   Such notification shall not relieve the user of any expense, loss,
damage or other liability which may be incurred as a result of damage or loss
to the IEUA and/or the City or any other damage or loss to user or property;
nor shall such notification relieve the user of any fees or other liability
which may be imposed by this chapter or other applicable law.
      (4)   A notice shall be permanently posted on the user's employee
bulletin board or other prominent place advising employees whom to call in the
event of an accidental discharge, spill or slug loading. Users shall ensure
that all employees who may cause such a discharge to occur are advised of the
emergency notification procedure.
   (b)   Change to discharge. All users shall notify the City before making
substantial changes to their process wastewater discharges. Substantial changes
include:
      (1)   Operational flows, changes of + 20%;
      (2)   Pollutant loadings, changes of + 20%;
      (3)   Changes in the characteristics of their process flows;
      (4)   On-site plumbing; or
      (5)   Pretreatment procedures and/or facilities. All users shall notify
the City a minimum of thirty (30) days prior to any planned changes. Upon
notification, the Administrator may require that a new application be filed and
a new permit obtained before discharging any waste involving the changed
characteristics.
   (c)   Discontinued discharge.
      (1)   The user shall notify the Administrator at least ten (10) days
prior to discontinuing its industrial wastewater discharge for more than thirty
(30) days unless the user can demonstrate to the Administrator that it could
not have known of the discontinued discharge.
      (2)   Within thirty (30) days of the discontinued discharge, the user
shall remove the contents of all on-site sewers, sumps, floor drains,
wastewater storage tanks, and/or pretreatment facilities in accordance with all
applicable regulations. The contents shall not be discharged to the public
sewer without prior written approval from the Administrator.
      (3)   If the user fails to clean up and remove the contents of its
facilities to the satisfaction of the Administrator, such activities and the
costs thereof shall also become the responsibility of the owner of the building
and/or land.
      (4)   Failure of the user or the owner to promptly and satisfactorily
clean up and remove the contents of all on-site sewers, sumps, floor drains,
wastewater storage tanks, and/or pretreatment facilities shall subject the user
and the owner of the building and/or land to any enforcement action authorized
in this chapter.
   (d)   Hazardous waste discharge.
      (1)   The user shall notify the Administrator, the IEUA, the EPA Regional
Waste Management Division Director, and State Hazardous Waste authorities in
writing of any discharge into the sewerage system of a substance, which, if
otherwise disposed of, would be a hazardous waste under 40 CFR part 261.
      (2)   Such notification must include the name of the hazardous waste as
set forth in 40 CFR part 261, the EPA hazardous waste number, and the type of
discharge (continuous, batch, or other).
      (3)   If the user discharges more than one hundred (100) kilograms of
such waste per calendar month to the sewerage system, the notification shall
also contain the following information to the extent such information is known
and readily available to the user: an identification of the hazardous
constituents contained in the wastes, an estimation of the mass and
concentration of such constituents in the wastestream discharged during that
calendar month, and an estimation of the mass of constituents in the
wastestream expected to be discharged during the following twelve (12) months.
      (4)   Any notification under this chapter must be submitted only once for
each hazardous waste discharged. Discharges are exempt from the requirements of
subsection (a) of this section during a calendar month in which the discharge
is no more than fifteen (15) kilograms of hazardous wastes, unless the wastes
are acute hazardous wastes as specified in 40 CFR 261.30(d) and 261.33(e).
Discharges of more than fifteen (15) kilograms of non-acute hazardous wastes in
a calendar month, or of any quantity of acute hazardous wastes as specified in
40 CFR 261.30(d) and 261.33(e), requires a one-time notification. Subsequent
months during which the user discharges more than such quantities of any
hazardous waste do not require additional notification.
      (5)   In the case of any new regulations under § 3001 of RCRA identifying
additional characteristics of hazardous waste or listing any additional
substance as hazardous waste, the user must notify the Administrator, the IEUA,
the EPA Regional Waste Management Division Director, and State Hazardous Waste
authorities of the discharge of such substance within ninety (90) days of the
effective date of such regulations.
      (6)   In the case of any notification made under this chapter, the user
shall certify that it has a program in place to reduce the volume and toxicity
of hazardous wastes.
      (7)   The notification requirement in this section does not apply to
pollutants already reported under the self-monitoring requirements of 40 CFR
403.12(b), (d), and (e).
   (e)   Bypass. Bypass of industrial wastewater to the City sewerage system is
prohibited. The City may take enforcement action against a user, unless the
permittee submitted notices as required by §
6-7.509 or met conditions as specified in §
6-7.210.
(§ 3, Ord. 2755, eff. April 4, 2002, as amended by § 19, Ord. 2816, eff.
December 1, 2005)
Sec. 6-7.510. Signatory requirements. 
   All permit applications and reports required by this chapter under §
6-7.302 and Article 5 or 40 CFR 403.12(1)(1-4) shall be signed by an authorized
representative of the user. Any user signing such documents shall make the
following certification in writing.
"I certify under penalty of law that this document and all attachments were
prepared under my direction or supervision in accordance with a system designed
to assure that qualified personnel properly gather and evaluate the information
submitted. Based on my inquiry of the person or persons who manage the system,
or those persons directly responsible for gathering the information, the
information submitted is, to the best of my knowledge and belief, true,
accurate, and complete. I am aware that there are significant penalties for
submitting false information, including the possibility of fine and
imprisonment for knowing violations."
(§ 3, Ord. 2755, eff. April 4, 2002, as amended by § 2, Ord. 3190, eff. October
7, 2021)
Sec. 6-7.511. Record-keeping requirements.
   (a)   Each user subject to the Federal Pretreatment Requirements, or the
provisions of this chapter, shall retain records on-site for all waste and
wastewater generated, operation and maintenance logs for pretreatment systems,
and industrial wastewater monitoring results for a minimum period of four (4)
years. Said records shall be made available for inspection and copying by the
Administrator at any time. During the course of litigation regarding the user,
the City of Ontario, or IEUA, the period of retention shall be extended until
the subject of litigation is resolved.
   (b)   Information resulting from monitoring activities (including self-
monitoring) required by said regulations shall include the following:
      (1)   Detailed description of the sample location;
      (2)   Dates and times during which the sample was taken;
      (3)   Method of sampling used, i.e. grab or composite;
      (4)   Name of the person who collected the sample;
      (5)   Date of the analysis;
      (6)   Identity and address of the laboratory who performed the analysis;
      (7)   Analytical method used and its detection limit;
      (8)   Quality control and quality assurance data associated with the
batch of samples tested for the parameters analyzed;
      (9)   Results of the analysis;
      (10)   Chain-of-custody form; and
      (11)   Any documentation required with the applicable best management
practices.
   (c)   Hauling records for waste and wastewater generated on-site shall
include, at a minimum, the following information:
      (1)   Volume and a description of the waste hauled;
      (2)   Date the waste was hauled;
      (3)   Name and address of the hauler;
      (4)   Name and address of the facility receiving the waste or wastewater;
and
      (5)   Manifest number.
(§ 3, Ord. 2755, eff. April 4, 2002, as amended by § 20, Ord. 2816, eff.
December 1, 2005, and § 2, Ord. 3190, eff. October 7, 2021)
Sec. 6-7.512. Public access to information and confidentiality. 
   (a)   The Administrator shall maintain a data filing system in compliance
with public information and confidentiality records and provide for the proper
handling and filing of records and reports for the general administration of
the pretreatment program.
   (b)   Any information in a user's file, which includes, but is not limited
to, permits, permit applications, questionnaires, inspection reports and
monitoring reports shall be available to the public or other governmental
agency without restriction.
   (c)   Any request for public access to a user's file shall be in writing and
shall include:
      (1)   Date of the review;
      (2)   Name and title of the reviewer;
      (3)   Reviewer's business name, address and telephone number;
      (4)   List of files to be reviewed; and
      (5)   Reason for review.
         (i)   A copy of the written request to review a user's file may be
sent by the Administrator to such a user. The Administrator may require an
observer to be present while any file is being reviewed. The Administrator may
also require that the reviewer furnish his or her own copying devices and/or
supplies.
   (d)   If the disclosure of the user's file or a portion thereof would
divulge trade secrets or secret processes, the user shall have the right to
request that such information be kept confidential. Any such claim must be made
at the time of submittal of the information by marking the submittal
"confidential business information" on each page containing such information.
The Administrator shall not consider any wastewater constituents and
characteristics to be confidential information.
   (e)   Information which is demonstrated to be confidential shall not be
transmitted to anyone other than a governmental agency bound by the
confidentiality requirements of 40 CFR Part 2, for uses related to this
chapter, the IEUA NPDES permit, state disposal system permit and/or the
pretreatment program, and for use by the state or federal agency in judicial
review or enforcement proceedings involving the user.
(§ 3, Ord. 2755, eff. April 4, 2002, as amended by § 2, Ord. 3190, eff. October
7, 2021)
Sec. 6-7.513. Inspection/right-of-entry. 
   Users or occupants of a premises where wastewater is created, conveyed,
treated, or discharged shall allow the Administrator, or his or her
representatives, having presented proper credentials, reasonable access to all
parts of the wastewater generating and disposal facilities for the purposes of
inspection, sampling, monitoring, reviewing or copying records, photographing,
videotaping, or recording during all times that the discharger's facility is
open, operating, or any other reasonable time. No user shall interfere with,
delay, resist or refuse entrance to authorized City or IEUA personnel
attempting to inspect any facility involved directly or indirectly with a
discharge of wastewater to the City's sewerage system.
   If the Administrator has been refused access to a building, structure, or
property, or any part thereof, and is able to demonstrate probable cause to
believe that there may be a violation of this chapter, or that there is a need
to inspect and/or sample as a part of a routine inspection and sampling program
designed to verify compliance with this chapter or any permit or order issued
hereunder, or to protect the overall public health, safety, and welfare of the
community, the Administrator may seek issuance of a search warrant from a court
of competent jurisdiction.
(§ 3, Ord. 2755, eff. April 4, 2002, as amended by § 21, Ord. 2816, eff.
December 1, 2005, and § 2, Ord. 3190 , eff. October 7, 2021)
Article 6. Enforcement
Sec. 6-7.601. Purpose and scope.
   (a)   Any user who has violated or continues to violate federal pretreatment
standards or requirements, this chapter, an industrial wastewater permit, or
any prohibition, limitation, or requirement contained herein, is subject to
enforcement actions administratively or judicially by the City, EPA, State of
California Regional Water Quality Control Board, or the County of San
Bernardino District Attorney. Said actions may be taken pursuant to the
authority and provisions of several laws, including but not limited to: the
Clean Water Act, the Resource Conservation and Recovery Act, the California
Porter-Cologne Water Quality Act, and the California Hazardous Waste Control
Law.
   (b)   The Council finds that in order for the City to comply with such laws,
and regulations, and to ensure that the City's facilities and the POTW are
protected and are able to operate with the highest degree of efficiency, and to
protect public health and the environment, specific enforcement provisions must
be adopted to govern the discharges of wastewater into the sewerage system.
   (c)   The City and IEUA, at its discretion, may utilize any one, combination
or all enforcement remedies provided in Article 6 in response to any permit or
violation of this chapter.
(§ 3, Ord. 2755, eff. April 4, 2002, as amended by § 22, Ord. 2816, eff.
December 1, 2005)
Sec. 6-7.602. Determination of non-compliance. 
   (a)   Sampling procedures.
      (1)   Sampling of all permittees shall be conducted in the time, place,
manner, and frequency determined at the discretion of the City.
      (2)   Non-compliance with mass emission rate limits, concentration
limits, permit discharge conditions, or any discharge provision of this chapter
may be determined by an analysis of a grab or composite sample of the effluent
of a user. Non- compliance with mass emission rate limits shall be determined
by an analysis of a composite sample of the user's effluent. A grab sample may
be used to determine compliance with mass emission rate limits when the
discharge is from a closed (batch) treatment system in which there is: no
wastewater flow into the system when the discharge is occurring, the volume of
wastewater contained in the batch system is known, the time interval of
discharge is known, and the grab sample is homogeneous and representative of
the discharge.
      (3)   Any sample taken from a sample point is considered to be
representative of the discharge to the sewerage system.
   (b)   Permit, agreements, and administrative orders provisions.
      (1)   Non-compliance with a permit condition, Compliance Agreement, or
Cease and Desist Order compliance deadline shall be determined by whether the
user or permittee has submitted the required information, or completed the
required action (such as installing and operating a pretreatment system that is
discharging effluent and meeting the permitted discharge limits) by the date
and/or time specified.
      (2)   The user or permittee may request in writing by certified mail, an
extension to a deadline to meet a compliance deadline. At a minimum, the
request shall specify the reasons for not meeting the deadline, what actions
are now being taken to accomplish the requirement, and the new date by which
the user will complete the requirement.
      (3)   It the discretion of the Administrator, the request may be granted
and the user notified in writing of the new compliance deadline. If the
Administrator does not provide notification by the original compliance date in
the permit, Compliance Agreement, or Cease and Desist Order, then the original
date shall stand as the compliance date.
   (c)   Fees, surcharges, or penalties. A user shall be in non-compliance with
the chapter and their permit, if connection fees, sewer surcharge fees,
penalties, non-compliance fees, administrative fees, bond guaranty or other
monies owed to the City for sewer services are not paid within the time
specified on the bill or in the permit, Compliance Agreement, or other
enforcement agreement.
(§ 3, Ord. 2755, eff. April 4, 2002, as amended by § 22, Ord. 2816, eff.
December 1, 2005)
Sec. 6-7.603. Non-compliance fees. 
   (a)   Non-compliance with discharge requirements of this chapter or the
user's industrial wastewater permit [may] be determined by an analysis or a
grab or composite sample of the user's discharge to the sewerage system.
Sampling of a user's wastewater shall be conducted in the time, manner, and
frequency determined at the discretion of the Administrator.
   (b)   A user is in violation of a separate offense for every day during
which any violation of any provision of this chapter is committed, continued,
or permitted by the user.
   (c)   Such user may be subject to administrative and/or legal actions, and
shall pay to the City non-compliance fees as established by this section, to
recover all costs incurred by the City and IEUA in performing inspections,
sampling, and analysis of the user's wastewater, processing Notices of
Violation, and conducting enforcement actions. For a discharge violation, non-
compliance fees shall continue to accumulate for each day sampled.
      (1)   The user shall pay a minimum of One Hundred Dollars ($100.00) for
the first confirmed occurrence of a violation within one (1) year.
      (2)   The user shall pay a minimum of Two Hundred Dollars ($200.00) for
the second occurrence of the same violation within one (1) year.
      (3)   After the second occurrence of the same violation within one (1)
year, the user shall pay a minimum of Five Hundred Dollars ($500.00) for each
additional occurrence of such violation.
      (4)   The user shall pay a minimum of One Thousand Dollars ($1,000) for
any violation or a Show Cause Order, Compliance Agreement, or a Cease and
Desist Order.
   (d)   Any user shall be assessed a mandatory minimum penalty of Three
Thousand Dollars ($3,000) pursuant to Cal. Water Code § 13362 for each
violation if any of the following applies:
      (1)   There is a serious violation within any six (6) month period;
      (2)   A user commits two (2) or more serious violations in any six (6)
month period; or
      (3)   A user does any of the following four (4) or more times in any six
(6) month period:
         (i)   Exceeds a waste discharge effluent limitation;
         (ii)   Fails to file a report pursuant to Cal. Water Code § 13260;
         (iii)   Files an incomplete report pursuant to Cal. Water Code §
13260; or
         (iv)   Exceeds a toxicity discharge limitation where the waste
discharge requirements do not contain pollutant-specific effluent limitations
for toxic pollutants.
   (e)   The user shall pay a minimum of Fifty Dollars ($50.00) per calendar
day for non-compliance with the submittal date for a compliance schedule,
progress report, or any monitoring or technical report as established in this
chapter, the user's industrial wastewater permit, or in a written request by
the Administrator. The Administrator shall allow a reasonable amount of time
for the user to submit any required monitoring or technical reports.
   (f)   The payment of non-compliance fees shall not limit the City, IEUA or
any other regulatory agency, from undertaking any administrative and/or legal
action.
(§ 3, Ord. 2755, eff. April 4, 2002, as amended by § 22, Ord. 2816, eff.
December 1, 2005)
Sec. 6-7.604. Notice of violation. 
   (a)   Whenever the Administrator finds that a user has violated Federal
Categorical Pretreatment Standards or pretreatment requirements of this
chapter, an industrial wastewater permit, an order issued hereunder, or any
prohibition, limitation, or requirement contained herein, the Administrator
shall serve upon said user a verbal or written notice, depending on the
severity of the infraction, stating the nature of the violation and the
penalties for continued non-compliance.
   (b)   Whenever the user receives a notice of violation, such user shall
submit to the Administrator, within ten (10) days from the date of the notice,
a written explanation of the cause of the violation and the corrective actions
which have been taken to prevent recurrence of such violation. In the case of a
violation of a discharge limit, the user shall repeat the sampling weekly, test
for each constituent in violation, and submit the test results to the
Administrator within thirty (30) days from the date of the notice until such
time that the discharge shows compliance with the discharge limit.
   (c)   If the user fails to correct a violation within forty-five (45) days
from the date of the notice, requires additional time to correct all conditions
to bring the discharge violation into compliance, or a discharge violation has
occurred more than once within a one (1) year period, the user shall submit a
compliance schedule within sixty (60) days of the initial violation.
   (d)   Unless otherwise provided herein or in expressly permitted in the ERP,
any notice under this chapter shall be in writing and served on the user or by
certified mail. Notice shall be deemed to have been given at the time of
deposit, postage prepaid, in a facility regularly serviced by the United States
Postal Service. Any time limit provided in any written notice or in any
provision of this chapter shall be extended only by a written direction of the
Administrator.
   (e)   The Administrator or the Inland Empire Utilities Agency (IEUA) shall
publish annually, in a newspaper of general circulation that provides
meaningful public notice within the jurisdictions served by the IEUA, a list of
the users which at any time during the previous twelve (12) months, were in
significant non-compliance with applicable pretreatment standards and
pretreatment requirements. The term significant non-compliance shall be
applicable to all significant industrial users (or any other industrial user
that violates paragraphs (3),( 4), or (8) of §
6-7.106(mmmm) as defined in §
6-7.106(mmmm).
(§ 3, Ord. 2755, eff. April 4, 2002, as amended by § 2, Ord. 3190, eff. October
7, 2021)
Sec. 6-7.605. Show cause order. 
   (a)   The Administrator may issue a Show Cause Order requiring the user who
causes or contributes to a violation of this chapter, or any order, agreement,
or permit issued hereunder, to appear at the City's offices at the date and
time specified in the Order to Show Cause to the Administrator as to why more
severe enforcement actions and/or criminal and/or civil actions should not be
taken.
   (b)   The order shall be served on the user and shall specify the proposed
enforcement action, the reasons for such action, and a request that the user
show cause why this proposed enforcement action should not be taken. The notice
of the meeting shall be served personally or by registered or certified mail
(return receipt requested) at least 10 (ten) days prior to the hearing. Such
notice may be served on any principal executive, general partner or corporate
officer. Whether or not a duly notified user appears as noticed, immediate
enforcement action may be pursued.
(§ 3, Ord. 2755, eff. April 4, 2002)
Sec. 6-7.606. Compliance agreement. 
   (a)   Upon finding that a user will need to install pretreatment equipment
to bring the discharge into compliance with this section or industrial
discharge permit limits, need additional Operation and Maintenance personnel
and/or procedures to meet a categorical standard, or need to construct
facilities to meet the City's pretreatment requirements or to correct a
recurring violation of any local discharge limitation, the Administrator may
require that a Compliance Schedule, agreed upon in advance by the user and the
City, be issued to the user.
   (b)   The Compliance Agreement may contain terms and conditions including,
but not limited to, installation of pretreatment equipment and facilities,
submittal of drawings, technical reports and/or progress reports, payment of
fees, posting of a performance bond, limits on the rate and time of discharge,
additional self-monitoring requirements, a compliance schedule, or other
provisions to ensure compliance with this chapter. The schedule shall contain
milestones of progress in the form of dates for the commencement and completion
of major events leading to design, construction, and operation of the
pretreatment facility of similar structure. Each increment in the Compliance
Schedule is subject to review and approval by the Administrator. No Compliance
Schedule increment shall exceed nine (9) months.
   (c)   The user shall submit a progress report to the Administrator following
each milestone in the schedule. Each report shall be submitted no later than
fourteen (14) days following each milestone in the Compliance Schedule. The
report shall include whether or not the user achieved the milestones on their
date and, if not, the date on which the user expects to complete the milestone,
the reason for delay, and the steps taken by the user to meet the established
schedule.
   (d)   The Administrator may extend the Compliance Schedule for an additional
period of time, provided that the user shows good cause, including, but not
limited to, reasonable progress under the terms of the Compliance Schedule. A
Compliance Schedule shall not extend beyond any applicable Federal deadlines.
(§ 3, Ord. 2755, eff. April 4, 2002)
Sec. 6-7.607. Cease and desist order.
   (a)   A Cease and Desist Order shall direct a user to cease and desist all
discharge violations, to comply immediately with all discharge requirements and
to take such appropriate remedial or preventative action as may be needed to
properly address a continuing or threatened discharge violation, including
halting operations and/or terminating the discharge.
   (b)   The user shall pay a minimum of One Thousand Dollars ($1,000) for any
violation of a Cease and Desist Order.
(§ 3, Ord. 2755, eff. April 4, 2002)
Sec. 6-7.608. Permit suspension revocation.
   The Administrator may issue a permit suspension or revocation order, whereby
the user must comply with all directives, conditions and requirements therein
within the time prescribed. The suspension or revocation order shall contain
terms and conditions to ensure compliance with this chapter. The Administrator
will determine if suspension or revocation is the appropriate response
depending on the severity of the violation.
   (a)   Grounds. The Administrator may revoke an industrial wastewater permit
when it is determined that a user:
      (1)   Fails to comply with the terms and conditions of an industrial
wastewater permit, any provision of this chapter, an administrative order, or a
compliance agreement;
      (2)   Knowingly provides a false statement, representation, record,
report, or document to the City;
      (3)   Falsifies, tampers with, or knowingly renders inaccurate any
monitoring and/or sampling device;
      (4)   Fails to report changes in ownership and operations which result in
significant changes in quantity or quality of the user's wastewater;
      (5)   Fails to submit oral notice or a written report of bypass
occurrence;
      (6)   Discharges wastewater that causes an upset, interference, or a pass
through at the POTW or with the City's collection system;
      (7)   Discharges to the sewerage system in violation of a cease and
desist order;
      (8)   Refuses reasonable access to the user's premises for the purpose of
inspection and monitoring;
      (9)   Does not make timely payment of all amounts owed to the City for
user charges, non- compliance fees, or any other fees;
      (10)   Discharges a slug load to the sewerage system; or
      (11)   Refuses to provide records, drawings, reports, or other documents
required by the City to determine permit terms and conditions, or limits,
discharge compliance, or compliance with this chapter.
   (b)   Notice of hearing. When the Administrator has reason to believe that
grounds exist for permit revocation, he or she shall give written notice
thereof by personal delivery or by certified mail to the user setting forth a
statement of the facts and grounds deemed to exist, together with the time and
place where the charges shall be heard by the Administrator. The hearing date
shall not be less than fifteen (15) calendar days or more than forty-five (45)
calendar days after mailing of such notice.
      (1)   At the revocation hearing, the user shall have an opportunity to
respond to the allegations set forth in the notice by presenting written or
oral evidence. The revocation hearing shall be conducted in accordance with
procedures established by the Department of Public Works (DPW) and approved by
the City Council.
      (2)   After the conclusion of the hearing, the Administrator shall make
his or her determination and submit a written report to the DPW setting forth a
brief statement of facts found to be true, a determination of the issues
presented, conclusions, and a recommendation. Upon receipt of the written
report, the Administrator shall make his or her determination and should he or
she find that grounds exist for permanent revocation of the permit, he or she
shall issue his or her decision and order in writing within thirty (30)
calendar days after the conclusion of the hearing by his or her designee. The
written decision and order of the Administrator shall be sent by certified mail
to the permittee or its legal counsel/representative at the permittee's
business address.
      (3)   In the event the Administrator determines to not revoke the permit,
he or she may order other enforcement actions, including, but not limited to, a
temporary suspension of the permit, under terms and conditions that he or she
deems appropriate.
   (c)   Effect.
      (1)   Upon an order of revocation by the Administrator becoming final,
the user shall have no right to discharge any non-domestic wastewater or
sanitary wastes (whichever applies) directly or indirectly to the City sewerage
system for the duration of the revocation. All costs for physically terminating
and reinstating service shall be paid by the user.
      (2)   Any owner or responsible management employee of the user shall be
bound by the order of revocation. An order of permit revocation issued by the
Administrator shall be deemed final in all respects upon delivery to the
applicant or user unless a request for hearing is filed with the City Council
pursuant to §
1-4.01 of Chapter 4 of Title 1 of the Ontario Municipal Code.
      (3)   Any future application for a permit at any location within the City
by any user subject to an order of revocation will be considered by the
Administrator after fully reviewing the records of the revoked permit. Such
records may be the basis for denial of a new permit.
(§ 3, Ord. 2755, eff. April 4, 2002, as amended by § 2, Ord. 3190 , eff.
October 7, 2021)
Sec. 6-7.609. Injunction. 
   Whenever a user has engaged in, is engaged in, or is about to engage in any
acts or practices which constitute or will constitute a violation of this
chapter, the user's industrial wastewater permit, or any pretreatment
regulation, the City or IEUA may petition the Superior Court for the issuance
of a preliminary or permanent injunction, restraining order, or other
appropriate order may be granted upon a showing that the user(s) engaged in, is
engaged in, or is about to engage in the challenged acts or practices.
(§ 3, Ord. 2755, eff. April 4, 2002, as amended by § 23, Ord. 2816, eff.
December 1, 2005)
Sec. 6-7.610. Civil penalties. 
   (a)   Authority. All users of the City of Ontario sewerage system are
subject to enforcement actions administratively or judicially by the City of
Ontario, IEUA, U.S. EPA, the State of California Regional Water Quality Control
Board, or the City Attorney. Said actions may be taken pursuant to the
authority and provisions of several laws, including but not limited to:
      (1)   Federal Water Pollution Control Act, commonly known as the Clean
Water Act (33 U.S.C. 1251 et seq.); California Porter-Cologne Water Quality Act
(Cal. Water Code §§ 13000 et seq.);
      (2)    California Hazardous Waste Control Law (Cal. Health & Safety Code
§§ 25100 to 25250); and
      (3)    Resource Conservation and Recovery Act of 1976 (42 U.S.C. 6901 et
seq.).
   (b)   Recovery of fines or penalties. In the event the City of Ontario is
subject to the payment of fines or penalties pursuant to the legal authority
and actions of other regulatory or enforcement agencies based on a violation of
law or regulation or its permits or IEUA's permits, and said violation can be
established by the City as caused by or contributed to by the discharge of any
user of the City sewerage system which is in violation of any provision of this
chapter or the user's permit, the City shall be entitled to recover from the
user all costs and expenses, including, but not limited to, the full amount of
said fines, penalties, and damages to which it has been subjected.
   (c)   Penalties for violations.
      (1)   Administrative complaints and penalties. In addition to any other
remedy or proceeding available under this chapter, or any other law, pursuant
to Cal. Gov't Code §§ 54739 and 54740.5, the Administrator may issue an
administrative complaint to any user who violates this chapter, any permit
condition, prohibition or effluent limitation, or any suspension or revocation
order. The administrative complaint shall allege the act or failure to act that
constitutes the violation, the proposed civil penalty, and the authority under
which it is imposed.
      (2)   The administrative complaint, served on the alleged violator by
personal delivery or by certified mail, shall inform the user served that a
hearing before the Administrator shall be conducted within sixty (60) days of
the service of the complaint. The right to a hearing may be waived by the user
who issued the administrative complaint.
      (3)   After the conclusion of the hearing, the Administrator shall make
his or her determination and shall issue his decision and order within thirty
(30) calendar days of the hearing. The written decision and order of the
Administrator shall be sent by personal delivery or by certified mail to the
user.
      (4)   The order of the Administrator shall be final in all aspects
fourteen (14) days after it is mailed to the user unless a request for hearing
is filed with the City Council pursuant to §
1-4.01 of
Chapter 4 of Title 1 of the Ontario Municipal Code. If after the hearing it is
found that the user violated reporting or discharge requirements, the
Administrator may assess a civil penalty. Unless appealed, an order imposing
administrative civil penalties shall become effective upon issuance, and
payment shall become due within thirty (30) days of issuance of an invoice by
the City of Ontario.
      (5)   Civil penalties may be assessed as follows:
         (i)   In an amount which shall not exceed Two Thousand Dollars
($2,000) for each day for failing or refusing to furnish technical or
monitoring reports;
         (ii)   In an amount which shall not exceed Three Thousand Dollars
($3,000) for each day for failing or refusing to timely comply with any
compliance schedule established by the City;
         (iii)   In an amount which shall not exceed Five Thousand Dollars
($5,000) per violation for each day of discharge in violation of any discharge
limitation, permit condition, or requirement issued, reissued or adopted by the
City;
         (vi)   In an amount which shall not exceed Ten Dollars ($10.00) per
gallon for discharges in violation of any suspension, revocation, cease and
desist order or other orders, or prohibition issued, reissued or adopted by the
City. In determining the amount of the penalty, the City shall take into
consideration all relevant circumstances including, but not limited to, the
extent of harm caused by the violation, the economic benefit derived by non-
compliance, the nature and persistence of the violation, the length of time
over which the violation occurs, and corrective action, if any, taken by the
user. Each day, or any portion thereof, during which a violation occurs or
continues is a separate violation for which the maximum daily penalty may be
assessed.
      (6)   Copies of the administrative order setting civil penalties shall be
sent to the user either by personal delivery or by certified mail.
      (7)   Any user aggrieved by a final order issued by the City Council
pursuant to this section, may obtain a review of the order in the Superior
Court by filing a petition for writ of mandate within thirty (30) days
following the service of a copy of such order.
      (8)   Unless appealed, payment on any administrative order setting civil
penalties shall be made within thirty (30) days of the date the order becomes
final.
      (9)   All monies collected under this section shall be deposited in a
special account of the City, and shall be made available for monitoring and
control of discharges into the public sewer and for other enforcement and
mitigation measures.
      (10)   Any fines or charges imposed on the City by a regulatory agency as
a result of a user's violation of any provisions of this chapter shall be an
additional sewer charge to that user.
(§ 3, Ord. 2755, eff. April 4, 2002)
Sec. 6-7.611. Criminal penalties. 
   Any user who willfully violates any provision of this chapter,
administrative order, or industrial wastewater permit condition, is guilty of a
misdemeanor, which upon conviction is punishable by a fine of not less than One
Thousand Dollars ($1,000) or by imprisonment in the County Jail for not more
than six (6) months or by both. Each day a violation occurs shall constitute a
new and separate violation of this chapter and shall be subject to the
penalties contained herein.
(§ 3, Ord. 2755, eff. April 4, 2002)
Sec. 6-7.612. Appeal. 
   (a)   Pursuant to §
1-4.01 of
Chapter 4 of Title 1 of the Ontario Municipal Code, any user, affected by any
decision, action or determination made by Administrator, may appeal in writing
to the City Council by filing with the City Clerk a written notice of such
appeal, setting forth grounds thereof. The appellant shall file such notice
within fourteen (14) days after receipt of the notice of the administrative
decision concerned.
   (b)   The order of the City Council shall be deemed final upon its adoption.
   (c)   If the user fails to appeal to the City Council, or the City Council
fails to reverse or modify the administrative decision, the Administrator's
administrative decision shall be deemed final.
(§ 3, Ord. 2755, eff. April 4, 2002)
Sec. 6-7.613 Additional emergency remedial measures. 
   The Administrator shall have full power and authority to take any necessary
precautions including, but not limited to; decontamination, sewer closure,
packaging, diking, and transportation of materials, in order to protect life,
protect property, or prevent further damage resulting from a condition that is
likely to result in a discharge which presents an imminent hazard to the
public's health, safety or welfare; or which either individually or by
interaction with other discharges, is an imminent hazard to the City's sewerage
facilities; or which places the regional treatment plant in violation of its
NPDES permit. In the pursuit of such an operation, City personnel, any party
contracting with the City, or duly authorized representative of another
government agency shall have immediate access to the premises. The
Administrator may prohibit approach to the scene of such emergency by any user,
vehicle, vessel or thing, and all users not actually employed in the
extinguishing of the condition or the preservation of lives and property in the
vicinity thereof.
   The Administrator or an authorized designee may immediately suspend a user's
discharge, after informal notice to the user, whenever such suspension is
necessary to stop an actual or threatened discharge, which reasonably appears
to present, or cause an imminent or substantial endangerment to the health or
welfare of the community, the operation of the POTW, causes or contributes to a
violation of IEUA's NPDES permit, or which presents, or may present, an
endangerment to the environment. Failure to comply with the emergency
suspension order may lead to termination of service.
(§ 3, Ord. 2755, eff. April 4, 2002, as amended by § 2, Ord. 3190 , eff.
October 7, 2021)
Sec. 6-7.614. Cumulative remedies. 
   The remedies provided by this chapter are cumulative, and shall not be
construed as restricting any remedy, provisional or otherwise, provided by law
for the benefit of the City, and no remedy under this chapter shall preclude
the City from obtaining additional relief based upon the same facts.
(§ 3, Ord. 2755, eff. April 4, 2002)
Sec. 6-7.615. Termination of services. 
   The City, by order of the Administrator, may physically terminate sewerage
service to any property as follows:
   (a)   Upon any order of emergency suspension or revocation of a permit; or
   (b)    Upon the failure of a user not holding a valid discharge permit to
immediately cease discharge, whether direct or indirect, to the City’s sewerage
facilities.
(§ 3, Ord. 2755, eff. April 4, 2002, as amended by § 6, Ord. 2945, eff. January
6, 2012)
Sec. 6-7.616. Public nuisance. 
   Discharge of wastewater in any manner in violation of this chapter or of any
order issued by the Administrator, as authorized by this chapter, is hereby
declared a public nuisance and shall be corrected or abated as directed by the
Administrator. Any user creating a public nuisance is guilty of a misdemeanor.
(§ 3, Ord. 2755, eff. April 4, 2002, as amended by § 7, Ord. 2945, eff. January
6, 2012)
Sec. 6-7.617. Cost.
   In the event permittee fails to comply with any of the terms and conditions
of the this chapter, a Compliance Agreement, a permit revocation, or a permit
issued hereunder, the City and IEUA shall be entitled to reasonable attorney's
fees and costs which may be incurred in order to enforce any of said terms and
conditions, with or without filing proceedings in court.
(§ 3, Ord. 2755, eff. April 4, 2002, as amended by § 24, Ord. 2816, eff.
December 1, 2005)
Sec. 6-7.618. Recovery of cost incurred by City.
   Any user who, by discharging wastewater, non-stormwater or by any other
means, damages monitoring equipment, adversely affects wastewater treatment
processes, significantly increases POTW operation costs, causes blockage,
damage, upset, interference, or pass through at the POTW, or causes blockage
shall be liable to the City for said damages and additional costs, including
any fines or penalties, occasioned thereby. An administrative fee, which shall
be fixed by the City Manager based on the City's current overhead cost
allocation percentage and approved by the City Council, shall be added to these
charges and shall be payable within thirty (30) days of invoicing by the City.
(§ 3, Ord. 2755, eff. April 4, 2002)
Sec. 6-7.619. Financial security.
   (a)   Compliance deposit. Permittees that have been subject to enforcement
and/or collection proceedings may be required to deposit with the City an
amount determined by the Administrator as necessary to guarantee payment to the
District of all charges, fees, penalties, costs and expenses that may be
incurred in the future, or as a condition to ensure compliance provisions of a
Compliance Agreement, permit issuance after revocation, before permission is
granted for further discharge to the sewer.
   (b)   Delinquent accounts. The City may require an amendment to the permit
of any permittee who fails to make payment in full of all fees and charges
assessed by the City, including reconciliation amounts, delinquency penalties,
and other costs or fees incurred by the user.
   (c)   Bankruptcy. Every user filing any legal action in any court of
competent jurisdiction, including the United States Bankruptcy Court, for
purposes of discharging its financial debts or obligations or seeking court-
ordered protection from its creditors, shall, within ten (10) days of filing
such action, apply for and obtain the issuance of an amendment to its permit.
   (d)   Permit amendments. The City shall review and examine the user's
account to determine whether previously incurred fees and charges have been
paid in accordance with time requirements prescribed by this chapter. The City
and IEUA may thereafter issue an amendment to the user's permit in accordance
with the provisions of Article 3 and subsection (e) of this section.
   (e)   Security. An amendment to a waste discharge permit issued pursuant to
subsections (c) and (d) of this section may be conditioned upon the user
depositing financial security in an amount equal to said user's average total
fees and charges for the two (2) prior calendar quarters. Said deposit shall be
used to guarantee payment of all fees and charges incurred for future services
and facilities furnished by City and shall not be used by the City to recover
outstanding fees and charges incurred prior to the user filing and receiving
protection from creditors in the United States Bankruptcy Court.
   (f)   Return of security. In the event the user makes payment in full within
the time prescribed by this chapter of all fees and charges said user incurred
over a period of two (2) years following the issuance of an amendment to the
permit pursuant to subsections (c), (d) and (e) of this section, the City shall
either return the security deposit posted by the user or credit their account.
(§ 3, Ord. 2755, eff. April 4, 2002, as amended by § 25, Ord. 2816, eff.
December 1, 2005)
Sec. 6-7.620. Appeals to the Administrator.
   (a)   General. Any user, permit applicant or permittee affected by any
decision, action or determination made by the Administrator may file with the
Administrator a written request for an appeal hearing. The request must be
received by the City within fifteen (15) days of mailing of notice of the
decision, action, or determination of the City to the appellant. The request
for hearing shall set forth in detail all facts supporting the appellant’s
request.
   (b)   Notice. The Administrator shall, within fifteen (15) days of receiving
the request for appeal, designate a representative to hear the appeal and
provide written notice to the appellant of the hearing date, time and place.
The hearing date shall not be more than thirty (30) days from the mailing of
such notice by certified mail to the appellant unless a later date is agreed to
by the appellant. If the hearing is not held within said time due to actions or
in actions of the appellant, then the staff decision shall be deemed final.
   (c)   Hearing. At the hearing, the appellant shall have the opportunity to
present information supporting its position concerning the Administrator’s
decision, action or determination. The hearing shall be conducted in accordance
with procedures established by the Administrator and approved by the City
Counsel.
   (d)   Written determination. After the conclusion of the hearing, the
representative shall submit a written report to the Administrator setting forth
a brief statement of facts found to be true, a determination of the issues
presented, conclusions, and recommendations whether to uphold, modify or
reverse the Administrator’s original decision, action or determination. Upon
receipt of the written report, the Administrator shall make his or her
determination and shall issue his or her decision and order within thirty (30)
calendar days of the hearing by his or her designee. The written decision and
order of the Administrator shall be sent by certified mail to the appellant or
its legal counsel/representative at the appellant’s business address.
   (e)   The order of the Administrator shall be final in all respects on the
sixteenth (16th) day after it is mailed to the appellant unless a request for
hearing is filed with the City pursuant to §
1-4.01 of Chapter 4 of Title 1 of the Ontario Municipal Code, no later than 5:
00 p.m. on the fifteenth (15th) day following such mailing.
   (f)   Pursuant to §
1-4.01 of Chapter 4 of Title 1 of the Ontario Municipal Code, any user,
affected by any decision, action or determination made by Administrator, may
appeal in writing to the City Council by filing with the City Clerk a written
notice of such appeal, setting forth grounds thereof. The appellant shall file
such notice within fourteen (14) days after receipt of the notice of the
administrative decision concerned.
   (g)   The order of the City Council shall be deemed final upon its adoption.
   (h)   If the user fails to appeal to the City Council, or the City Council
fails to reverse or modify the administrative decision, the Administrator’s
administrative decision shall be deemed final.
(§ 3, Ord. 2755, eff. April 4, 2002, as amended by § 8, Ord. 2945, eff. January
6, 2012)
Sec. 6-7.621. Judicial review.
   (a)   Purpose and effect. Pursuant to Cal. Code of Civil Procedure § 1094.6,
the City hereby enacts this part to limit to ninety (90) days following final
decisions in adjudicatory administrative hearings the time within which an
action can be brought to review such decisions by means of administrative
mandamus.
   (b)   Definitions. As used in this section, the following terms and words
shall have the following meanings:
      (1)    “Complete record” shall mean and include the transcript, if any
existing, of the proceedings, all pleadings, all notices and orders, any
proposed decision by the Administrator, the final decision, all admitted
exhibits, all rejected exhibits in the possession of the City or its offices or
agents, all written evidence, and any other papers in the case.
      (2)   “Decision” shall mean and include adjudicatory administrative
decisions that are made after hearing, or after revoking, suspending, or
denying an application for a permit or a license.
      (3)   “Party” shall mean a user whose permit has been denied, suspended,
or revoked.
   (c)   Time limit for judicial review. Judicial review of any decision of the
City or its officer or agent may be made pursuant to Cal. Code of Civil
Procedure § 1094.5 only if the petition for writ or mandate is filed not later
than the ninetieth (90th) day following the date in which the decision becomes
final. If there is not provision for reconsideration in the procedures
governing the proceedings or if the date is not otherwise specified, the
decision if final on the date it is made. If there is provision for
reconsideration, the decision is final upon the expiration of the period during
which such reconsideration can be sought; provided that if reconsideration is
sought pursuant to such provision to decision is final for the purposes of this
section on the date that reconsideration is rejected.
   (d)   Preparation of the record. The complete record of the proceedings
shall be prepared by the City officer or agent who made the decision and shall
be delivered to the petitioner within ninety (90) days after he or she has
filed written request therefor. The City may recover from the petitioner its
actual cost for transcribing or otherwise preparing the record.
   (e)   Extension. If the petitioner files a request for the record within ten
(10) days after the date the decision becomes final, the time within which a
petition, pursuant to Cal. Code of Civil Procedure § 1094.5, may be filed shall
be extended to not later than the thirtieth (30th) day following the date on
which the record is either usually delivered or mailed to the petitioner or the
petitioner’s attorney of record, if appropriate.
   (f)   Notice. In making a final decision, the City shall provide notice to
the party that the time within which judicial review must be sought is governed
by Cal. Code of Civil Procedure § 1094.6.
   (g)   Administrative civil penalties. Notwithstanding the foregoing, and
pursuant to Cal. Gov’t Code § 54740.6, judicial review of an order of the
Steering Committee imposing administrative civil penalties may be made only if
the petition for writ of mandate is filed not later than the thirtieth (30th)
day following the day on which the order of the Steering Committee becomes
final.
(§ 3, Ord. 2755, eff. April 4, 2002, as amended by § 9, Ord. 2945, eff. January
6, 2012)
Sec. 6-7.622. Affirmative defense.
   A user shall have an affirmative defense in any action brought against it
alleging a violation of the general prohibitions established in §
6-7.201(a) and the specific prohibitions listed in §
6-7.201(b) where the user can demonstrate that:
   (a)   It did not know or have reason to know that its discharge, alone or in
conjunction with a discharge or discharges from other sources, would cause pass
through or interference; and
   (b)   Either of the following depending on the purpose of the local limit;
      (1)   A local limit designed to prevent pass through and/or interference,
as the case may be, was developed in accordance with §
6-7.201(c) for each pollutant in the user's discharge that caused pass through
or interference, and the user was in compliance with each such local limit
directly prior to and during the pass through or interference; or
      (2)   If a local limit designed to prevent pass through and/or
interference, as the case may be, has not been developed in accordance with §
6-7.201(c) for the pollutant(s) that caused the pass through or interference,
the user's discharge directly prior to and during the pass through or
interference did not change substantially in nature or constituents from the
user's prior discharge activity when the POTW was regularly in compliance with
the POTW's NPDES permit requirements and, in the case of interference,
applicable requirements for sewage sludge use or disposal.
(§ 3, Ord. 2755, eff. April 4, 2002, as amended by § 2, Ord. 3190 , eff.
October 7, 2021)
Article 7. Schedule of Fees and Changes
Sec. 6-7.701. Revenues.
   (a)   Every person whose premises in the City are served by a connection to
the public sewer system whereby the sewage and/or industrial wastes are
disposed of by the City through the regional sewage system, or otherwise, shall
pay a sewer operation charge and any surcharge as established by §
6-7.703 of this chapter.
   (b)   The charges provided for in §
6-7.703 shall be applicable only on premises to which a public sewer system
main is connected.
   (c)   The charges provided for in §
6-7.703 for any promise or property shall be collected with the charges and
rates for water services furnished by the City to such premises. Such charges
shall be billed upon the same bill as prepared for charges for water services
and shall be due and payable monthly at the same time such charges for water
services are due and payable. The total amount due for the charges herein fixed
and for charges for water shall be paid as a unit.
   (d)   The City Council may, from time to time in its discretion by ordinance
or resolution, alter, change, amend, or revise the charges and rates for
services and facilities in connection with the public sewer and stormwater
drainage systems.
   (e)   It shall be the duty of the Revenue Department of the City to collect
all charges provided for in this chapter.
   (f)   The City Council shall have the right to require any person liable to
pay any stormwater pollution abatement charges, sewer operation charges and
applicable surcharges to make a reasonable deposit to insure the collection of
such charge.
   (g)   If any person fails to pay any applicable charges when the same become
due, the City may, in addition to any other remedies it has, cut off any of the
services and facilities provided for in this chapter and shall not resume the
same until all delinquent charges, together with any charges necessitated by
the resumption of such services and facilities, have been fully paid.
   (h)   All funds and monies received from the collection of sewer operation
charges and applicable surcharges as herein established, shall be deposited and
maintain in a separate fund and account to be known as the Sewer Operation
Fund. The moneys deposited in such fund shall be used as permitted by Cal.
Health & Safety Code § 5471.
   (i)   Adequate funds shall be transferred from Sewer Service Revenues to the
Sewer Revolving Fund for sewer capital facilities repairs and replacement. The
amount of this transfer shall be reviewed and adjusted in conjunction with rate
studies to meet the needs of the sewer capital improvement program.
   (j)   If a developed parcel does not have a utility account with the City on
the effective date of this section, a new account shall be established for that
parcel and billed to the owner of said parcel as shown on the latest County
Assessor's property tax rolls as an existing utility account. When an
undeveloped parcel is developed, a new account shall be established and billed
to the owner of that parcel as shown on the latest County Assessor's property
tax rolls. The developed property owner shall maintain responsibility for
payment until such time as other City utility services are provided to said
parcel and a primary utility account is established for payment responsibility
with the occupier of said property.
(§ 3, Ord. 2755, eff. April 4, 2002)
Sec. 6-7.702. Equivalent dwelling units (EDU).
   (a)   Residential customers: The wastewater flow from a single family
residential unit is defined as one (1) EDU. On the average, this flow is two
hundred seventy (270) gallons per day, and the levels of biological oxygen
demand (BOD) and suspended solids (SS) are equal to two hundred thirty (230)
mg/l and two hundred twenty (220) mg/l, respectively. The average flow from a
multiple family residential or mobile home unit is one hundred eighty-nine
(189) gallons per day with the same levels of BOD and SS. By definition, this
is equal to seven-tenths (.7) of one (1) EDU.
   (b)    Schools. The number of EDUs for a school is determined annually based
on the school's October Average Daily Attendance (ADA). One (1) EDU is
equivalent to fifty-four (54) Kindergarten through high school students, or
twenty-seven (27) college students.
   (c)   Commercial customers. Commercial customers are grouped in different
sewer categories as shown below. Each category is assigned a wastewater factor
(WF) based on the percentage of water consumption returned to the sewer, and
the wastewater levels of BOD and SS according to the following formula:
   WF = Flow %
   ((0.37 + (0.31 BOD/230) + (0.32 SS/220)) / 10.98
The number of EDUs is calculated using the monthly water consumption in hundred
cubic feet (HCF) as follows:
EDUs — HCF x WF COMMERCIAL
CATEGORIES AND WASTEWATER FACTORS FOR DETERMINING MONTHLY SEWER CHARGES
Category Type of Commercial BOD/SS Flow % Wastewater Factor
EDUs — HCF x WF COMMERCIAL
CATEGORIES AND WASTEWATER FACTORS FOR DETERMINING MONTHLY SEWER CHARGES
Category Type of Commercial              BOD/SS  Flow %   Wastewater Factor
1        Office                          230/220 80       0.0729
         Day Care Center
         Market w/o grinder
         Public Facility w/o dining
         Bar/Tavern w/o food
         Retail/Service
         Recreation/Amusement w/o dining
2        Mortuary                        250/350 95       0.1052
3        Hotel w/dining                  300/400 85       0.1050
         Motel w/dining
         Bar/Tavern w/dining
         Recreation/Amusement w/dining
         Public Facility w/dining
         Hospital - full service
         Convalescent facility
4        Laundromat                      100/150 95       0.0626
         Car Wash
5        Laundry Commercial/Industrial   350/550 85       0.1215
         Dry Cleaner
6        Motel w/o dining                300/100 80       0.0670
         Health Spa
         Church/Workshop
7        Outpatient Facility             225/100 90       0.0671
         Doctor Office
         Dental Office
8        Restaurant full service         400/300 85       0.1042
         Restaurant fast food
         Market w/grinder
         Bakery
9        School   Public/Private      230/220          Fixed EDU
         K through 12                            5 gpd/s  October ADA/54
         College                                 10 gpd/s October ADA/27
 
   (d)   Industrial customers. Industrial customers shall consist of any
industrial user identified in the NAICS/SIC Code US Manual, 1997, as amended
and supplemented, under the category Division D - Manufacturing, and any other
user of significant waste products as determined by the City. The number of
EDUs of industrial customers shall be the sum of domestic and non-domestic
wastewater EDUs as follows:
      (1)   The number of domestic wastewater EDUs is calculated using a
wastewater factor equal to 0.0729 (category 1 - commercial customers) as
described in subsection (c) of this section.
      (2)   The number of non-domestic wastewater EDUs is calculated based on
the average daily flow (gallons per day) and strength (BOD & SS in mg/l) of the
non-domestic wastewater flow according to the following formula:
   EDUs-Non-Domestic Flow
   ((0.37 + (0.31 BOD/230) + (0.32 SS/220)) / 270
   (e)   If required by the City, any non-residential user may be required to
submit on a yearly basis (on or before the first of July of every year), a
twenty- four (24) hour composite wastewater sample analysis performed by a
certified laboratory. Said analysis shall be for BOD, SS and/or any other
parameters, as may be required by the City. The customer shall pay all
monitoring costs. The results of the analysis may be used to adjust the
customer's wastewater factor and billing records. The frequency of wastewater
analysis samples submitted may vary depending on the type of industrial
discharge as determined by the City.
   (f)   In the event a customer believes the parameters used to establish the
customer's wastewater factor is no longer applicable, said customer may submit
the results of laboratory analyses and any other documents for review by the
City. An adjustment in the wastewater factor and billing records may be made if
deemed appropriate and consistent with the intent of this section. Any
adjustment shall not be retroactive and shall be effective on the first day of
the current billing cycle.
   (g)   If a wastewater pretreatment device and/or in-plant modification is
instituted which involves a change in the quality and/or quantity of wastewater
being discharged, the customer shall immediately notify the City. The user
shall be required to submit flow 71 measurements and laboratory analysis for
BOD, SS and any other parameters as described in subsection (e) of this
section.
   (h)   The specific wastewater rate calculation criteria, including the
assignment of sewer factors to specific customers, shall be determined by the
City for all customers not specifically mentioned under the classifications set
forth in this section, in accordance with the provisions of this section.
   (i)   If a commercial or industrial customer's water meter is used for both
domestic and landscape irrigation, forty-five percent (45%) of the metered
water consumption shall be assigned to landscape irrigation. If the user can
show that landscape irrigation constitutes more than forty-five percent (45%)
of the total, the City shall adjust this value provided that installation of a
separate irrigation meter is not feasible. The adjustment shall be made after
review, verification and approval of a water-use audit report prepared and
submitted by the customer. Water meters that are used for landscape irrigation
only, and other water meters that do not contribute to sewer flow shall not be
included in the EDU calculations, and shall be exempt from sewer charges.
(§ 3, Ord. 2755, eff. April 4, 2002)
Sec. 6-7.703. Sewer revenue charge rates.
   In addition to other fees, assessments, or charges provided by the Municipal
Code or adopted by the City Council, the owner or occupant of any parcel of
property for which no other sewer service charge is provided, and which parcel
of property is connected to the sewer system of the City, shall pay monthly
sewer service charges as established from time to time by resolution of the
City Council.
(§ 3, Ord. 2755, eff. April 4, 2002, as amended by § 7, Ord. 2785, eff.
November 16, 2003,§§ 26 and 27, Ord. 2816, eff. December 1, 2005, § 3, Ord.
2880, eff. February 4, 2008, § 3, Ord. 2913, eff. January 1, 2010, § 5, Ord.
3133, eff. July 5, 2019)
Sec. 6-7.704. Industrial wastewater permit fees.
   Industrial wastewater permit fees for non- residential customers shall be
included in the monthly sewer charges as established in §
6-7.703 of this chapter.
(§ 3, Ord. 2755, eff. April 4, 2002)
Sec. 6-7.705. Industrial wastewater non-compliance fees.
   Any user who has violated or continues to violate this chapter, an
industrial wastewater permit, an order issued hereunder, or any prohibition,
limitation, or requirement contained herein, shall pay non- compliance fees to
the City as established in §
6-7.603 of this chapter, to recover all costs incurred by the City in
performing inspections, sampling and analysis of the user's wastewater, and
administrative costs associated with processing notices of violation, and
conducting enforcement actions.
(§ 3, Ord. 2755, eff. April 4, 2002)
Sec. 6-7.706. Capital Capacity Reimbursement Account (CCRA) fee.
   (a)   The City is required to deposit regional sewer capacity fees in a
separate capital facilities fund with other charges received, and account for
the charges in a manner to avoid any commingling with other moneys of the City,
except for investments, and shall expend those charges solely for the purposes
for which the charges were collected. Any interest income earned from the
investment of moneys in the capital facilities fund shall be deposited in that
fund.
   (b)   The City is a party to the regional sewerage service contract, the
obligations of which include financing the capital expansion of the regional
sewerage facilities serving the City. These regional sewerage facilities are
operated by the Inland Empire Utilities Agency (IEUA).
   (c)   IEUA has prepared a Ten (10) Year Capital Improvement Program which
includes a study of the impact of anticipated development within the
jurisdiction of each of the contracting agencies, including the City, upon the
need for and cost of sufficient wastewater interceptor and treatment capacity.
   (d)   Purpose and findings.
      (1)   In order to implement the goals and objectives of the City of
Ontario's General Plan and the regional sewerage service contract, a Ten (10)
Year Capital Improvement Program is prepared annually by IEUA for those
expansions of the regional sewerage facilities to be needed by the contracting
agencies to mitigate sewage impacts caused by new development in the City of
Ontario and within the spheres of each of the contracting agencies.
      (2)   The Ten (10) Year Capital Improvement Program, which is hereby
incorporated by reference, establishes that certain sewerage pretreatment
facilities must be or had to be constructed to provide adequate treatment
capacity to service anticipated new development within the jurisdiction of each
of the contracting agencies. The cities and agencies contracting for sewage
treatment with the IEUA are Cucamonga Valley Water District, and the cities of
Ontario, Chino, Chino Hills, Fontana, Montclair and Upland.
      (3)   The contracting agencies and IEUA have determined that a regional
sewer capacity fee is needed in order to completely finance these public
improvements and to pay for public facilities in existence at the time regional
sewer capacity fees are imposed or for new public facilities to be acquired or
constructed in the future that are of proportional benefit to the person or
property being charged, including, real property interests, and entitlements
and other rights of the local agency involving capital expense relating to its
use existing or new public facilities.
      (4)   IEUA's Ten (10) Year Capital Improvement Program identifies the
need for new regional wastewater interceptor facilities, pretreatment
facilities, and disposal facilities and sets forth the relationship between new
development, needed facilities and estimated costs of the facilities. This
report is annually updated by IEUA. The report utilizes the contracting
agencies' forecasted growth and an analysis of IEUA's financial projection of
being able to provide capacity. Those projections have been examined and have
been found to be reasonable estimates of the projected growth within the City
and the regional service area of the IEUA.
      (5)   The regional sewer capacity fees collected pursuant to this section
shall be used to finance only the regional wastewater interceptor facilities,
pretreatment facilities and disposal facilities identified in the IEUA Ten (10)
Year Capital Improvement Program in accordance with the terms of the regional
contract.
      (6)   New development within the City of Ontario will generate additional
need for sewage treatment capacity within the regional service area and will
contribute to the degradation of pretreatment facility capacity within the
regional service area of the IEUA.
      (7)   The amount of the regional sewer capacity fees does not exceed the
estimated reasonable cost of providing the service for which the fees are
imposed.
      (8)   There is a need in the City for sewage treatment capacity which has
not been constructed or has been constructed in anticipation of new development
which has not contributed its fair share towards these facility costs and said
facilities have been called for in or are consistent with the City's General
Plan.
         (i)   There is a reasonable relationship between the need for the
wastewater interceptor facility, pretreatment facility, and disposal facilities
and the types of development considered in the forecasts submitted by the
contracting agencies, including the City of Ontario, for which a CCRA fee is
hereby imposed;
         (ii)   There is a reasonable relationship between the use of such fee
and each type of development project upon which the fee is imposed;
         (iii)   There is a reasonable relationship between the IEUA amount of
the fee and the cost of the facilities to be built to service new development
projects for which the fee is imposed; and
         (iv)   The procedures used to determine these relationships are
described in more detail in the "Agreement Amending and Supplementing Chino
Basin Regional Sewage Service Contract" and the Ten (10) Year Capital
Improvement Program.
      (9)   There is a need in this City for sewage treatment capacity which
has not now been constructed or has been constructed in anticipation of new
development which has not contributed its fair share towards these facility
costs and said facilities have been called for in or are consistent with the
City's General Plan.
      (10)   The cost estimates set forth in IEUA's Ten (10) Year Capital
Improvement Program are reasonable cost estimates for constructing wastewater
interceptor facility, pretreatment facility, and disposal facilities
necessitated by projected new development, and the development fees collected
by the City from any affected development project will not exceed the total of
these costs attributable to the increased capacity necessary to serve that
project.
   (e)   Every developer constructing any new residential, commercial, or
industrial structure which will be connected to the City's public sewer shall
pay to the City a regional sewer capacity fee calculated by multiplying the
number of EDUs by the current IEUA rate per EDU. The regional sewer capacity
fee will automatically be adjusted each year on July 1 to the amount adopted by
the IEUA Board of Directors.
   (f)   For the purposes of computing uniform financial obligations for each
contracting agency in the regional sewerage system, the following computation
shall be used to determine EDUs for residential, commercial and industrial
units:
      (1)   Residential is a structure or part of a structure which is designed
for the purpose of providing permanent housing for one (1) family or tenant
shall be one (1) EDU. This includes, but is not limited to, a single family
detached residence, an apartment, a townhouse, a condominium, or mobile home
space within a mobile home park.
      (2)   Commercial is a structure which is designed for the purpose of
providing permanent housing for enterprises engaged in the exchange of goods
and services. This shall include, but is not limited to, all private business
and service establishments, schools, churches, and public facilities. EDUs
shall be determined by multiplying the fixture units, as defined in the Uniform
Plumbing Code, shown on the approved building plans by the appropriate sewage
factor. Total EDUs for commercial centers with various use categories will be
the sum of the EDUs computed for each category use as follows:
COMMERCIAL USE CATEGORIES LISTING
No. Type of Commercial Gallons Per Fixture BOD/TSS Sewage Factor
No. Type of Commercial            Gallons Per Fixture BOD/TSS Sewage Factor
    Motel/Hotel
    Recreation/Amusement
    Restaurant (fast food)
I   Office                        12                  230/220 0.0444
    Retail Store
    Market (without butcher shop)
    Bar Tavern
    Market (with Butcher Shop)
II  Bakery                        24                  250/350 0.1081
    Mortuary
    Convalescent Home
III Hospital                      42                  250/300 0.178
    Health Spa (with pool)
    Restaurant (full service)
    Laundromat
IV  Laundry                       43                  350/500 0.2499
    Dry Cleaner (processor)
V   Car Wash (coin operated)      102                 150/500 0.491
    Church
VI  School                        17                  230/220 0.063
    Public Facility
VII Health Spa (without pool)     42                  230/220 0.1555
 
      (3)   Industrial is a structure which is designed for the purpose of
providing permanent housing for enterprises engaged in the production,
manufacturing, or processing of material. EDUs for industrial users shall be
determined as follows:
         (i)   For domestic type wastewater, multiply the fixture units, as
defined by the Uniform Plumbing Code, as shown on the approved building plans
by a sewer factor of 0.0741 based on a twenty (20) gallons per fixture unit
flow per day.
         (ii)   For industrial wastewater, compute the number of EDUs from
information contained on the industrial waste permit, as set forth in §
6-7.702 of this chapter.
         (iii)   Combine the resultant EDUs derived from (i) and (ii) above.
      (4)   The sewage factor formula used for commercial and industrial
categories is as follows:
Sewage factor = Gallons per fixture
((0.37 + (0.31 BOD/230) + (0.32 SS/220)) / 270
   (g)   Exempt from the regional sewer capacity fee shall be the following:
      (1)   Any residential, commercial or industrial structure which is or
will be connected exclusively to another agency's sewer system or to a private
sewage disposal system; and
      (2)   That portion of a newly constructed commercial and/or industrial
development's waste which is discharged into the non-reclaimable waste system.
   (h)   For residential structures with a building permit issued prior to July
1, 1979, no regional sewer capacity fees will be levied at the time of
connection to the regional system. If the original permit was issued after July
1, 1979, then the regional sewer capacity fees established at the time of
permit issuance will apply.
   (i)   The regional sewer capacity fees will apply to all commercial and
industrial development regardless of when the structure was constructed. When a
non-residential user requests to connect to the regional system or to modify
its use, if already connected, the regional sewer capacity fee shall be based
on the current fee in effect at the time the connection or modified use is
made.
   (j)   Additional regional sewer capacity fees shall be levied on existing
commercial and industrial users who expand or revise their use. The additional
regional sewer capacity fee shall be based on the additional number of EDUs
according to the following criteria:
      (1)   Regional sewer capacity fees will only be levied on the fixture
unit (FU) count difference between existing FUs and new FUs.
      (2)   The regional sewer capacity fee will be determined based on the fee
in effect at the time of building or sewer permit issuance for the revised or
expanding development.
      (3)   A change in use, placing a commercial development in a different
commercial category, will not result in the recalculation of the CCRA
obligation for the existing FUs. Only the regional sewer capacity fees for the
new added FUs will be levied based on the commercial category which best
defines the proposed use.
   (k)   All sewer use rights and capacity shall remain with the existing
building and shall be sold to building owners rather than tenants. In cases
where an existing building is completely demolished, the transfer of capacity
rights can be permitted provided that:
      (1)   Proof of building demolition can be documented;
      (2)   Payment for original system capacity can be documented;
      (3)   The demolition occurs simultaneously with the transfer; and
      (4)   The transfer occurs within the contracting agency who originally
sold the capacity.
      (5)   The capacity rights shall be determined based on number of EDUs of
the demolished structure.
   (l)   Regional sewer capacity fees shall be paid at the time of the
application for a building permit or an industrial wastewater permit if no
building permit is required.
   (m)   Regional sewer capacity fees collected shall be deposited in the City
of Ontario's Sanitary Sewerage Collection and Treatment Fund and used to
finance construction of wastewater interceptor facilities, pretreatment
facilities, and disposal facilities.
(§ 3, Ord. 2755, eff. April 4, 2002, as amended by § 1, Ord. 2756, eff. June
16, 2002, § 1, Ord. 2773, eff. July 6, 2003, § 1, Ord. 2801, eff. July 1, 2004,
§ 2, Ord. 2972, eff. December 19, 2013, and § 2, Ord. 3190, eff. October 7,
2021)
Sec. 6-7.707. Sanitary sewer installation policy and the setting of sewer
connection fees.
(Repealed by § 5 of Ord. 2779, eff. August 1, 2003)
Sec. 6-7.708. Interagency wastewater connection requirements and agreement.
   (a)   The sewer discharge from a public sewering agency to the City must be
approved by all involved agencies by written agreement.
   (b)   The public sewering agency desiring a sewer connection to the City, or
source agency, must submit to the Engineer, a written request for an
Interagency Connection Point which shall include: a plot map of the area to be
served including the distance to the proposed connection point; the current
zoning and acreage of each of the zoned regions of the area; the percentage of
existing development in each zoned region; the current average and peak flow
and wastewater quality from the total proposed area; and the projected maximum
peak and average flows from the total area at build-out.
   (c)   The City shall have the right to deny the request for any reason.
   (d)   The contract agreement must be written by the source agency but
reviewed and approved by the City and must include, but not be limited to the
following:
      (1)   A statement of agreement to construct, at no expense to the City,
all sewer facilities necessary to convey the sewage from the source agency area
to the City's public sewer system;
      (2)   All construction plans must be approved by the Engineer and all
construction done in the City including a monitoring manhole at the connection
point must be inspected and built to the City standards, also as-built plans
must be submitted to the City upon completion of the work all at no cost to the
City;
      (3)   The source agency shall agree, at their own expense, to submit to
the City no later than forty-five (45) days from the date the connection point
becomes active, a twenty-four (24) hour flow weighted composite analysis on the
effluent entering the City at the connection point for all the parameters and
constituents listed in the Inland Empire Utilities Agency Regional Contract,
Exhibit H, and shall agree to submit to the City, a similar analysis every six
(6) months starting from the submittal date of the first analysis;
      (4)   The water laboratory used by the source agency for the monitoring
and analysis work must be approved by the City on an annual basis, and a copy
of all the intercity connection point monitoring must be sent to the City
directly from the laboratory;
      (5)   If the connection point is to be eliminated, the source agency
shall abandon the intercity connection to current City standards, on the source
agency's side of the City's boundary line at no expense to the City;
      (6)   The requesting agency shall collect all sewer fees as established
by the City and transfer this money once per six (6) months to the City;
      (7)   The requesting agency shall be responsible to notify the City of
any growth in this sewered area, and agree to allow the City to enforce their
Pretreatment Program in the source agency's sewered area, 40 CFR 403.8(f)(2)
(i);
      (8)   The City agrees to accept and deliver to the regional sewage
treatment plant, or to an approved regional sewage system collection point, all
sewage discharged through this connection point providing all predetermined
flow and water quality criteria are being met;
      (9)   The City shall have the right to stop the sewer flow or eliminate
the intercity connection point if any of the above criteria are violated, but
must notify in writing, the source agency of the City's intent and establish a
date and time the connection point may be abolished; and
      (10)   The source agency shall be responsible for submitting an executed
copy of the interagency agreement to the IEUA.
      (11)   All existing source agencies that are discharging to the City's
Public Sewer System when this chapter becomes effective, shall comply with all
of the requirements of this section providing the requirements have not already
been regulated in an executed agreement between the source agency and the City;
all existing source agencies shall be given one year from the effective date of
this chapter to comply with the additional requirements or the source agency
may be subject to cancellation of their interagency connection.
(§ 3, Ord. 2755, eff. April 4, 2002)
Sec. 6-7.709. Discrepancies between actual and reported wastewater strength and
flow.
   (a)   Should measurements or other investigations reveal that the permittee
is discharging a flow rate, or a quantity of flow, biochemical oxygen demand or
total suspended solids significantly in excess of that stated on the permit or
in excess of the quantities reported to the Administrator by the permittee and
upon which the monthly sewer service charges or capacity facilities fees are
based, the permittee shall apply for an amended permit and shall be assessed
for all delinquent charges together with penalty and interest. Before these
charges shall be assessed at least two (2) additional twenty-four (24)-hour
samples and flow measurements shall be obtained by the Administrator with all
costs of sampling and analyses to be paid by the permittee.
   (b)   For the purpose of establishing the correct sewer service charge, the
data obtained in these samplings along with any other relevant information
obtained by the Administrator or presented by the permittee, shall be used by
the Administrator in determining the sewer service charge. A permittee who
violates this section shall, in the absence of other evidence, be presumed to
have been discharging at the determined parameter values over the period since
the Administrator's last verification of quantity parameters.
(§ 2, Ord. 3190 , eff. October 7, 2021)
CHAPTER 8: WATER SERVICES* (REPEALED)
*Chapter 8 of Title 6, incorporating §§ 6-8.01 through 6-8.11, was repealed in
its entirety by § 2, Ord. 2785, eff. November 16, 2003.
CHAPTER 8A: WATER CONSERVATION PLAN
   
6-8.20   Scope and title
   
6-8.21   Statement of policy and declaration of purpose
   
6-8.22   Authorization
   
6-8.23   General prohibitions
   
6-8.24   Exceptions
   
6-8.25   Voluntary conservation stage
   
6-8.26   Stage 1 water supply shortage–water supply reduced by up to ten
percent (10%)
   
6-8.27   Stage 2 water supply shortage–water supply reduced up to twenty
percent (20%)
   
6-8.28   Stage 3 water supply shortage–water supply reduced up to thirty
percent (30%)
   
6-8.29   Stage 4 water supply shortage–water supply reduced up to forty percent
(40%)
   
6-8.30   Stage 5 water supply shortage–water supply reduced up to fifty percent
(50%)
   
6-8.31   Stage 6 water supply shortage emergency–water supply reduced more than
fifty percent (50%)
   
6-8.32   Relief from compliance
   
6-8.33   Failure to comply
   
6-8.34   Appeal and hearing regarding violations
   
6-8.35   Remedies not exclusive
Sec. 6-8.20. Scope and title.
   This chapter shall be known as "The Water Conservation Plan of the City of
Ontario."
(§ 2, Ord. 2907, eff. June 16, 2009, as amended by § 2, Ord. 3027, eff. October
1, 2015 and § 2, Ord. 3196, eff. December 7, 2021)
Sec. 6-8.21. Statement of policy and declaration of purpose.
   (a)   Because of the water supply conditions prevailing in the City and/or
the area from which the City obtains a portion of its supply, the general
welfare requires that the water resources available to the City of Ontario be
put to the maximum beneficial use to the extent to which they are capable, and
that the waste or unreasonable use, or unreasonable method of use of water be
prevented and that the conservation of such water be practiced with a view to
that reasonable and beneficial use thereof in the interest of the people of the
City.
   (b)   The purpose of this chapter is to minimize the potential for a water
shortage through the practice of water conservation, and to minimize the effect
of a shortage of water supplies on the water customers of the City. It is
furthermore the intent of this chapter to adopt provisions that will
significantly reduce the inefficient consumption of water, thereby extending
the available water resources necessary for domestic, sanitation, and fire
protection of the community to the greatest extent possible.
   (c)   This chapter shall be applicable to all persons within the City. For
the purposes of this chapter, "person" means any natural person, property
owner, renter, or lessee, as well as any corporation, partnership, government
entity or subdivision, trust, estate, cooperative association, homeowners'
association, joint venture, business entity, or other similar entity, or the
property management company, property manager, agent, employee or
representative of any of the above.
(§ 2, Ord. 2907, eff. June 16, 2009, as amended by § 2, Ord. 3027, eff. October
1, 2015 and § 2, Ord. 3196, eff. December 7, 2021)
Sec. 6-8.22. Authorization.
   (a)   The City Council may declare a water shortage based on a determination
by the Metropolitan Water District of Southern California, the Inland Empire
Utilities Agency, the declaration of an executive order of the Governor, or the
adoption of voluntary or mandatory water use restrictions by any state agency
governing the use of water, or based upon any interruption in water supply or
delivery that the City Council determines in its sole discretion necessitates
water conservation pursuant to this chapter.
   (b)   In the event of an immediate emergency that causes an unplanned
interruption of water supply, the City Manager or his/her designee is
authorized to restrict water use and apportion the available supply of water
among its customers in the most equitable manner possible to continue service
fairly and without discrimination, except that preference shall be given to
such service as is essential to the public interest and to the preservation of
life and health.
   (c)   A water shortage, including a water shortage emergency but excluding
an immediate emergency, shall be declared by the adoption of a resolution of
the City Council.
      (1)   A notice of a water shortage, other than a water shortage
emergency, shall be published in a daily newspaper of general circulation
within the City. Any restrictions on the use of water during a declared water
shortage shall become effective immediately upon such publication.
      (2)   Notice of hearing to declare a water shortage emergency, other than
an immediate emergency, shall be made in accordance with Water Code Section
351. Any restrictions on the use of water during a declared water shortage
shall become effective immediately upon adoption unless otherwise be determined
by the City Council.
(§ 2, Ord. 2907, eff. June 16, 2009, as amended by § 2, Ord. 3027, eff. October
1, 2015 and § 2, Ord. 3196, eff. December 7, 2021)
Sec. 6-8.23. General prohibitions.
   (a)   The following are prohibited in any new water connections:
      (1)   Non-recycling decorative fountains;
      (2)   Single-pass cooling systems; and
      (3)   Conveyor and in-bay vehicle wash and commercial laundry systems
that do not reuse water.
   (b)   No water customer of the City shall make, cause, use, or permit the
use of water from the City in a manner contrary to any provision of this
chapter or in an amount in excess of the use permitted by any restriction
provisions then in effect pursuant to the provisions of this chapter.
(§ 2, Ord. 2907, eff. June 16, 2009, as amended by § 2, Ord. 3027, eff. October
1, 2015 and § 2, Ord. 3196, eff. December 7, 2021)
Sec. 6-8.24. Exceptions.
   (a)   The prohibited uses of water and water use restrictions provided
within this chapter are not applicable for the use of recycled water or the use
of potable water necessary for public health and safety or for essential
government services such as police, fire, and other similar services.
   (b)   Nothing contained within this chapter shall be construed to require
the City to curtail the supply of water necessary for the health, safety, and
welfare of any person.
(§ 2, Ord. 2907, eff. June 16, 2009, as amended by § 2, Ord. 3027, eff. October
1, 2015 and § 2, Ord. 3196, eff. December 7, 2021)
Sec. 6-8.25. Voluntary conservation stage.
   (a)   All persons are encouraged to voluntarily limit the amount of water
used to the amount absolutely necessary for health and safety, business
operations, and irrigation. Except as otherwise provided in this chapter where
a declared water shortage stage or water shortage emergency requires mandatory
or other more stringent requirements, the following elements of conservation
apply at all times on a voluntary basis by all persons within the City:
      (1)   Avoid hose washing of sidewalks, walkways, driveways, parking areas
or other paved surfaces, except as required for sanitary purposes. If a person
uses a hand-held hose to wash any sidewalk, walkway, driveway, parking area or
other paved surface, the hose shall be equipped with a positive shutoff nozzle.
      (2)   Wash motor vehicles, trailers, boats and other types of mobile
equipment using a hand held bucket or a hose equipped with a positive shutoff
nozzle for quick rinses, or at the immediate premises of a commercial car wash
or with recycled wastewater for approved uses.
      (3)   Avoid using water to clean, fill or maintain levels in decorative
fountains, ponds, lakes or other similar aesthetic structures unless such water
is part of a recycling system.
      (4)   Encourage restaurants, hotels, cafés, cafeterias or other public
places where food is sold, served or offered for sale, to serve drinking water
only to those customers expressly requesting water.
      (5)   Promptly repair all leaks from indoor and outdoor plumbing
fixtures.
      (6)   Avoid watering lawn, landscape or other turf areas between 6:00
a.m. and 6:00 p.m.
      (7)   Avoid causing or allowing the water to run off landscape areas into
adjoining streets, sidewalks or other paved areas due to incorrectly directed
or maintained sprinklers or excessive watering.
(§ 2, Ord. 2907, eff. June 16, 2009, as amended by § 2, Ord. 3027, eff. October
1, 2015 and § 2, Ord. 3196, eff. December 7, 2021)
Sec. 6-8.26. Stage 1 water supply shortage–water supply reduced up to ten
percent (10%).
   (a)   During Stage 1, the following mandatory restrictions on the use of
potable water shall be applicable when the City Council determines that the
City's water conservation goals are not being met by voluntary water
conservation measures, or that the City's water supplies are likely to be
reduced by up to ten percent (10%) or it has otherwise been requested or
directed by executive order or regulation of a state agency to reduce its
potable water consumption or production by a specified amount.
      (1)   Except as required for health and sanitary purposes, washing of
sidewalks, walkways, driveways, parking areas or other paved surfaces is
prohibited. Any held-hose used for such purposes shall be equipped with a
positive shutoff nozzle.
      (2)   Washing of motor vehicles, trailers, boats and other types of
mobile equipment shall be done only with a hand-held bucket or a hose equipped
with a positive shutoff nozzle for quick rinses, except that washing may be
done at the immediate premises of a commercial car wash or with reclaimed
wastewater.
      (3)   No water shall be used to clean, fill or maintain levels in
decorative fountains, ponds, lakes or other similar aesthetic structures unless
such water is part of a recycling system.
      (4)   No restaurant, hotel, café, cafeteria or other public place where
food is sold, served or offered for sale, shall serve drinking water to any
customer unless expressly requested.
      (5)   All water customers of the City shall promptly repair all leaks
from indoor and outdoor plumbing fixtures. Such leak shall be repaired in a
timely manner after notification by the City, but in no case after notification
in excess of seventy-two (72) hours for the first violation and then every
seventy-two (72) hours thereafter for the second and third violations.
      (6)   No person shall sprinkle, water, or irrigate any shrubbery, trees,
lawns, grass, groundcovers, plants, vines, gardens, vegetables, flowers, or any
other landscaped or vegetated areas between the hours of 9:00 a.m. and 4:00
p.m. In any event, such watering shall not be in excess of needs nor be of a
manner that allows water to flow onto streets or other paved areas. The above
mentioned plants may be watered by a hand-held hose equipped with a positive
shutoff nozzle at any time of the day. This provision shall not apply to
commercial nurseries, golf courses and other water-dependent industries.
      (7)   No water customer of the City shall cause or allow the water to run
off landscape areas into adjoining streets, sidewalks or other paved areas due
to incorrectly directed or maintained sprinkler or excessive watering.
      (8)   The use of water from fire hydrants shall be limited to fire
fighting and related activities necessary to maintain the public health,
safety, and welfare. An exception may be made for construction use through a
proper City-designated meter. The use of potable water for construction
activities shall be restricted in areas where recycled water is available for
such use.
   (b)   At any time during Stage 1, if the City Council determines that
additional reductions in the amount the potable water being used by water
customers are necessary, it may adopt a resolution establishing water use
limitations and enforce those water use limitations by the adoption and
imposition of a volumetric penalty established therein.
(§ 2, Ord. 2907, eff. June 16, 2009, as amended by § 2, Ord. 3027, eff. October
1, 2015 and § 2, Ord. 3196, eff. December 7, 2021)
Sec. 6-8.27. Stage 2 water supply shortage–water supply reduced up to twenty
percent (20%).
   (a)   During Stage 2, the following mandatory restrictions on the use of
potable water shall be applicable when the City Council determines that it is
likely that the City will suffer a reduction of more than ten percent (10%) and
up to (20%) in its water supplies or it has otherwise been requested or
directed by an executive order or regulation of a state agency to reduce its
potable water consumption or production by a specified amount.
      (1)   All prohibitions and restrictions in §
6-8.26 shall be in effect provided that more restrictive measures noted in this
section shall take precedence.
      (2)   Filling or refilling of empty swimming pools shall not occur
without the written permission of the City Manager or his/her designee.
      (3)   All customers are prohibited from irrigating turf or ornamental
landscapes during and within forty-eight (48) hours following measurable
rainfall.
      (4)   Operators of hotels and motels must provide guests with the option
of choosing not to have towels and linens laundered daily and prominently
display notice of this option.
      (5)   All persons, including the City, are prohibited from irrigating
with potable water any ornamental turf on public street medians.
      (6)   The use of potable water for irrigation outside of newly
constructed homes and buildings shall be consistent with California Building
Standards Commission and Department of Housing & Community Development.
   (b)   At any time during Stage 2, if the City Council determines that
additional reductions in the amount the potable water being used by water
customers are necessary, it may adopt a resolution establishing water use
limitations and enforce those water use limitations by the adoption and
imposition of a volumetric penalty established therein.
(§ 2, Ord. 2907, eff. June 16, 2009, as amended by § 2, Ord. 3027, eff. October
1, 2015 and § 2, Ord. 3196, eff. December 7, 2021)
Sec. 6-8.28. Stage 3 water supply shortage–water supply reduced up to thirty
percent (30%).
   (a)    During Stage 3, the following mandatory restrictions on the use of
potable water shall be applicable when the City Council determines that it is
likely that the City will suffer a reduction of more than twenty percent (20%)
and up to thirty percent (30%) in its water supplies or it has otherwise been
requested or directed by executive order or regulation of a state agency to
reduce its potable water consumption or production by a specified amount.
      (1)   All the prohibitions and restrictions in §
6-8.27 shall be in effect provided that the more restrictive measures noted in
this section shall take precedence.
      (2)   Residents and CII customers will be prohibited from irrigating any
turf or landscape area more than four (4) days a week.
      (3)   The use of water from fire hydrants shall be limited to fire
fighting and related activities and other uses of water for municipal purposes
shall be limited to activities necessary to maintain the public health, safety
and welfare. Unless written permission has been granted by the City Manager or
his/her designee, the use of potable water for construction activities and
grading shall be prohibited.
   (b)   At any time during Stage 3, if the City Council determines that
additional reductions in the amount the potable water being used by water
customers are necessary, it may adopt a resolution establishing water use
limitations and enforce those water use limitations by the adoption and
imposition of a volumetric penalty established therein.
(§ 2, Ord. 2907, eff. June 16, 2009, as amended by § 2, Ord. 3027, eff. October
1, 2015 and § 2, Ord. 3196, eff. December 7, 2021)
Sec. 6-8.29. Stage 4 water supply shortage–water supply reduced up to forty
percent (40%).
   (a)   During Stage 4, the following mandatory restrictions on the use of
potable water shall be applicable when the City Council determines that it is
likely that the City will suffer a reduction of more than thirty percent (30%)
and up to forty percent (40%) in its water supplies or it has otherwise been
requested or directed by executive order or regulation of a state agency to
reduce its potable water consumption or production by a specified amount.
      (1)   All the prohibitions and restrictions in §
6-8.28 shall be in effect provided that the more restrictive measures noted in
this section shall take precedence.
      (2)   Residents and CII customers will be prohibited from irrigating turf
or other landscaping more than two (2) days a week.
      (3)   No person shall irrigate any turf or landscaped area more than
fifteen (15) minutes on watering days.
      (4)   No vehicles shall be washed unless it is taken to a carwash.
   (b)   At any time during Stage 4, if the City Council determines that
additional reductions in the amount the potable water being used by water
customers are necessary, it may adopt a resolution establishing water use
limitations and enforce those water use limitations by the imposition of a
volumetric penalty established therein.
(§ 2, Ord. 2907, eff. June 16, 2009, as amended by § 2, Ord. 3027, eff. October
1, 2015 and § 2, Ord. 3196, eff. December 7, 2021)
Sec. 6-8.30. Stage 5 water supply shortage–water supply reduced up to fifty
percent (50%).
   (a)   During Stage 5, the following mandatory restrictions on the use of
potable water shall be applicable when the City Council determines that it is
likely that the City will suffer a reduction of more than forty percent (40%)
and up to fifty percent (50%) in its water supplies or it has otherwise been
requested or directed by executive order or regulation of a state agency to
reduce its potable water consumption or production by a specified amount.
      (1)   All the prohibitions and restrictions in §
6-8.29 shall be in effect provided that the more restrictive measures noted in
this section shall take precedence.
      (2)   Residents and CII customers will be prohibited from irrigating turf
or other landscaping more than one (1) day a week.
   (b)   At any time during Stage 5, if the City Council determines that
additional reductions in the amount the potable water being used by water
customers are necessary, it may adopt a resolution establishing water use
limitations and enforce those water use limitations by the imposition of a
volumetric penalty established therein.
(§ 2, Ord. 2907, eff. June 16, 2009, as amended by § 2, Ord. 3027, eff. October
1, 2015 and § 2, Ord. 3196, eff. December 7, 2021)
Sec. 6-8.31. Stage 6 water supply shortage emergency–water supply reduced more
than fifty percent (50%).
   (a)   During Stage 6, the following mandatory restrictions on the use of
potable water shall be applicable when the City Council determines that it is
likely that the City will suffer a reduction of more than fifty percent (50%)
in its water supplies or it has otherwise been requested or directed by
executive order or regulation of a state agency to reduce its potable water
consumption or production by a specified amount. A water shortage emergency may
be declared whenever the City Council finds and determines that the ordinary
demands and requirements of water consumers cannot be satisfied without
depleting the water supply of the City to the extent that there would be
insufficient water for human consumption, sanitation, and fire protection. A
water shortage emergency may include an immediate emergency. An immediate
emergency may occur as a result of a breakage or failure of a dam, pump, pipe
line or conduit, a major earthquake, large-scale fire, or other so called "Act
of God" which may have serious impacts on the City's available water supply.
      (1)   All the prohibitions and restrictions in §
6-8.30 shall be in effect provided that the more restrictive measures noted in
this section shall take precedence.
      (2)   Unless otherwise permitted by a resolution of the City Council,
there shall be no use of potable water for irrigation of outdoor landscape or
turf.
      (3)   Commercial nurseries shall be prohibited from the use of potable
water for irrigation of outdoor, landscape and turf except by use of a hand-
held hose equipped with a positive shutoff nozzle.
      (4)   The following nonessential uses of water shall be prohibited: the
filling, cycling, filtering, or refilling swimming pools, spas, Jacuzzis,
fountains or other like devices.
   (b)   At any time during Stage 6, if the City Council determines that
additional reductions in the amount the potable water being used by water
customers are necessary, it may adopt a resolution establishing water use
limitations and enforce those water use limitations by the imposition of a
volumetric penalty established therein.
(§ 2, Ord. 2907, eff. June 16, 2009, as amended by § 2, Ord. 3027, eff. October
1, 2015 and § 2, Ord. 3196, eff. December 7, 2021)
Sec. 6-8.32. Relief from compliance.
   (a)   A water customer of the City may file a written application for relief
in whole or in part, from the water use restriction provisions of this chapter.
The City Manager or his/her designee shall review the request for a variance
and take such steps as he or she deems reasonable to resolve the application
for relief. The decision of the City Manager shall be final.
   (b)   Relief may be granted if the water customer shows that he or she has
achieved the maximum practical reduction in water consumption other than in the
specific areas in which relief is being sought. No relief shall be granted to
any water customer who, when requested by the City Manager, fails to provide
any information necessary for resolution of the customer's application for
relief.
(§ 2, Ord. 2907, eff. June 16, 2009, as amended by § 2, Ord. 3027, eff. October
1, 2015 and § 2, Ord. 3196, eff. December 7, 2021)
Sec. 6-8.33. Failure to comply.
   (a)   Each and every day that a violation of this chapter occurs or
continues to occur shall be considered a new and separate offense. Except for
any violation of water use limitations for which a volumetric penalty may be
imposed, for each violation of this chapter the following civil penalties may
be imposed by issuance of a citation and complaint:
      (1)   First violation. For a first violation, the City shall issue a
written warning to the water customer.
      (2)   Second violation. For a second violation, the City shall impose a
civil penalty in the amount of One Hundred Dollars ($100.00).
      (3)   Third violation. For a third violation, the City shall impose a
civil penalty in the amount of Two Hundred Dollars ($200.00).
      (4)   Subsequent violations. For the fourth and any subsequent violation
within one (1) year, the City shall impose a penalty in the amount of Five
Hundred Dollars ($500.00). In addition to the civil penalty, the City may also
install a flow restricting device on the service of at the premises at which
the violation occurred for a period of not less than forty-eight (48) hours.
The City shall charge the responsible party the reasonable costs incurred for
installing and removing the flow-restricting devices and for restoration of
normal service. The charge shall be paid before normal service may be restored.
   (b)   Except for any violation of water use limitations for which a
volumetric penalty may be imposed, the City shall give notice of a violation to
the person committing the violation as follows:
      (1)   For a first violation, if the person committing the violation is a
water customer of the City, then notice shall be given in writing by regular
mail or personal delivery to the address at which the water customer is
normally billed or at the address where the violation occurred. If the person
committing the violation is not a water customer of the City, or if the event
is not related to a specific property, the notice may be sent to the last known
address of the responsible party or personally delivered.
      (2)   Notice of second or subsequent violations shall be given by the
issuance of a citation and complaint in accordance with §
6-8.33(c) and (d).
      (3)   Unless an appeal and/or hearing is requested pursuant to the
provisions of §
6-8.34, any civil penalty(ies) imposed by the City shall be due and payable
within thirty (30) days of the issuance of the citation and complaint.
   (c)   Except for any violation of water use limitations for which a
volumetric penalty may be imposed, any notice of violation of this chapter
shall be issued as a citation and complaint and shall:
      (1)   Identify the provision(s) of this chapter and any state law, if
applicable, alleged to have been violated;
      (2)   State that continued noncompliance may result in civil, criminal,
or administrative enforcement actions against the person who committed the
violation, or the customer or the property owner and/or occupant of the
property where the violation occurred;
      (3)   State a compliance date that must be met by the person who
committed the violation, or the customer, or the property owner and/or occupant
of the property where the violation occurred;
      (4)   Order remediation work, where applicable, that must be taken;
      (5)   State that the recipient has a right to request a hearing and
appeal the matter as set forth in §
6-8.34;
      (6)   Include the address of the affected property and be addressed to
the water customer or the property owner as shown on the most recently issued
equalized assessment roll or as may otherwise appear in the current records of
the City. If the notice of violation applies to a responsible party who is not
the property owner or a water customer, or if the event is not related to a
specific property, the notice may be sent to the last known address of the
responsible party or personally delivered; and
      (7)   Be deemed served within ten (10) business days after posting on the
property, if the property owner or occupant of the affected property cannot be
located after the reasonable efforts of the City Manager or his/her authorized
designee.
   (d)   Any citation and complaint may be sent by regular mail or personal
delivery. Service by regular mail is effective on the date of mailing. Service
by personal delivery is effective on the date delivered. The citation and
complaint, may include, where deemed applicable by the City Manager or his/her
authorized designee, the following terms and conditions.
      (1)   Specific steps or actions and time schedules for compliance as
reasonably necessary to prevent future violations of this chapter; and
      (2)   Any other terms, conditions, or requirements reasonably calculated
to prevent continued or threatened future violations of this chapter,
including, but not limited to, discontinuing or limiting water service with the
installation of a flow restricting device.
   (e)   Any volumetric penalty imposed shall be:
      (1)   Applicable to all potable water used in excess of the water use
limitations as established by separate resolution of the City Council;
      (2)   Collected on the customer's water bill;
      (3)   Due and payable as part of the customer's water bill;
      (4)   The responsibility of the customer of record for the property where
the violation occurred; and
      (5)   Paid in addition to the water service fees the City imposes for the
potable water delivered to the property where the violation occurred.
   (f)   The receipt of a water bill with any applicable volumetric penalty
shall serve as notice of violation of the adopted water use limitations as
established by resolution of the City Council.
   (g)   Any person who wishes to appeal the imposition of a volumetric penalty
may do so pursuant to §
6-8.34. Notice of the right to a hearing and to appeal the imposition of a
volumetric penalty shall be included in the customer's water bill.
(§ 2, Ord. 2907, eff. June 16, 2009, as amended by § 2, Ord. 3027, eff. October
1, 2015 and § 2, Ord. 3196, eff. December 7, 2021)
Sec. 6-8.34. Appeal and hearing regarding violations.
   (a)   Any person receiving notice of a violation of this chapter and the
imposition of a civil penalty or volumetric penalty, shall have a right to a
hearing by the City Manager or his/her authorized designee to appeal the
imposition of any civil penalty. Any request for a hearing must be submitted to
the City within fifteen (15) days of mailing or other delivery of the citation
and complaint or water bill, as applicable. Additional documentation may be
requested at the discretion of the City Manager or his/her authorized designee.
   (b)   The timely written request for a hearing shall automatically stay
installation of flow-restricting device on the premises where the violation
occurred and imposition of the civil penalty or volumetric penalty until after
the City Manager or his/her designee renders his or her decision. The hearing
shall be held no sooner than thirty (30) days after the issuance of the
citation and complaint or water bill, as applicable.
   (c)   The decision of the City Manager or his/her designee shall be final
and shall be memorialized in a final order. If the appeal is denied, then
within ten (10) days after issuance of the final order, the person shall pay
any civil penalty(ies) imposed by the City.
   (d)   The provisions of Section 1094.5 of the Code of Civil Procedure of the
State of California shall be applicable to judicial review of the final order.
   (e)   Non-payment of any civil penalty or volumetric imposed pursuant to
this chapter shall be subject to the same remedies available to the City as for
non-payment of basic water service fees.
(§ 2, Ord. 2907, eff. June 16, 2009, as amended by § 2, Ord. 3027, eff. October
1, 2015 and § 2, Ord. 3196, eff. December 7, 2021)
Sec. 6-8.35. Remedies are not exclusive.
   In addition to any other remedies provided in this chapter or available
under applicable law, the City may alternatively seek injunctive relief in the
Superior Court or take enforcement action, including discontinuing or
appropriately limiting water service to any customer, or installing a flow
restricting device. All remedies provided herein shall be cumulative and not
exclusive.
(§ 2, Ord. 3027, eff. October 1, 2015, as amended by § 2, Ord. 3196, eff.
December 7, 2021)
CHAPTER 8B: WATER SERVICES*
* Chapter 8B, incorporating §§
6-8.50 through
6-8.61, amended in its entirety by § 6, Ord. 2785, eff. November 16, 2003)
   
6-8.45   Definitions
   
6-8.46   Rules and regulations
   
6-8.47   Tampering
   
6-8.48   Service connections outside city
   
6-8.49   Collection and payment
   
6-8.50   Disabled person's and senior citizen's discount
   
6-8.51   Service fees and charges
   
6-8.52    Water service
   
6-8.53   Reserved
   
6-8.54    Reserved
   
6-8.55    Water meters
   
6-8.56   Fire hydrants
   
6-8.57   Reserved
   
6-8.58   Reserved
   
6-8.59   Reserved
   
6-8.60   Emergency water regulations
   
6-8.61   Violations
Sec. 6-8.45. Definitions.
   For the purposes of this chapter, unless otherwise apparent from context,
certain words and phrases used in this chapter shall have the meanings
hereinafter designated. The definitions in this chapter are included for
reference purposes only and are not intended to narrow the scope of definitions
set forth in federal or state laws or regulations. Words used in this chapter
in the singular may include the plural and the plural may include the singular.
Use of the masculine shall also mean feminine and neuter.
   (a)   “City” means the City of Ontario, California.
   (b)   “City Council” means the City Council of the City of Ontario,
California.
   (c)   “City Manager” means the City Manager of the City of Ontario, or his
or her authorized representative.
   (d)   “Construction water” means the water, potable or recycled, used in
conjunction with the building of a structure from conception to transfer of
ownership, excluding landscape irrigation, or the water used for soil
consolidation, dust control, and the like, during grading operations.
   (e)   “Cost” means the monetary value of labor, material, material
transportation, supervision, engineering, administration, and other necessary
overhead expenses.
   (f)   “Customer” means a person, firm, or corporation who is the recipient
of water service from the City.
   (g)   “Developer” means a person, firm, corporation, partnership, or
association who desires water service which requires the installation of new,
improved or expanded water service facilities for him or herself or for others,
except that employees and consultants of such persons or entities, acting in
such capacity, are not developers.
   (h)   “Municipal Utilities Company” means the Municipal Utilities Company of
the City of Ontario.
   (i)   "Service" or "water service" means the furnishing of water to a
customer.
   (j)   “Service connection” shall mean the water pipe, or pipes, and
appurtenances installed by a developer to transport potable water from
adjoining City facilities located within a public right-of-way or public
utility easement to the developer’s parcel of land. Said service connections
shall terminate at the customer side of the meter and meter box located at a
specified place approved by the City.
   (k)   “Utilities Customer Services Department” means the Utilities Customer
Services Department of the Municipal Utilities Company.
   (l)   “Utilities Customer Services Director” means the Director of the
Utilities Customer Services Department of the Municipal Utilities Company, or
his or her authorized representative.
(§ 6, Ord. 2785, eff. November 16, 2003, as amended by § 2, Ord. 2914, eff.
January 1, 2010, and § 2, Ord. 2946, eff. January 6, 2012; § 2, Ord. 3251, eff.
July 20, 2023, § 2, Ord. 3297, eff. March 18, 2025)
Sec. 6-8.46. Rules and regulations.
   Rules and regulations explaining the procedures and methods of the Municipal
Utilities Company in carrying out the provisions of this chapter shall be set
forth and may be amended in the manner described in §
1-1.09 of this Code.
(§ 6, Ord. 2785, eff. November 16, 2003, as amended by § 3, Ord. 2946, eff.
January 6, 2012, § 1, Ord. 3153, eff. January 21, 2020, § 2, Ord. 3297, eff.
March 18, 2025)
Sec. 6-8.47. Tampering.
   No person except an employee or representative of the City shall at any time
and in any manner operate the curb stops or valves or the main gates or valves
of the City's water system, or interfere with meters or their connections,
street mains, or other parts or facilities of the water system.
(§ 6, Ord. 2785, eff. November 16, 2003, § 2, Ord. 3297, eff. March 18, 2025)
Sec. 6-8.48. Service connections outside city.
   No additional customers outside the City shall be served or connected to the
water system of the City, and no additional dwellings or customers shall be
connected to existing service connections outside the City; provided, however,
the City Council may by motion approve water service outside the City where the
owners of land have signed a covenant running with the land that the land shall
be annexed whenever possible, and the City Council finds that such annexation
would be in the public interest, and the annexation might reasonably be
completed within the foreseeable future. The City Council may, however, provide
otherwise by written agreement with any city, county, or other governmental
agency.
(§ 6, Ord. 2785, eff. November 16, 2003, § 2, Ord. 3297, eff. March 18, 2025)
Sec. 6-8.49. Collection and payment.
   (a)   Unified billing system. The City may use a unified billing system for
City-furnished services. The charges for water, refuse, storm water abatement,
and wastewater services may be billed on the water bill and collected as one
(1) item. Failure to pay the amount due in full for any of the services may
result in the discontinuation of water services as provided below.
   (b)   Utility bill payment. Utility bills shall be due and payable to the
Utilities Customer Services Department on the bill date to the customer of
record. Any utility bill remaining unpaid eighteen (18) business days after
such bill date shall be deemed past due and a late charge and penalties will be
applied as set forth in §§
1-2.06 and
1-2.07 of the Municipal Code. Should a residential account remain unpaid for a
period of sixty (60) calendar days from the past due date, water service to the
property may be disconnected for nonpayment after the City provides notice
pursuant to the City’s administrative policy on discontinuation of residential
water service, described in subsection (c) below. Should a non-residential
account remain unpaid from thirty (30) calendar days from the past due date,
water service to the property may be disconnected for non-payment after mailed
notice to the customer of record at least ten (10) calendar days prior to
termination.
   Residential water customers may contest or appeal a bill in the manner
described in the City’s adopted policy for discontinuation of residential water
service. Non-residential customers may contest or appeal a bill using the same
dispute and appeal procedures described in the policy for discontinuation of
residential water service.
   (c)   Disconnection of residential water service. The City Manager may adopt
and amend a written administrative policy on discontinuation of residential
water service for nonpayment pursuant to §
6-8.46, and such policy shall be available on the City's website. Such policy
may include, but may not be limited to, supplementary provisions concerning
billing procedures, discontinuation of service, notification procedures,
restoration of service, procedures to contest or appeal a bill, extensions or
other alternative payment arrangements, protections available to qualified low-
income customers, procedures for becoming a customer of the City under
specified circumstances, and related matters. To the extent a policy adopted
pursuant to this section conflicts with any provisions of this chapter, this
chapter shall control. Except as expressly provided in this section or the
policy, the policy shall not apply to non-residential customers.
   (d)   Water turn on/off. Once terminated, service shall not be turned on
again except upon payment of all amounts due on the utility account, including
all late charges and penalties, and the cost of making a service call to turn
the water off and/or on. The fee to cover the cost of making a service call to
turn the water off and/or on shall be set forth in an ordinance adopted by the
City Council. Residential customers who demonstrate a household income below
200% of the federal poverty line may be eligible for reduced turn-on fees
pursuant to applicable law and as further described in the City's policy on
discontinuation of residential water service.
   (e)   Customer liability. Failure to receive a bill shall not relieve the
customer of liability. Any amount due shall be deemed a debt to the City, and
is subject to the provisions set forth in §§
1-2.06 and
1-2.07 of the Municipal Code.
   (f)   Special bill rate. Special bills, split bills, any other irregular
bills, or bills covering irregular billing periods, shall be calculated by the
Municipal Utilities Company; provided, however, the adjusted rate so made shall
be reasonable in accordance with the rate schedule set forth in this section.
   (g)   Determination of minimum charges. For the purpose of determining
minimum charges as set forth in this section, each separate meter connected to
the water system shall be charged on individual readiness-to-serve meter fee
and commodity charge.
(§ 6, Ord. 2785, eff. November 16, 2003, as amended by § 4, Ord. 2946, eff.
January 6, 2012; § 3, Ord. 3251, eff. July 20, 2023, § 2, Ord. 3297, eff. March
18, 2025)
Sec. 6-8.50. Disabled person's and senior citizen's discount.
   (a)   Disabled person defined. A “disabled person,” for the purposes of this
section, is an adult who has a mental or physical disability that, in the
opinion of a licensed physician, renders him or her incapable of being
gainfully employed.
   (b)   Eligible household. An eligible household, for the purpose of this
section, is a separately billed dwelling unit, which is (1) occupied by a
person age sixty-five (65) or older, or by a disabled person, and (2) has
annual gross household income at or below 200% of federal poverty level. The
City may establish detailed qualifications and requirements for demonstrating
annual gross household income in a written administrative policy adopted
pursuant to §
6-8.46.
   (c)   Applications. Applications for an eligible household discount shall be
submitted in writing to the Utilities Customer Services Director. The
application shall be on a form provided by the Utilities Customer Services
Director, shall be completed to show the information elicited by the form and
shall be signed under penalty of perjury by the applicant. When the discount is
sought based upon a disabled person, the application shall be accompanied by a
physicians certificate stating that the person is a disabled person within the
meaning of subsection (a) of this section. The Utilities Customer Services
Director shall determine whether a household is an eligible household for the
purpose of this section and his or her determination shall be final.
   (d)   Discount. The charges for water, refuse and wastewater service
provided to an eligible household, shall be discounted by an amount approved by
the City Council pursuant to an ordinance or resolution. The discount shall be
available only to customers with individually metered residential water
service. The discount shall be in effect for a one (1) year period, which shall
begin as determined by the City Council (e.g., upon approval of an individual
application, upon the start of the following fiscal year, etc.). To renew the
discount for an additional year, the customer must complete and return a
renewal application to the City’s Utilities Customer Services Department. A
renewal notice shall be mailed to the customer with the utilities bill at or
before the end of each year of eligibility. The discount offered under this
subsection is subject to City Council approval through the annual budget
process and the availability of funds allocated to fund the discount.
   (e)   Termination of eligibility. A household shall no longer be an eligible
household if the Utilities Customer Services Department does not receive a
renewal application, if any of the eligibility criteria set forth in subsection
(b) above cease to exist, or if funds to provide the discount are unavailable
pursuant to subsection (d).
(§ 6, Ord. 2785, eff. November 16, 2003; § 5, Ord. 3251, eff. July 20, 2023, §
2, Ord. 3297, eff. March 18, 2025)
Sec. 6-8.51. Service fees and charges.
   (a)   Residential, non-residential, and private fire service water fees and
charges. In addition to other fees, assessments, or charges provided by the
Municipal Code or adopted by the City Council, the owner or occupant of any
parcel of property for which no other water service fee or charge is provided,
and which parcel of property is connected to the water system of the City,
shall pay monthly water service fees and charges as established from time to
time by resolution of the City Council.
   (b)   Turning water supply on and off. No charge shall be made for shutting
off and turning on water supply when requested by the customer for the closing
of an old account or the beginning of a new one. When service has been
discontinued due to non-payment of utility bills or for any infraction of the
rules, the charges to restore water service shall be as listed above. The
customer shall pay these charges, plus the amount of any outstanding bills,
before service can be restored.
   (c)   Construction water. All construction water shall be metered and
charged.
   (d)   Temporary service connection. Temporary service connections shall be
subject to the fees and deposits as established from time to time by resolution
of the City Council. All water delivered through a temporary service connection
shall be metered and charged.
   (e)   Water meter testing fee. Water meter testing fee shall be based on the
actual costs of removal, testing and reinstallation of the meter.
   (f)   Reserved.
   (g)   Other water service work. This charge is based on actual time, travel
and material cost based on the City’s burden of labor and overhead rates in
effect at the time service is provided.
   (h)   Outside City services. For water furnished to any customer outside the
City limits, the rates shall be double the rates charged inside the City. The
City Council may, however, provide otherwise by written agreement with any
city, county, or other governmental agency.
   (i)   Charges for agricultural use. Charges for usage of recycled water for
agricultural service, where the agricultural use provides assignment of water
production rights to the City, shall be determined by the Utilities General
Manager; provided, however,
such charges will be consistent with the most recent rate study and current
rates charged by the Chino Basin Watermaster for replenishment assessments.
   (j)   Charges for unmetered service. Unmetered usage of water and charges
for unmetered usage of water shall be authorized by the Utilities General
Manager prior to such usage; provided, however, such charges shall be
reasonably in accordance with the charges established by resolution adopted by
the City Council.
(§ 6, Ord. 2785, eff. November 16, 2003, as amended by § 5, Ord. 2806, eff.
January 21, 2005, §§ 4, 5, 6 and 7, Ord. 2816, eff. December 1, 2005, § 2, Ord.
2880, eff. February 4, 2008, § 3, Ord. 2914, eff. January 1, 2010, § 2, Ord.
2974, eff. December 19, 2013, § 5, Ord. 3133, eff. July 5, 2019, § 2, Ord.
3297, eff. March 18, 2025)
Sec. 6-8.52. Water service.
   (a)   Application for water service. Before water is turned on by the City
for any purpose, the customer shall apply for new service, at least one (1)
business day before desired date of service, in which he or she guarantees
payment of future utility bills for the service requested. The customer
applying for service shall be held responsible for said utility bills until the
service is discontinued on the next business day after the City is notified to
discontinue service. When such notice is not received by the City, the customer
shall be required to pay for service until one (1) business day after the City
has knowledge that the customer has vacated the premises or otherwise
discontinued service. No tenant applying for residential utility services shall
be required to pay any charges or penalties on account of non-payment of
charges by a previous tenant. The City may require that tenants seeking to
establish service provide a written lease or rental agreement along with signed
authorization from the landlord or property owner to ensure that the tenant is
authorized to occupy the property and initiate utility services; provided,
however, that the City will not require that service to tenants be furnished on
the account of the landlord or property owner unless the property owner
voluntarily agrees to that requirement in writing by completing a consent form
provided by the City. The City shall require an applicant for utility services
or restoration of services after turn-off for a delinquent bill to make an
advance payment equal to twice the estimated monthly bill for water, refuse and
wastewater services, provided that no such advance payment shall be less than
eighty dollars ($80.00).
   (b)   Water used without application. A customer taking possession of
premises and using water from an active service connection without having
applied for utility services shall be held liable for the water delivered from
the date of the last recorded meter reading. If the meter is found inoperative,
then the quantity consumed shall be estimated. If proper application for
utility services is not made upon notification to do so by the City, and if
accumulated bills for services are not paid immediately, the services may be
discontinued without further notice.
   (c)   New service connection. For new, improved or expanded service
connection, the customer shall submit an application in accordance with §§
6-8.809 and
6-8.810 of
Chapter 8D of
Title 6 of the Municipal Code.
(§ 6, Ord. 2785, eff. November 16, 2003, as amended by §§ 8 and 9, Ord. 2816,
eff. December 1, 2005, § 5, Ord. 2946, eff. January 6, 2012, § 3, Ord. 2974,
eff. December 19, 2013, § 2, Ord. 3039, eff. March 3, 2016; § 6, Ord. 3251,
eff. July 20, 2023, § 2, Ord. 3297, eff. March 18, 2025)
Sec. 6-8.53. Reserved.
Sec. 6-8.54. Reserved.
Sec. 6-8.55. Water meters.
   (a)   Accuracy of meter questioned by consumer. When the consumer questions
the accuracy of the water meter, the City Manager shall, upon request and
payment of the water meter testing fee, cause an official test to be made.
Meters are tested by certified testers contracted by the City. The meter shall
be tested on variable rates of delivery and, if the average registration is
more than three percent (3%) in excess of the actual quantity of water passing
through the meter, another meter shall be substituted therefor. The City
Manager shall refund to the consumer, in addition to the meter testing fee
charged at the rate shown in §
6-8.51(e), the overcharge based upon the reading and billing for the current
period preceding the test, unless it can be shown that the error was due to
some cause for which the date can be fixed. In the latter case, the overcharge
shall be computed back to and not beyond such time.
   (b)   Non-registering meters. The City may bill the customer for water
consumed while the meter was non-registering, but not to exceed a period of two
(2) months, at the minimum monthly meter rate, or upon an estimate of the
consumption based upon the customer’s prior use during the same season of the
year, if conditions were similar, or upon an estimate based upon reasonable
comparison with the use of other customers during the same period receiving the
same class of service under similar circumstances and conditions.
   (c)   Meter errors. When it is found that error in a meter is due to some
cause, the date of which can be fixed, the overcharge or the undercharge shall
be computed back to but not beyond such date, not to exceed the current statute
of limitations law.
(§ 6, Ord. 2785, eff. November 16, 2003, as amended by § 7, Ord. 2946, eff.
January 6, 2012, § 2, Ord. 3297, eff. March 18, 2025)
Sec. 6-8.56. Fire hydrants.     
   (a)   Purpose of fire hydrants. Fire hydrants are provided for the sole
purpose of extinguishing fires, and are to be opened and used only by the Fire
Department and Municipal Utilities Company, or such other persons as are
specifically authorized by the Municipal Utilities Company. To insure safety of
fire hydrants for fire protection, any person or persons authorized by the
Municipal Utilities Company to open fire hydrants shall be required to use only
an approved spanner wrench, and to replace the caps on outlets when the same
are not in use. Failure to meet this requirement shall be sufficient cause to
prohibit further use of the hydrants, and the refusal of subsequent
authorization for use of the fire hydrants. Damage caused by the failure to
comply with the above shall be repaired at the expense of the person(s)
authorized.
   (b)   Unlawful to take water without permit. It is unlawful for any person
to take any water from any fire hydrant without a written permit, furnished
upon application to the Municipal Utilities Company. Said application shall
include a monthly permit fee and deposit equal to the replacement value of
meter and backflow valve. Any person taking water from a hydrant without a
permit shall be assumed to have taken water in the value of at least One
Thousand Dollars ($1,000.00) and shall be charged for said amount.
(§ 6, Ord. 2785, eff. November 16, 2003, as amended by § 8, Ord. 2946, eff.
January 6, 2012, § 2, Ord. 3297, eff. March 18, 2025)
Sec. 6-8.57. Reserved.
Sec. 6-8.58. Reserved.
Sec. 6-8.59. Reserved.
Sec. 6-8.60. Emergency water regulations.
   (a)   Unplanned interruption of water supply. In the event of an unplanned
interruption of water supply causing a water shortage, the City Manager or his
or her designee is authorized to restrict water use and apportion the available
supply of water among its customers in the most equitable manner possible to
continue service fairly and without discrimination, except that preference
shall be given to such service as is essential to the public interest and to
the preservation of life and health pursuant to §
6-8.22(b).
   (b)   Notice of water shortage. A notice of a water shortage shall be
published in a daily newspaper of general circulation within the City. Any
restrictions on the use of water shall become effective immediately upon such
publication pursuant to §
6-8.22(c).
(§ 6, Ord. 2785, eff. November 16, 2003, as amended by § 10, Ord. 2946, eff.
January 6, 2012, § 2, Ord. 3297, eff. March 18, 2025)
Sec. 6-8.61. Violations.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to violate any provisions of this
chapter, and persons violating said provisions shall be subject to
Chapter 2 of Title 1 of the Municipal Code.
(§ 6, Ord. 2785, eff. November 16, 2003, § 2, Ord. 3297, eff. March 18, 2025)
CHAPTER 8C: RECYCLED WATER USE
Article 1: General Provisions
   
6-8.701   Authority
   
6-8.702   Purpose
   
6-8.703   Goals
   
6-8.704   Policy
   
6-8.705   Priority
   
6-8.706   Administrator
   
6-8.707   Other applicable rules and codes
   
6-8.708   Severability
Article 2: Definitions
   
6-8.709   Definitions
Article 3: Area Served
   
6-8.710   Service area
Article 4: General Requirements
   
6-8.711   Determination of recycled water use area
   
6-8.712   Authorized uses
   
6-8.713   Conditions of service
   
6-8.714   Recycled water service application
   
6-8.715   Recycled water use agreement
   
6-8.716   Rates, fees, charges and deposits
   
6-8.717   Construction water service
   
6-8.718   Size, location and installation of service line
   
6-8.719   Service connection limitations
   
6-8.720   Service pressure
   
6-8.721   Relocation of recycled water service lines
Article 5: Protective Measures
   
6-8.722   Cross-connections
   
6-8.723   Other measures
   
6-8.724   Emergency connection to the recycled water system to the potable
water system
Article 6: Facilities Design and Construction
   
6-8.725   Facilities design
   
6-8.726   Offsite recycled water facilities
   
6-8.727   Onsite recycled water facilities
   
6-8.728   Construction
Article 7: Facilities Operation
   
6-8.729   Offsite facilities
   
6-8.730   Onsite facilities
   
6-8.731   Monitoring and inspection
   
6-8.732   Maintenance responsibility
   
6-8.733   Meter testing
Article 8: Enforcement
   
6-8.734   Illegal connections, diversions, or tampering
   
6-8.735   Violations and enforcement
Article 1: General Provisions
Sec. 6-8.701. Authority.
   Recycled water use is regulated by the California State Water Resources
Control Board (State Board) and the Regional Water Quality Control Board, Santa
Ana Region (RWQCB). In accordance with waste discharge requirements for water
reclamation projects, the RWQCB requires control mechanisms to regulate
facilities distributing recycled water. The California Legislature has
established a state policy encouraging the use of recycled water (California
Water Code, Section 13510). Permission to use recycled water is based on Inland
Empire Utilities Agency's ability to treat domestic wastewater in accordance
with the Uniform Statewide Recycling Criteria under Title 22, Division 4,
Chapter 3 of the California Code of Regulations. These regulations were adopted
to ensure proper health protection and specify the treatment degree to meet the
needs of the intended applications.
(§ 1, Ord. 2689, eff. June 17, 1999, as amended by § 2, Ord. 3197, eff. January
7, 2022, § 3, Ord. 3297, eff. March 18, 2025)
Sec. 6-8.702. Purpose.
   The purpose of this chapter is to establish procedures, specifications, and
limitations for the safe use and operation of recycled water facilities and
systems within the City's service area, and adopt rules and regulations
controlling such use and operation.
(§ 1, Ord. 2689, eff. June 17, 1999, as amended by § 2, Ord. 3197, eff. January
7, 2022, § 3, Ord. 3297, eff. March 18, 2025)
Sec. 6-8.703. Goals.
   The goals of this chapter are as follows:
   (a)   Achieve conservation of potable water supplies by using recycled water
for current and future demands. Recycled water uses may include:
      (1)   Agricultural irrigation.
      (2)   Commercial uses (including flushing toilets and urinals).
      (3)   Construction use.
      (4)   Industrial processes.
      (5)   Landscape irrigation.
      (6)   Landscape and/or recreational impoundments.
      (7)   Wildlife habitat.
      (8)   Groundwater recharge, as approved by the State Board and RWQCB.
   (b)   Maintain recycled water quality through a stringent pretreatment
program for industrial wastewater.
   (c)   Prevent direct human consumption of recycled water through:
      (1)   Adherence to all applicable rules and regulations.
      (2)   Posting of warning signs by the user.
      (3)   Cross-connection/backflow prevention program.
   (d)   Control runoff of recycled water through monitoring of the
installation and operation of all recycled water facilities and use areas.
   (e)   Monitor recycled water quality.
(§ 1, Ord. 2689, eff. June 17, 1999, as amended by § 2, Ord. 3197, eff. January
7, 2022, § 3, Ord. 3297, eff. March 18, 2025)
Sec. 6-8.704. Policy.
   It is the policy of the City that recycled water be used for any and all
purposes approved by state regulations for recycled water use. Recycled water
shall be the primary source of supply for commercial and industrial uses,
whenever available and/or feasible. Use of potable water for commercial and
industrial uses shall be contrary to City policy, shall not be considered the
most beneficial use of a natural resource, and shall be avoided to the maximum
extent feasible. If the City determines that recycled water service is feasible
under §§
6-8.710 and
6-8.711, the applicant, owner, or user will be required to use recycled water
service.
   (a)   The people of the State of California have a primary interest in the
development of facilities to recycle water containing waste to supplement
existing surface and underground water supplies and to assist in meeting the
future water requirements of the state (California Water Code, Section 13510).
Conservation of all available water resources requires the maximum reuse of
recycled water for beneficial uses of water (California Water Code, Section
461). The State of California has declared that use of potable water for non-
potable uses may be a waste or an unreasonable use where recycled water is
available (California Government Code, Section 65602(e); California Water Code,
Section 13550).
   (b)   It is the policy of the City that recycled water shall be used within
the jurisdiction of the City whenever and wherever:
      (1)   There is not an alternative higher or better use for the recycled
water; and
      (2)   Such use is consistent with legal requirements, preservation of
public health, safety and welfare of the public, and protection of the
environment.
(§ 1, Ord. 2689, eff. June 17, 1999, as amended by § 2, Ord. 3197, eff. January
7, 2022, § 3, Ord. 3297, eff. March 18, 2025)
Sec. 6-8.705. Priority.
   Connection to the City's recycled water system shall be provided on a first-
come, first-served basis, as long as infrastructure and recycled water are
available.
(§ 1, Ord. 2689, eff. June 17, 1999, as amended by § 2, Ord. 3197, eff. January
7, 2022, § 3, Ord. 3297, eff. March 18, 2025)
Sec. 6-8.706. Administrator.
   Except as otherwise provided herein, the City Manager shall administer,
implement, and enforce the provisions of this chapter. The City Manager may, at
his or her discretion, delegate any or all of these powers and duties.
(§ 1, Ord. 2689, eff. June 17, 1999, as amended by § 2, Ord. 3197, eff. January
7, 2022, § 3, Ord. 3297, eff. March 18, 2025)
Sec. 6-8.707. Other applicable rules and codes.
   Other guidelines, rules and regulations, ordinances, and specifications that
may be applied by the Administrator to govern the use of recycled water within
the City include:
   (a)   Rules and regulations that deal with backflow prevention, billing,
deposits, penalties, delinquencies, and metering for potable water as
established in Chapters
8A,
8C,
8D, and
8E of Title 6 of the Municipal Code.
   (b)   Regional Recycled Water Distribution System Ordinance (Ordinance No.
69, Inland Empire Utilities Agency).
   (c)   Water Reclamation (Title 22, Division 4 of the California Code of
Regulations).
   (d)   State Water Board’s Cross-Connection Control Policy Handbook (adopted
December 19, 2023).
   (e)   Guidelines for Distribution of Non- Potable Water (California-Nevada
Section AWWA).
(§ 1, Ord. 2689, eff. June 17, 1999, as amended by § 2, Ord. 3197, eff. January
7, 2022, § 3, Ord. 3297, eff. March 18, 2025)
Sec. 6-8.708. Severability.
   If any section, subsection, sentence, clause or phrase of this chapter
establishing rules and regulations for the use of recycled water is for any
reason found to be invalid or unconstitutional, such decision shall not affect
the remaining portions of this chapter.
(§ 1, Ord. 2689, eff. June 17, 1999, as amended by § 2, Ord. 3197, eff. January
7, 2022, § 3, Ord. 3297, eff. March 18, 2025)
Article 2: Definitions
Sec. 6-8.709. Definitions.
   The terms used in this chapter shall have the following meanings:
   (a)   "Agricultural use" shall mean water used for the production of crops
and/or livestock. Agricultural uses include, but are not limited to, the
growing of field and nursery crops, row crops, trees and vines, and the feeding
of fowl and livestock.
   (b)   "Air gap separation" or “AG” shall mean a physical vertical separation
of at least two (2) times the effective pipe diameter between the free- flowing
discharge end of a potable water supply pipeline and the flood level of an open
or non- pressurized receiving vessel, and in no case less than one (1) inch.
   (c)   "Applicant" shall mean any person, group, firm, partnership,
corporation, association, or agency that applies for recycled water service.
   (d)   "Approved use" shall mean an application of recycled water in a
manner, and for a purpose, designated in a recycled water use agreement, and in
compliance with applicable state and local rules and regulations.
   (e)   "Approved use area" shall mean a site with well-defined boundaries
designated in a recycled water use agreement in compliance with applicable
state and local rules and regulations.
   (f)   "As-built drawings" shall mean the record drawings that show the
completed facilities as constructed or modified.
   (g)   "Auxiliary water supply" shall mean a source of water, other than an
approved water supply, that is either used or equipped, or can be equipped, to
be used as a water supply and is located on the premises of, or available to, a
customer.
   (h)   "AWWA" shall mean the American Water Works Association.
   (i)   "City Council" shall mean the City Council of the City of Ontario.
   (j)   "City Manager" shall mean the chief administrative officer of the City
of Ontario or his or her authorized designee.
   (k)   "Commercial use" shall mean the water used for non-body contact such
as toilets, urinals, decorative fountains, decorative indoor and outdoor
landscape, and other uses approved by the City.
   (l)   "Construction water service" shall mean temporary recycled water
service obtained from the City for construction purposes on any new facilities
or structures.
   (m)   "Cross-connection" shall mean any actual or potential connection or
structural arrangement between a public water system, including a piping system
connection to the City’s distribution system and located on the premises of a
customer or available to the customer, and any source or distribution system
containing liquid, gas, or other substances not from an approved water supply.
   (n)   "Cross-Connection Control Policy Handbook” or “CCCPH” shall mean the
State Water Board’s Cross-Connection Control Policy Handbook, which are
standards and principles for California’s Public Water Systems.
   (o)   "Direct beneficial use" shall mean the use of recycled water, which
has been transported from the point of production to the point of use, without
an intervening discharge to waters of the state.
   (p)   "Discharge" shall mean any release or distribution of recycled water
to a use area or disposal site/mechanism. Such discharges are subject to
approval by the City.
   (q)   "Divert" shall mean to change the intended course or path of recycled
water into or out of the City's recycled water system without the authorization
or consent of the City. Any unpermitted withdrawal of recycled water from the
City's facilities is a "diversion."
   (r)   "IEUA" shall mean the Inland Empire Utilities Agency.
   (s)   "Industrial use" shall mean the water used for an industrial process
such as rinsing, washing, cooling, flushing, circulation, or construction; and
other uses approved by the City.
   (t)   "Infiltration rate" shall mean the rate at which water penetrates the
soil surface and enters the soil profile.
   (u)   "Landscape irrigation" shall mean recycled water used for the
propagation and maintenance of trees, shrubs, ground cover and turf used for
erosion control and aesthetic value, not for resale or profit purposes.
   (v)   "Letter of approval" shall mean a written formal letter issued by the
State Board approving the use of recycled water at a premise.
   (w)   "Non-potable water" shall mean water that has not been treated for, or
is not acceptable for, human consumption, in conformance with federal, state
and local water standards. Non-potable water includes recycled water.
   (x)   "Offsite facilities" shall mean all existing or proposed facilities
under the control of the IEUA or the City, from the source of supply to the
point of connection with the customer's onsite facilities, up to and including
the City's recycled water meter and meter box. Such facilities shall include,
without limitation, recycled water transmission mains, recycled water pipes and
reservoirs, pumping stations, treatment plants and other appurtenances and
property.
   (y)   "Onsite facilities" shall mean all existing or proposed facilities
within property under the control of the customer, normally downstream of the
City's recycled water meter and meter box.
   (z)   "Onsite Recycled Water Supervisor" shall mean a qualified person
designated by a recycled water user and approved by the City to be responsible
for the safe and efficient operation of the user's recycled water system. This
person shall be knowledgeable in the operation of the recycled water system and
in the application of federal, state and local guidelines, criteria, standards,
and rules and regulations governing the use of recycled water.
   (aa)   "POC" shall mean the point of connection at the recycled water
service meter.
   (bb)   "Ponding" shall mean the retention of recycled water on the ground
surface or human-made surface for a period of time following the cessation of
an approved recycled water use activity, such that potential hazard to the
public health may result, as determined by regulatory agencies.
   (cc)   "Potable water" shall mean water furnished to the customer which
meets applicable local, state and federal drinking water standards.
   (dd)   "Recycled water" shall mean water, which as a result of treatment of
wastewater, is suitable for direct beneficial use or a controlled use that
otherwise would not occur. The treatment of wastewater is accomplished in
accordance with the Uniform Statewide Recycling Criteria set forth in Title 22,
Division 4 of the California Code of Regulations.
   (ee)   "Recycled water facilities" shall mean the systems and structures
used in the treatment, storage, pumping, transmission and distribution of
recycled water.
   (ff)   "Recycled water system" means the publicly owned property involved in
the distribution of recycled water within the City and any privately owned
onsite facilities, including piping, pumps, reservoir, land, supply lines (main
lines), fittings, and equipment related to such elements.
   (gg)   "Recycled water use agreement" shall mean an agreement between the
user and the City to use recycled water in compliance with all applicable rules
and regulations.
   (hh)   "Regulatory agency" shall mean any public entity legally constituted
by federal, state and local statutes to protect health and water quality.
   (ii)   “Runoff” shall mean the flow of water along natural or human-made
surfaces away from the designated use area.
   (jj)   "RWQCB" shall mean the California Regional Water Quality Control
Board, Santa Ana Region.
   (kk)   "Service" shall mean the delivery of recycled water to a user.
   (ll)   "Service connection" shall mean City facilities between the City
recycled water distribution system and the customer's meter, including, but not
limited to, the meter, meter box, valves, and piping equipment.
   (mm)   "Standard specifications" shall mean the specifications approved by
the City for construction of recycled water facilities.
   (nn)   "State Board" shall mean the California State Water Resources Control
Board.
   (oo)   "Tampering" shall mean the unauthorized entering, breaking, damaging,
destroying, uncovering, defacing, rearranging, injuring, altering, or
interference with any temporary or permanent structure (including any
pipeline), equipment (including any pumps or backflow devices), or appurtenance
owned by the City or that is part of the City's recycled water. Any unpermitted
connection the City's facilities is "tampering."
   (pp)   "Unauthorized discharge" shall mean any release of recycled water
that violates any applicable federal, state, or local statutes, regulations,
chapters, contracts, or other requirements.
   (qq)   "Uniform Statewide Recycling Criteria" shall mean the criteria for
treatment of recycled water established for the protection of public health and
codified under Title 22, Division 4, Chapter 3 of the California Code of
Regulations.
   (rr)   "Use area" shall mean the specific area designated to be served with
recycled water through onsite recycled water facilities.
   (ss)   "User" shall mean any person, group, firm, partnership, corporation,
association or agency accepting recycled water from the City's recycled water
facilities for use in accordance with this chapter. "Applicant," "owner," or
"customer" are terms that are to be considered as users.
   (tt)   "Windblown spray" shall mean any dispersed, airborne particles of
recycled water capable of being transmitted through the air to a location other
than that for which the direct application of recycled water is approved.
(§ 1, Ord. 2689, eff. June 17, 1999, as amended by § 2, Ord. 3197, eff. January
7, 2022, § 3, Ord. 3297, eff. March 18, 2025)
Article 3: Area Served
Sec. 6-8.710. Service area.
   The rules and regulations contained in this chapter apply to recycled water
service to lands and/or improvements lying within the legal boundaries of the
City, and to properties contiguous to the City under the same ownership as
abutting lands within the City or its designated service boundary. Recycled
water service shall be provided to a specific service area when related
distribution facilities are completed, and service becomes available.
(§ 1, Ord. 2689, eff. June 17, 1999, as amended by § 2, Ord. 3197, eff. January
7, 2022, § 3, Ord. 3297, eff. March 18, 2025)
Article 4: General Requirements
Sec. 6-8.711. Determination of recycled water use area.
   (a)   General.
      (1)   The City Council may adopt and periodically review the City's
Recycled Water Master Plan and recommend where water service should be made
with recycled water in place of potable water. The Master Plan shall be in
accordance with all of the requirements of the State Board and the RWQCB, and
shall encourage recycled water use.
      (2)   If the City determines recycled water is available, or will be
available within five (5) years, the City may request modifications to existing
onsite water facilities and require construction of recycled water systems in
new developments.
      (3)   The City Council may enter into agreements with other
municipalities and public entities to identify recycled water use service areas
within the City and the jurisdiction of each entity.
      (4)   The City may identify customers who are located within the City's
service area, and within an area identified in the City's Recycled Water Master
Plan as an area capable of receiving service from the City's recycled water
system, and may determine the feasibility of providing recycled water service
to identified users.
      (5)   If the City determines recycled water service is feasible,
applicants for new recycled water service must install onsite facilities to
accommodate both potable water and recycled water in accordance with this
chapter.
   (b)   Existing potable water service.
      (1)   The City may make determinations of areas where existing potable
water use should be replaced with recycled water use.
      (2)   The City shall provide notice of the determination to use recycled
water to the current customer, explaining the reasons for recycled water use,
procedures to facilitate recycled water use, and proposed conditions and
schedule for the conversion. Partial or full conversion of existing customers
to recycled water use may be mandated to the extent allowed or required by law.
      (3)   A customer seeking to convert to recycled water service must submit
an application for a letter of approval to the City for review, along with any
required application fee. The City shall review the application for
completeness and contact the customer regarding the potential provision of
recycled water service and the City's recycled water use agreement. If the
customer does not agree to the terms of the recycled water use agreement, or if
the City determines that recycled water is not available for the proposed use,
the City may, in its sole and absolute discretion, refuse to provide such
service.
   (c)   New recycled water service.
      (1)   Upon submittal by applicant of a tentative map, land use permit,
other proposed land development/land use, or request for recycled water
service, the Administrator shall make preliminary determinations if recycled
water service can be provided to the area in question. Based upon such
determinations, use of recycled water and construction of recycled water
distribution systems or other facilities, and the application for recycled
water service, may be required as conditions of approval for any development
application, in addition to any other conditions of the new industrial,
commercial or residential development.
      (2)   Upon submittal by applicant of a proposed alteration or remodeling
of multi-family, commercial, or industrial structures which substantially
increase a facility's area, volume or size, or upon request for recycled water
service, the Administrator shall make preliminary determinations if recycled
water service can be provided to the area in question. Based upon such
determinations, use of recycled water and construction of recycled water
distribution systems or other facilities, and the application for such use, may
be required as conditions of approval for any application, in addition to other
conditions of approval for the alteration or remodel.
      (3)   The Administrator may require the use of recycled water for
approved uses and refuse or otherwise restrict potable water service when
recycled water is available and approved for use.
      (4)   Any recycled water supply assessments or verifications prepared by
the City will not entitle the applicant's project to recycled water service, or
to any right, priority, or allocation in any supply, capacity, or facility, or
affect the City's obligation to provide service to its users or potential
future users. In order to receive service, the applicant, owner, or user must
meet all of the applicable requirements of this chapter.
(§ 1, Ord. 2689, eff. June 17, 1999, as amended by § 28, Ord. 2816, eff.
December 1, 2005 and § 2, Ord. 3197, eff. January 7, 2022, § 3, Ord. 3297, eff
March 18, 2025)
Sec. 6-8.712. Authorized uses.
   (a)   Uses of recycled water include only those uses approved by the State
Board and consistent with the Uniform Statewide Recycling Criteria under Title
22 of the California Code of Regulations. Each proposed use will be considered
for approval by the City on a case-by-case basis, and the City may determine in
its discretion whether it is feasible to furnish recycled water for the
proposed use. The City's determination of feasibility will be based on the
following factors:
      (1)   Whether recycled water may be furnished for the intended use at a
reasonable cost to the user and the City.
      (2)   Whether recycled water use is in accordance with the standards of
treatment and water quality requirements set forth in Title 22, Division 4,
Chapter 3, of the California Code of Regulations and all other applicable
federal, state, and local laws and regulations.
      (3)   Whether the use of recycled water can be made in a manner not
detrimental to public health.
   (b)   Prior to approving such uses, the City may, in its discretion, set
forth specific requirements as conditions to providing such services and/or
require specific approval from the appropriate regulatory agencies. Prior to
approval, the user must comply with the requirements established by this
chapter and any other requirements imposed by the Inland Empire Utilities
Agency, State Board, or any other regulatory agencies that have jurisdiction
over such uses.
(§ 1, Ord. 2689, eff. June 17, 1999, as amended by § 2, Ord. 3197, eff. January
7, 2022, § 3, Ord. 3297, eff. March 18, 2025)
Sec. 6-8.713. Conditions of service.
   (a)   Prior to obtaining recycled water service, the user must enter into a
recycled water use agreement with the City. Recycled water use shall be subject
to terms and conditions established in the agreement, and in accordance with
this chapter and other applicable codes, rules, and regulations. If any of the
conditions of service are not satisfied at all times, the recycled water use
agreement may be revoked by the Administrator, after which all recycled water
service shall cease.
   (b)   The City shall not be liable for any damage by recycled water or
resulting from:
      (1)   Defective plumbing.
      (2)   Broken or faulty services or recycled water mains.
      (3)   Onsite facilities failures.
      (4)   High or low pressure conditions.
      (5)   Interruptions of service.
      (6)   Any inappropriate or illegal use or management practices.
   (c)   All recycled water will be provided to the user in the conditions and
quantity specified in the recycled water use agreement.
   (d)   Recycled water use will not be subject to the same restrictions as
potable water during drought conditions and will be supplied as available.
   (e)   Recycled water service may be terminated whenever the quality of the
recycled water does not comply with the requirements of the regulatory
agencies, or at any time the provisions of this chapter, or the conditions
specified in the recycled water use agreement, are violated.
(§ 1, Ord. 2689, eff. June 17, 1999, as amended by § 2, Ord. 3197, eff. January
7, 2022, § 3, Ord. 3297, eff. March 18, 2025)
Sec. 6-8.714. Recycled water service application.
   (a)   An application for a service connection must be made on a form
furnished by the City. The applicant shall provide the City with the
anticipated recycled water demand (maximum gallons per minute) and shall
specify the size of the water meter that is desired; however, the City reserves
the right to determine the ultimate size of the service connection and meter.
The applicant shall also specify the property to be served. The information
supplied by the applicant shall be considered as authoritative and final. If
any error in such application shall cause installation of a service connection
that is improper, either in size or location, the cost of all changes required
shall be borne by the applicant. The steps for obtaining recycled water service
are as follows:
      (1)   The applicant completes and submits a recycled water service
application, including existing facility "as-built" drawings or proposed
facility plans as appropriate, description of where and how recycled water use
is proposed, and any other information pertinent to the use of recycled water
as requested by the Administrator.
      (2)   An engineering report shall be prepared by a qualified engineer
registered in California and experienced in the field of wastewater treatment,
and submitted to the State Board for approval. The City or Inland Empire
Utilities Agency may prepare the report on behalf of the user, provided that
the user pays all costs associated with the preparation of the report. The
engineering report shall be consistent with State Board guidelines. Pursuant to
the Uniform Statewide Recycling Criteria under Title 22 of the California Code
of Regulations, the engineering report shall include:
         (i)   A description of the design of the proposed reclamation system.
         (ii)   A means for compliance with Title 22 regulations and any other
features specified by the State Board.
         (iii)   A contingency plan which will assure that no untreated or
inadequately treated wastewater will be delivered to the use area.
      (3)   The City shall forward the completed engineering report to the
State Board for review and approval.
      (4)   The user and the City will address any concerns that the State
Board may have regarding the engineering report and revise the report
accordingly.
      (5)   Upon the State Board's approval of the engineering report, the user
may enter into a recycled water use agreement with the City. The user must
enter into the agreement to begin recycled water service and pay any applicable
fees.
      (6)   The Administrator will schedule a start-up test of the onsite
recycled water system to ensure that cross-connections do not exist.
      (7)   Upon the successful completion of the test, the Administrator may
authorize recycled water service to begin.
(§ 1, Ord. 2689, eff. June 17, 1999, as amended by § 2, Ord. 3197, eff. January
7, 2022, § 3, Ord. 3297, eff. March 18, 2025)
Sec. 6-8.715. Recycled water use agreement.
   Every applicant agreeing to receive recycled water shall sign a recycled
water use agreement (to be furnished by the City) and shall be subject to the
following conditions:
   (a)   The applicant shall pay any specified connection fees, service line
charges and other charges, and adhere to the requirements prescribed by this
chapter and any additional requirements required by other agencies governing
recycled water use.
   (b)   In order to maintain acceptable operating conditions throughout the
recycled water system, the Administrator may schedule recycled water use for
specific applications. Such scheduling may involve programming deliveries to
different users and/or to various portions of a single user's onsite system.
Any scheduling shall consider the operating constraints of the affected users.
   (c)   The Administrator may temporarily terminate recycled water service at
any time recycled water produced by the Inland Empire Utilities Agency does not
meet the requirements of the regulatory agencies. Recycled water service would,
in such case, be restored when the recycled water meets the governing
requirements.
   (d)   At a minimum, the recycled water use agreement shall include the
following:
      (1)   Names and addresses of the owner of the property and user(s) of the
recycled water.
      (2)   A statement that no changes in the proposed system will be
undertaken without amending the agreement.
      (3)   A statement that the applicant recognizes potential penalties for
violation of this chapter and any regulatory agencies.
      (4)   A copy of the State Board approved engineering report.
      (5)   Specific quantity of recycled water to be used, including estimated
average annual use in acre-feet, and the maximum gallons per minutes (GPM)
needed at the point of connection (POC) as shown on the plans.
      (6)   Approved uses.
      (7)   A statement that the agreement shall be canceled or amended if:
         (i)   A change of recycled water use occurs.
         (ii)   A change in the piping system has been implemented without
prior approval.
         (iii)   A violation of these rules and regulations occurs and results
in a system turn-off.
(§ 1, Ord. 2689, eff. June 17, 1999, as amended by § 2, Ord. 3197, eff. January
7, 2022, § 3, Ord. 3297, eff. March 18, 2025)
Sec. 6-8.716. Rates, fees, charges and deposits.
   (a)   All rates and fees regarding recycled water service and their
administrative costs shall be established by the City Council and incorporated
into Municipal Code
Title 6, Chapter 8B. Any changes in fee and rate schedules shall be
automatically adopted into this chapter.
   (b)   Applicants for recycled water service shall pay their fair share for
the construction of facilities needed to deliver recycled water to the
applicant's property. All fees and estimated construction costs shall be paid
prior to construction; however, the City may reimburse the applicant for a
portion of the cost of such facilities as described in subsection (c) of this
section.
   (c)   Under certain circumstances, the City may contribute to the cost of
designing and/or constructing the facilities needed to deliver recycled water
to an applicant's property. Subject to the availability of funds, the City may:
      (1)   Reimburse an applicant for costs incurred to install oversized
facilities in the public right-of-way.
      (2)   Elect to participate in or construct pipelines, reservoirs, pumping
stations or other facilities, as the City determines necessary, and/or as funds
are available.
      (3)   Elect to fund or construct recycled water facilities, necessary for
converting existing customers from potable to recycled water, with customer
reimbursement to the City in the form of an increased recycled water rate, not
to exceed the potable rate, until such time as reimbursement is complete under
the terms of the recycled water use agreement.
(§ 1, Ord. 2689, eff. June 17, 1999, as amended by § 29, Ord. 2816, eff.
December 1, 2005, and § 2, Ord. 3197, eff. January 7, 2022, § 3, Ord. 3297,
eff. March 18, 2025)
Sec. 6-8.717. Construction water service.
   Persons desiring recycled water for construction purposes shall request a
temporary water meter for connection to a City recycled water fire hydrant, and
shall be subject to the fees and deposits as set forth in this chapter. It
shall be the responsibility of the customer to identify the approximate
location of the recycled water fire hydrant. The customer shall be responsible
for any damage and repair to the meter while in the customer's possession. In
the event that a meter is stolen, it will be at the City's sole discretion
whether the deposit shall be forfeited. If a replacement meter is requested, a
new deposit and application may be required for the replacement meter. All
temporary water meters shall be installed by City staff and secured to the
desired recycled water fire hydrant with a City-provided locking device. The
meter shall remain at the City approved and designated location until such time
as the customer requests it to be moved. The customer can request the meter to
be relocated at a maximum number of four (4) times per billing period. Requests
for removal or relocation will be accomplished the same working day, provided
the request is made to the City prior to 1:00 p.m. of the day of the request.
Any request made after 1:00 p.m. may be completed the following business day.
(§ 2, Ord. 3197, eff. January 7, 2022, § 3, Ord. 3297, eff. March 18, 2025)
Sec. 6-8.718. Size, location, and installation of service line.
   Recycled water service lines shall be extended by the property owner/
developer to a curb line or property line of the customer's property, abutting
on a public street, highway, road or City easement in which recycled water
mains are installed. The size and location and/or type of recycled water
service lines, service connections, meters, backflow protection devices, and
any/all other appurtenances are subject to review and approval by the City.
(§ 1, Ord. 2689, eff. June 17, 1999, as amended by § 2, Ord. 3197, eff. January
7, 2022, § 3, Ord. 3297, eff. March 18, 2025)
Sec. 6-8.719. Service connection limitations.
   Recycled water service shall be subject to the following conditions:
   (a)   The City reserves the right to limit the area of land under one (1)
ownership to be supplied by one (1) recycled water service connection and
recycled water meter.
   (b)   A recycled water service connection and its corresponding meter shall
not be used to supply adjoining property of a different owner, or to supply
property of the same owner across a road, street or other public right-of-way.
   (c)   When a property provided with a recycled water connection and
corresponding recycled water meter is subdivided, such connection and meter
shall be considered as serving the lot or parcel of land it directly or first
enters. Additional recycled water mains and/or recycled water service lines
will be required for all subdivided areas in accordance with this chapter.
   (d)   Private irrigation systems for homeowner's associations and other
developments where landscaping around homes and in common areas are served with
one (1) recycled water meter, shall not be allowed to cross public roads,
easements, or other public rights-of-way without City approval.
   (e)   All recycled water used on any property where a meter is installed
must pass through the meter. Customers shall be held responsible and charged
for all recycled water passing through their meters.
   (f)   Every recycled water service line shall be equipped with an angle curb
stop on the inlet side of the meter; such angle curb stop being intended
exclusively for the use of the City in controlling the recycled water supply
through the recycled water service line. If the curb stop is damaged by the
user's use to an extent requiring replacement, such replacement shall be at the
user's expense.
(§ 1, Ord. 2689, eff. June 17, 1999, as amended by § 2, Ord. 3197, eff. January
7, 2022, § 3, Ord. 3297, eff. March 18s, 2025)
Sec. 6-8.720. Service pressure.
   Whenever possible, the recycled water system will operate at a slightly
lower pressure than the potable water system. This will cause potable water to
flow in the recycled water system in the event of a cross-connection.
(§ 1, Ord. 2689, eff. June 17, 1999, as amended by § 30, Ord. 2816, eff.
December 1, 2005, and § 2, Ord. 3197, eff. January 7, 2022, § 3, Ord. 3297,
eff. March 18, 2025)
Sec. 6-8.721. Relocation of recycled water service lines.
   Should a recycled water service line installed pursuant to the request of
the applicant, owner, or user be of the wrong size, or installed at a wrong
location or depth, then the cost of all changes requiredshall be paid for by
the applicant, owner, or user. All recycled water services provided prior to
final street improvements will be considered temporary and the costs for all
repairs or changes required to be performed by the City must be paid by the
applicant, owner, or user.
(§ 1, Ord. 2689, eff. June 17, 1999, as amended by § 2, Ord. 3197, eff. January
7, 2022, § 3, Ord. 3297, eff. March 18, 2025)
Article 5: Protective Measures
Sec. 6-8.722. Cross-connections.
   (a)   
Chapter 8E of
Title 6 of the Municipal Code establishes the rules and regulations for the
City’s active Cross-Connection Control Program (“Program”). Service is
conditioned on the users adherence to the Program. The City has designated a
Cross-Connection Control Coordinator (“Coordinator”) for the Program. When a
request for recycled water service is initiated, the applicant must provide
sufficient information, including plumbing and building plans, to enable the
Administrator, Coordinator, and other regulatory agencies to determine the
level of backflow protection required. The proper backflow protection, as
determined by the Administrator, Coordinator, and other regulatory agencies,
shall then be installed and tested according to Chapter 8E before recycled
water service is provided. Users must make their premises open for inspection
at all reasonable times in accordance with §
6-8.908 of
Chapter 8E.
   (b)   Any questions or notifications regarding these provisions or the
program should be directed to the Coordinator or the Administrator, or his/her
designee.
(§ 2, Ord. 3197, eff. January 7, 2022, § 3, Ord. 3297, eff. March 18, 2025)
Sec. 6-8.723. Other measures.
   (a)   Water meters used for recycled water service shall be tagged or color-
coded purple, color Pantone 512 or 522, or otherwise distinguished as such per
AWWA standards. These meters shall not be interchanged or used for potable
water service after repairs and/or meter testing have been performed.
   (b)   Where premises contain dual or multiple water systems and piping, the
exposed portions of pipelines shall be painted, banded, or marked pursuant to §
6-8.725 at sufficient intervals to distinguish clearly water is that safe for
drinking purposes and water that is not safe. All outlets intended for drinking
purposes shall be plainly marked to indicate that fact.
   (c)   For residences providing recycled water services, water outlets that
serve non-potable water shall be marked with the words "Recycled Water - Do Not
Drink."
   (d)   Periodic inspection by the City of the recycled water facilities will
determine if all identifying items are clearly discernable. If not, they shall
be immediately replaced, repaired or refurbished as needed, by the user. These
items include:
      (1)   Warning tags.
      (2)   Painted surfaces.
      (3)   Warning tape.
      (4)   Identification tape.
      (5)   Covers, caps, signs.
      (6)   Other items that indicate recycled water is being used.
   (e)   To determine the existence of any cross-connections or backflow
conditions into the potable water system, periodic testing by State Board
approved methods will be performed by the Administrator and/or other regulatory
agencies.
   (f)   The State and County Health Departments, the Administrator, and the
IEUA shall be kept informed by written document of the identity of the person
responsible for the user's recycled water system on all premises concerned with
these rules and regulations. At each authorized use area, an “Onsite” Recycled
Water Supervisor shall be designated. This supervisor shall be responsible for:
      (1)   The installation and use of all components of the onsite recycled
water system(s).
      (2)   Prevention of cross- connections.
      (3)   Change in use of recycled water.
   (g)   When the recycled water uses or conditions, as determined by the
Administrator, Coordinator or other regulatory agencies, represent a clear and
immediate hazard to the City's potable and/or recycled water supply that cannot
be immediately removed or corrected, the Administrator shall terminate recycled
water use. Section
6-8.920 of
Chapter 8E establishes the conditions or uses that create a basis for
termination.
(§ 2, Ord. 3197, eff. January 7, 2022, § 3, Ord. 3297, eff. March 18, 2025)
Sec. 6-8.724. Emergency connection to the recycled water system to the potable
water system.
   If the Administrator determines an emergency exists where all or parts of
the recycled water system are unable to provide recycled water, the
Administrator may approve an emergency temporary connection to the potable
water system. Before such emergency temporary connection is made, the portion
without recycled water shall be isolated by an air gap separation from the
remainder of the recycled water system. This isolation shall occur at either
individual services or on the offsite system, as determined by the
Administrator. An approved backflow prevention device shall be installed on the
potable water lines in accordance with this chapter and any and all applicable
rules and regulations of the state and local health departments. The recycled
water system shall be disinfected in accordance with Title 22 California Code
of Regulations and AWWA C651 Standard prior to any use of potable water through
the system. Before the emergency temporary connection or connections shall be
removed, whether onsite or offsite, the user shall notify the City's Municipal
Utilities' Water Quality Programs Division. The emergency temporary connection
shall be removed before connection to the recycled water system is re-
established. Re-establishment of recycled water service must be inspected and
approved by the Administrator prior to resuming delivery of recycled water.
(§ 1, Ord. 2689, eff. June 17, 1999, as amended by § 2, Ord. 3197, eff. January
7, 2022, § 3, Ord. 3297, eff. March 18, 2025)
Article 6: Facilities Design and Construction
Sec. 6-8.725. Facilities design.
   (a)   The design of offsite and onsite recycled water facilities, including
the preparation of plans and construction specifications, shall be under the
responsibility of an engineer registered in the State of California. The design
of customer (onsite) facilities that will use recycled water, and preparations
of plans and construction specifications, shall be stamped and signed by a
State of California registered landscape architect or civil engineer, unless
otherwise approved by the Administrator.
   (b)   Before the Administrator grants final acceptance of any system using
recycled water, as-built drawings of the system shall be provided. The
installed system shall be tested in accordance with the City Standard
Specifications to ensure that the system is in full compliance with applicable
rules and regulations.
   (c)   All offsite and onsite recycled water facilities shall be designed and
constructed according to the requirements, conditions, and standards as adopted
in the City Standard Specifications to ensure that the system is in full
compliance with this chapter. Recycled water systems, both onsite and offsite,
shall be separate and independent of any potable water systems.
   (d)   Where the premises contain dual or multiple water systems, the exposed
portions of pipelines shall be identified at sufficient intervals.
   (e)   Areas irrigated with recycled water must be kept completely separated
from domestic water wells and reservoirs. Recycled water shall not be applied
or allowed to migrate to within fifty (50) feet of any well used for domestic
supply. No impoundment of recycled water shall be located within one hundred
(100) feet of any domestic water well, unless it can be demonstrated that
special circumstances justify lesser distances to be acceptable.
   (f)   Adequate means of notification shall be provided to inform the public,
employees and others that recycled water is being used. Conspicuous signs with
appropriate wording that can be clearly read should be placed at adequate
intervals around the authorized use area.
      (1)   Golf courses should print messages on score cards in a different
color indicating recycled water is being used. Water hazards containing
recycled water should be posted with appropriate signs.
      (2)   Languages in addition to English should be used on signs where
appropriate.
(§ 2, Ord. 3197, eff. January 7, 2022, § 3, Ord. 3297, eff. March 18, 2025)
Sec. 6-8.726. Offsite recycled water facilities.
   (a)   Any offsite recycled water distribution facilities required to serve
existing or new developments of the property within the City, as determined by
the Administrator, shall be provided by the applicant, owner, or customer at
their expense, unless the Administrator determines it is a City benefit to
construct these capital facilities.
   (b)   Plans and specifications for all recycled water distribution
facilities shall be submitted to and approved by the Administrator, and other
regulatory agencies, in advance of construction.
   (c)   The City will assume responsibility for providing recycled water
service to the point of connection of such development on transfer, to the
City, of the title to all offsite recycled water systems and any necessary
easements. All easements shall be in a form acceptable to the Administrator,
and not subject to outstanding obligations to relocate such facilities or any
deeds of trust, except in instances where such is determined by the
Administrator to be in the best interest of the City.
   (d)   The City and the property owner or developer may enter into a
reimbursement agreement for the portions of a recycled water system that are
required to be oversized with capacity to supply more recycled water than the
property owner or developer requires. The determination to enter into a
reimbursement agreement, and the specific items that are the subject of
reimbursement, will be made by the City.
(§ 2, Ord. 3197, eff. January 7, 2022, § 3, Ord. 3297, eff. March 18, 2025)
Sec. 6-8.727. Onsite recycled water facilities.
   (a)   The user or the owner of the property shall be responsible for all
costs associated with onsite recycled water facilities.
   (b)   When City standards and specifications require a higher quality
material, equipment, design or construction method than that required by other
governing codes, rules and regulations, the City standards and specifications
shall take precedence.
      (1)   In areas where recycled water is not immediately available when the
use area is ready for construction, and if the City has determined that
recycled water will be supplied in the future, onsite facilities shall be
designed to use recycled water. Provisions shall be made to allow for
connection to the City's offsite recycled water facilities, when available. In
the interim, potable or other suitable water may be supplied to the onsite
facilities through an "interim service connection."
      (2)   Conditions of interim service are:
         (i)   The City anticipates recycled water will be available to the
site within five (5) years of the time interim service is initiated.
         (ii)   The user or the owner of the property must sign a recycled
water use agreement.
         (iii)   The user or the owner of the property must agree to perform or
pay for all work necessary to remove the interim connection and make
connections to the permanent recycled water system at the time the recycled
water system is installed.
         (iv)   An approved backflow prevention device is required on the
interim service. The backflow prevention device shall be downstream of the
meter and shall be a part of the onsite recycled water facilities.
         (v)   Future recycled water users will pay for the following:
            (A)   Cost of constructing and abandoning the interim service and
cost of constructing the recycled water service.
            (B)   Applicable recycled water fees at the time service becomes
available.
            (C)   Applicable interim water rates for the type of water
delivered through the interim service.
         (vi)   When recycled water is available to the site, an inspection of
the onsite facilities will be conducted by the Administrator to verify that the
facilities are still in compliance with the recycled water use agreement.
Recycled water service shall be provided on verification of compliance. If the
facilities are not in compliance, the Administrator shall notify the user to
make any necessary corrections.
(§ 1, Ord. 2689, eff. June 17, 1999, as amended by § 32, Ord. 2816, eff.
December 1, 2005 and § 2, Ord. 3197, eff. January 7, 2022, § 3, Ord. 3297, eff.
March 18, 2025)
Sec. 6-8.728. Construction.
   (a)   Construction of all new recycled water facilities will follow City
standards and specifications and the American Water Works Association
Construction Guidelines for Recycled Water Facilities.
   (b)   Where it is planned that an existing non-recycled water system shall
be converted to a recycled water facility, the facilities to be converted to
recycled water shall be investigated in detail at the user's expense, to
determine the measures required to bring the system into full compliance with
this chapter. No existing potable water facilities shall be connected to or
incorporated into the recycled water system without City and State Board
approvals.
   (c)   If, due to onsite failure of the recycled water system, the
Administrator determines that it is necessary to convert onsite facilities from
a recycled water supply to a potable water supply, a comprehensive
investigation shall be performed by or for the City.
      (1)   The facilities to be converted to recycled water use shall be
investigated in detail, including review of any record drawings, preparation of
required reports, and determinations by the City of measures necessary to bring
the system into full compliance with this chapter for recycled water service.
      (2)   No potable water facilities shall be connected to or incorporated
in the recycled water system that have not been approved for recycled water
service by the City.
   (d)   It shall be the responsibility of the user to pay all costs for such
conversion. Conversion costs may include, but are not limited to, the
following:
      (1)   Isolation of the recycled water supply. Service shall be removed
and plugged at the City main or abandoned in a manner approved by the
Administrator.
      (2)   Installation of approved backflow prevention devices, as determined
by the Administrator, on all potable and/or other water meter connections.
      (3)   Removal of any/all special recycled water quick couplers. The user
shall be responsible for replacement with quick couplers approved for potable
water systems.
      (4)   Notification to all onsite personnel involved.
      (5)   Removal of all warning labels/signs.
      (6)   Installation of any/all potable water facilities and payment of any
associated capacity fees, as established in
Title 6, Chapter 8B, of the Municipal Code.
      (7)   System flushing, disinfecting, decontamination, and water quality
analyses, as required by the City and/or other regulatory agencies.
(§ 1, Ord. 2689, eff. June 17, 1999, as amended by § 2, Ord. 3197, eff. January
7, 2022, § 3, Ord. 3297, eff. March 18, 2025)
Article 7: Facilities Operation
Sec. 6-8.729. Offsite facilities.
   The City and/or the Inland Empire Utilities Agency shall be responsible for
the operation, maintenance and surveillance of all offsite recycled water
systems. This includes, but is not limited to, recycled water pipelines,
valves, connections, storage facilities, and other related equipment and
property up to and including the meter. Only the City and/or the Inland Empire
Utilities Agency personnel and their representatives shall operate, adjust,
change, alter, move or relocate any portion of their respective offsite
recycled water facilities.
(§ 1, Ord. 2689, eff. June 17, 1999, as amended by § 2, Ord. 3197, eff. January
7, 2022, § 3, Ord. 3297, eff. March 18, 2025)
Sec. 6-8.730. Onsite facilities.
   (a)   General.
      (1)   The operation, surveillance, repair, and maintenance of all
customer recycled water facilities are the responsibility of the user and his
or her designated Onsite Recycled Water Supervisor.
         (i)   The Onsite Recycled Water Supervisor shall be responsible for
the installation, operation, and maintenance of the onsite recycled water
system, enforcing applicable requirements of the City's recycled water use
agreement, preventing potential hazards related to such system, maintenance of
the system plans in "as- built" form, and distribution of recycled water in
accordance with applicable laws and permits held by the City.
      (2)   The Administrator shall have the right to enter the user's premises
to monitor and inspect all onsite recycled water facilities. Where necessary,
keys and/or lock combinations shall be issued to the Administrator to provide
such access during hours of recycled water system operation.
   (b)   The Onsite Recycled Water Supervisor shall have the following
responsibilities pertaining to operation of onsite facilities:
      (1)   Ensure that all operations personnel are trained and familiarized
with the use of recycled water.
      (2)   Furnish all operations personnel with maintenance instructions,
irrigation schedules, controller charts, and as-built drawings to ensure proper
operation in accordance with the onsite facilities design and applicable rules
and regulations.
      (3)   Prepare and submit to the Administrator one (1) reproducible set of
as-built drawings.
      (4)   Notify the Administrator of all updates or proposed changes,
modifications, or additions to the onsite facilities and operations for review
and approval prior to construction or implementation. All updates and proposed
changes shall comply with this chapter, the recycled water use agreement and
any other applicable rules and regulations.
      (5)   Ensure that the operation and maintenance of all recycled water
facilities remain in accordance with this chapter, the recycled water use
agreement and any other applicable rules and regulations.
      (6)   Operate and control the system in order to prevent direct human
consumption of recycled water and to control and limit runoff. The user or the
owner of the property shall be responsible for any and all subsequent uses of
the recycled water. Operation and control measures to be utilized in this
regard shall include where appropriate, but are not limited to:
         (i)   Minimizing discharge onto areas not under control of the user so
as to minimize public contact. Full circle sprinklers shall not be used
adjacent to sidewalks, roadways, and property lines in order to confine the
discharge to the use area.
         (ii)   Operating the onsite recycled water facilities during periods
of minimal human use of the service area, and allowing a maximum dry-out time
before the irrigated area will be used by the public.
         (iii)   Providing adequate first aid kits on the premises, and
promptly treating all cuts and abrasions to prevent infection. If infection is
likely, a physician should be consulted.
         (iv)   Taking any other precautionary measures to minimize direct
contact with recycled water. User's employees, residents, and the public should
not be subjected to recycled water sprays.
         (v)   Applying recycled water at a rate that does not exceed the
infiltration rate of the soil. Where varying soil types are present, the design
and operation of the recycled water facilities shall be compatible with the
lowest infiltration rate of the soils present.
         (vi)   Reporting to the Administrator any/all failures in the recycled
water system that cause an unauthorized discharge of recycled water.
         (vii)   Protecting all drinking fountains located within the approved
use area, by location and/or a structure from contact with recycled water to
the maximum extent possible. Windblown spray, direct application through
irrigation or other approved uses are considered sources of recycled water.
Protection shall be by design, construction practice, or system operation.
         (viii)   Protecting facilities that may be used by the public,
including but not limited to, eating surfaces and playground equipment located
within the approved use areas, by locating seating and/or structures from
contact with recycled water to the maximum extent possible. Windblown spray,
direct contact by irrigation application, or other approved uses are considered
sources of recycled water. Protection shall be by design, construction
practice, or system operation.
   (c)   The user shall enforce the following prohibitions:
      (1)   Cross-connections, as defined by the Cross-Connection Control
Policy Handbook, resulting from the use of recycled water or from the physical
presence of a recycled water service, whether by design, construction practice,
or system operation, are prohibited.
      (2)   Discharge of recycled water for any purpose, in areas other than
those specifically approved in the recycled water use agreement, and without
the prior approval of the Administrator, is prohibited.
      (3)   Use or installation of permanent hose bibs on any customer water
system that presently operates or is designed to operate with recycled water is
prohibited.
      (4)   Conditions that directly or indirectly cause recycled water to pond
either within or outside of the approved use area, whether by design,
construction practice, or system operation are prohibited, unless designed
specifically for ponding and approved by the Administrator.
      (5)   Conditions that directly or indirectly cause runoff of recycled
water onto areas outside of approved use areas, whether by design, construction
practice, or system operation, are prohibited.
      (6)   Use of recycled water for any purposes other than those
specifically approved in the recycled water use agreement, and without the
prior approval of the Administrator, is prohibited.
      (7)   Conditions that directly or indirectly permit windblown spray to
pass outside of the approved use area, whether by design, construction
practice, or system operation, are prohibited.
(§ 1, Ord. 2689, eff. June 17, 1999, as amended by § 2, Ord. 3197, eff. January
7, 2022, § 3, Ord. 3297, eff. March 18, 2025)
Sec. 6-8.731. Monitoring and inspection.
   (a)   The Administrator will periodically monitor and inspect the entire
recycled distribution facility, including both offsite and onsite facilities.
The Administrator will conduct monitoring programs, maintain records as deemed
necessary, inspect onsite facilities for compliance with applicable rules and
regulations, and provide reports as requested by the State Board. For these
purposes, the Administrator will have the right to enter the user's premises
during hours of recycled water system operation to inspect onsite recycled
water facilities and approved areas of recycled water use, to ensure compliance
with this chapter and
Chapter 8E, including the requirement that runoff be controlled and limited (§
6-8.730(b)(6)) and the prohibition of cross-connections between potable water
facilities and recycled water facilities (
Chapter 8E).
   (b)   The approved user shall be responsible for providing access to and
cooperation with the City's Cross-Connection Control Specialist or designee so
that the City's Cross-Connection Control Specialist or designee can perform
periodic cross-connection tests, site inspections and backflow prevention
device tests. Site inspections shall include pressure testing of the system(s)
as well as a visual check of the entire system to verify that no cross-
connections or unapproved connections exist. The approved user shall be
responsible for correcting any work which violates the City's regulations, at
the user's sole expense, including any costs associated with repair and re-
testing the backflow prevention device should the backflow prevention device
fail to pass the required test.
   (c)   If the user or owner changes, the City's Cross-Connection Control
Coordinator or designee will perform an inspection and test to verify
compliance with this chapter and
Chapter 8E.
(§ 1, Ord. 2689, eff. June 17, 1999, as amended by § 2, Ord. 3197, eff. January
7, 2022, § 3, Ord. 3297, eff. March 18, 2025)
Sec. 6-8.732. Maintenance responsibility.
   (a)   The user or owner is responsible for maintaining all onsite facilities
that are under the ownership of parties other than the City.
   (b)   No person shall place, dispose, deposit or permit the placement,
disposal, or deposit of oil, toxic, hazardous or contaminated liquid or waste,
trash, soil, building materials, or any other substances, objects, or
obstructions in, on, or around meter boxes or other City facilities. No person
shall allow or permit meter boxes or other City facilities from becoming
obstructed or obscured by trees, shrubs, plants or in any other manner so as to
impede their use or access or make their location difficult to determine.
   (c)   If such substances, objects, or obstructions are not cleaned and
removed, or are permitted to obscure or impede use or access to such
facilities, the City may accomplish the cleaning and removal at the user's
expense. The Administrator will provide reasonable notice to the user before
assessing the charge.
(§ 1, Ord. 2689, eff. June 17, 1999, as amended by § 2, Ord. 3197, eff. January
7, 2022, § 3, Ord. 3297, eff. March 18, 2025)
Sec. 6-8.733. Meter testing.
   If a recycled water meter fails to register during any period or is known to
register inaccurately, the owner or user shall be charged using a reasonable
average daily consumption based on prior consumption or based on other
reasonable calculations in the absence of historical consumption data. The City
will examine and test the meter through which recycled water is being furnished
or determine whether it is correctly registering the amount of recycled water
being delivered.
(§ 2, Ord. 3197, eff. January 7, 2022, § 3, Ord. 3297, eff. March 18, 2025)
Article 8: Enforcement
Sec. 6-8.734. Illegal connections, diversions, or tampering.
   (a)   Diversion and tampering are prohibited.
   (b)   Diversion and tampering are crimes under the California Penal Code and
are violations of the Water Code and the Civil Code. Diversion and tampering
may be subject to charges and penalties, as well as referral to the District
Attorney for criminal prosecution. All charges and penalties shall be
applicable and collected in accordance with applicable laws and regulations.
(§ 2, Ord. 3197, eff. January 7, 2022, § 3, Ord. 3297, eff. March 18, 2025)
Sec. 6-8.735. Violations and enforcement.
   Nothing in this chapter limits or restricts the City's general authority to
enforce noncompliance of applicable rules and regulations. The City retains the
right to enforce violations of this chapter in accordance with
Chapter 1-5 or in accordance with any other legally authorized process,
including but not limited to discontinuing service to any customer that commits
a violation, infraction, or otherwise fails to comply with the Municipal Code,
any amendments or additions thereto, and any adopted rules or regulations.
Prior to the service disconnection, the City shall provide notice to the
customer where a violation, infraction, or otherwise noncompliance results, or
is likely to result, in a dangerous or unsanitary condition on the customer's
premises, or within the City's water system, and where disconnection of service
is necessary to protect the City from fraud, imposition, loss or abuse.
(§ 2, Ord. 3197, eff. January 7, 2022, § 3, Ord. 3297, eff. March 18, 2025)
CHAPTER 8D: POTABLE WATER FACILITIES
Article 1: General Provisions
   
6-8.800   Purpose and policy
   
6-8.801   Objectives
   
6-8.802   Severability
Article 2: Definitions
   
6-8.803   Definitions
Article 3: General Responsibilities
   
6-8.804   Applicant and developer responsibilities
   
6-8.805   Contractor responsibilities
   
6-8.806   City rights and responsibilities
   
6-8.807   Customer responsibilities
Article 4: New Service Connection Requirements
   
6-8.808   Connection fees
   
6-8.809   New service connection
   
6-8.810   Application for new service connection
   
6-8.811   Conditions of service
   
6-8.812   No entitlement to service
Article 5: Design and Construction
   
6-8.813   Water system design specifications and guidelines
   
6-8.814   Street sub-grade
   
6-8.815   Right-of-way and easements
   
6-8.816   Potable pipeline location
   
6-8.817   Fire hydrants
   
6-8.818   Water service lines
   
6-8.819   Service connections
   
6-8.820   Fire service connection
   
6-8.821   Automated meter reading devices
   
6-8.822   Backflow prevention assemblies
   
6-8.823   Service relocation
   
6-8.824   Temporary service connection
Article 6: Monitoring and Inspection
   
6-8.825   Inspection
   
6-8.826   Pressure and leakage testing
   
6-8.827   Bacteriological sampling and testing
   
6-8.828   Shutdowns
   
6-8.829   Title of water facilities
Article 7: Operation and Maintenance
   
6-8.830   Service connection maintained by Municipal Utilities Company
   
6-8.831   City right of ingress to and egress from customer’s property
   
6-8.832   City access
   
6-8.833   Obstruction of or deposit of material in meter boxes or hydrants
   
6-8.834   Quick-closing valves (or other devices)
   
6-8.835   Change in size of connection or meter
   
6-8.836   Emergency repairs
Article 8: Violations
   
6-8.837   Violations
Article 1: General Provisions
Sec. 6-8.800. Purpose and policy.
   The purpose of this chapter is to set forth requirements and procedures for
the design, construction, monitoring, inspection, and maintenance of potable
water facilities, and enable the City to comply with all applicable state and
federal laws and regulations.
(§ 4, Ord. 3297, eff. March 18, 2025)
Sec. 6-8.801. Objectives.
   The objectives of this chapter are:
   (a)   To establish the City’s rights and responsibilities regarding design,
construction, inspection, operation, and maintenance of potable water
facilities.
   (b)   To establish roles and responsibilities of applicant, developer,
contractor, and customer regarding design, construction, monitoring,
inspection, and maintenance of potable water facilities.
(§ 4, Ord. 3297, eff. March 18, 2025)
Sec. 6-8.802. Severability.
   If any section, subsection, sentence, clause or phrase of this chapter
establishing rules and regulations for the use of potable water is for any
reason found to be invalid or unconstitutional, such decision shall not affect
the remaining portions of this chapter.
(§ 4, Ord. 3297, eff. March 18, 2025)
Article 2: Definitions
Sec. 6-8.803. Definitions.
   (a)   “Applicant” shall mean any person, firm, corporation, association, or
agency who desires to obtain water services from the City.
   (b)   “Automated meter reading device” shall mean a specified device
installed with metered services with new development and replacement meters
that transmits meter read information electronically to a remote receiving
device.
   (c)   “Bacteriological test” shall mean a microbiological examination of
water samples routinely taken on the public water system and on all newly
constructed water facilities prior to City acceptance, to determine if the
water from said potable water facilities meets sanitary quality standards for
public consumption set by the California State Water Resources Control Board.
   (d)   “CADD” shall mean Computer Aided Design and Drafting.
   (e)   “City” shall mean the City of Ontario, California.
   (f)   “City Council” shall mean the City Council of the City of Ontario,
California.
   (g)   “City Manager” shall mean the City Manager of the City of Ontario, or
his or her authorized representative.
   (h)   “Contractor” shall mean any person who for himself or herself, in
conjunction with, or by or through others, agrees to perform and does perform a
construction contract and shall include:
      (1)   Any person required to be licensed under the California
Contractors’ State License Law, and any person contracting with the United
States to perform a construction contract, whether such persons are formed or
organized under the laws of this state, or another state or country; and
      (2)   Subcontractors and specialty contractors and those engaged in such
building trades as defined in the California Code of Regulations, Title 18,
Section 1521.
   (i)   “Customer” shall mean a person, firm, or corporation who is the
recipient of water service from the City.
   (j)   “DDW” shall mean California State Water Resources Control Board’s
Division of Drinking Water.
   (k)   “Design Development Guidelines and Specifications" shall mean the
City’s most current published version for potable water system design and
criteria.
   (l)   “Developer” shall mean a person, firm, corporation, partnership, or
association who desires water service which requires the installation of new,
improved or expanded water service facilities for him or herself or for others,
except that employees and consultants of such persons or entities, acting in
such capacity, are not developers.
   (m)   "Domestic service” shall mean the delivery of potable water through an
authorized service connection designated primarily for potable and sanitation
uses, and other associated uses.
   (n)   “ELAP” shall mean the California Environmental Laboratory
Accreditation Program.
   (o)   “Engineer” shall mean the City Engineer of the City of Ontario, or his
or her authorized representative.
   (p)   “Fecal coliform” shall mean a subgroup of total coliforms and are
associated with human and animal wastes. Escherichia coli is a fecal coliform
species.
   (q)   “Fire service” shall mean the standby and delivery of water through an
authorized service connection designated exclusively for fire protection
including automatic sprinklers and fire hydrants.
   (r)   “Greenbook” shall mean the most current published edition of
“Greenbook” Standard Specifications for Public Works Construction.
   (s)   “Heterotrophic plate count” shall mean a procedure for estimating the
number of culturable heterotrophic bacteria in water.
   (t)   “IEUA” shall mean the Inland Empire Utilities Agency.
   (u)   “Inspector” shall mean the City of Ontario’s Engineering Department’s
Public Works Inspector.
   (v)   “Municipal Utilities Company” shall mean the Municipal Utilities
Company.
   (w)   "NPDES” shall mean National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System.
   (x)   “Operation and maintenance” shall mean the functions required to
ensure continuous operations and viability of the City’s infrastructure.
   (y)   “Service connection” shall mean the water pipe, or pipes, and
appurtenances installed by the developer to transport potable water from
adjoining City facilities located within a public right- of-way or public
utility easement to the developer’s parcel of land. Said service connections
shall terminate at the customer side of the meter and meter box located at a
specified place approved by the City.
   (z)   “Standard Drawings” shall mean the City’s Standard Drawings.
   (aa)   "Subdivision” shall mean the division, by a developer, of any part of
portion of a parcel of land, within the service area of the City, into two or
more separate parcels or units for sale or lease for residential, commercial,
or industrial purposes.
   (bb)   “Total coliform” shall mean a coliform group consisting of several
genera of bacteria that belong to the family Enterobacteriaceae that live in
the intestines of warm-blooded animals, such as humans and animals.
   (cc)   "Transmission facilities” shall mean any designated City facilities,
and appurtenances, considered to be the backbone infrastructure that transports
large quantities of water within the City to and from the storage facilities
and the City treatment/processing plants. Such facilities shall not be used as,
nor be deemed to be, part of the on-site water facilities which are required
for the connection and delivery of water service to a customer or developer.
   (dd)   “Water facilities” shall mean any water mains, service connections,
water service lines, meters, and appurtenances used for providing potable water
service to any parcels of land or subdivision of said parcels of land,
excluding designated transmission facilities.
   (ee)   “Water Pipeline Construction Specifications” shall mean the City’s
most current published version for constructing potable water facilities.
   (ff)   “Water Pipeline Material Specification and Approved List” shall mean
the City’s most current published version for materials used to construct
potable water facilities.
(§ 4, Ord. 3297, eff. March 18, 2025)
Article 3: General Responsibilities
Sec. 6-8.804. Applicant and developer responsibilities.
   (a)   The applicant or developer shall be required to pay all applicable
fees based on current rates approved by City Council.
   (b)   The applicant or developer’s responsibilities shall generally include
engineering, construction, sanitizing, and testing of water facilities in
accordance with this chapter and subject to the Engineer’s and Inspector’s
approval. Complete engineering shall be by a registered civil engineer and
shall include submission of a full set of detailed improvement plans in
electronic form of a scale acceptable to the Engineer, along with appropriate
plan check and inspection fees. After all changes, modifications, and additions
requested by the Engineer have been made on the improvement plans and have been
approved, the applicant or developer shall furnish the Engineer a complete set
of electronic improvement plans, which shall become the property of the City.
In addition to furnishing the Engineer with a complete set of electronic
improvement plans, the applicant or developer shall furnish an electronic file
containing necessary data for producing CADD drawings in a format approved by
the Engineer.
   (c)   Any changes in installation from the improvement plans submitted
pursuant to subsection (b) shall have prior written approval of the Engineer,
and the applicant or developer shall furnish the Engineer a complete set of as-
built plans before water service is established and provided. An electronic
CADD file shall also be furnished for the as-built plans.
   (d)   The applicant or developer shall have the required installation,
chlorination, and sanitization of newly installed water facilities performed by
a contractor that meets the licensing requirements in subsection (a) and (b) of
§
6-8.805.
   (e)   The applicant or developer shall ensure that the contractor installs
water facilities in accordance with the City’s Design Development Guidelines
and Specifications and Standard Drawings unless otherwise granted in writing by
the Engineer.
   (f)   The applicant or developer shall be responsible for relocating or
reinstalling any existing water facilities installed in conflict with plans
submitted pursuant to subsection (b) or (c). Relocation of water facilities
shall be contingent upon the City approval of the plans, which are to be
submitted by applicant or developer in a format as required by the Engineer.
Under no circumstances may water facilities be relocated unless authorized by
the Engineer in writing.
   (g)   The applicant or developer is responsible for the abandonment of any
existing facilities that, through the plan checking process, are deemed
unnecessary or inadequate for usage by the new construction. Any abandonment
will be done in accordance with the approved plans in conjunction with the
construction of the new facilities or in a manner as directed by the Engineer.
   (h)   The applicant or developer shall comply with any other requirement set
forth in this chapter.
(§ 4, Ord. 3297, eff. March 18, 2025)
Sec. 6-8.805. Contractor responsibilities.
   (a)   The contractor shall possess a State of California Class “A” license
issued by the Department of Motor Vehicles and a Class “C-34” or Class “C-12”
license issued by the Contractors State License Board for the installation of
newly installed systems.
   (b)   The contractor shall possess a State of California Class “C-36”
license issued by the Contractors State License Board for the chlorination and
sanitization of newly installed systems.   
   (c)   The contractor shall at all times maintain and insure the integrity of
newly constructed facilities, including but not limited to pipeline,
appurtenance, and devices, during storage, transportation, and installation.
Pipe shall be delivered and stored with factory provided end caps. Failure to
maintain the integrity of newly constructed facilities through the
demonstration of inspection and testing shall allow the City, at its sole
discretion, to have the contractor remove, replace, retest, or reinspect at the
contractor’s sole expense.
   (d)   The contractor shall provide and maintain at all times during
construction, ample means and devices with which to promptly remove and dispose
of all water entering the excavations or other parts of the work. Ground or
subsurface water shall not be allowed to rise around pipe installations until
joining compound in the joints has set. The contractor shall dispose of the
water and any other materials generated from the work site in a suitable manner
without damage to adjacent property. No water shall be drained into work built
or under construction. Water and any other materials generated from the work
site shall be disposed of in such a manner that conforms to state and federal
waste disposal laws.
   (e)   At all times the contractor will coordinate all work with the City to
minimize waterline shutdowns made pursuant to §
6-8.828.
   (f)   The contractor shall have monitoring performed, in connection with
chlorination and sanitization of newly installed systems, by a current
certified California Water Distribution Operator and demonstrate formal
training by a certified ELAP laboratory. All charges shall be borne by
contractor.
   (g)   The contractor shall disinfect pipelines, valves, hydrants, service
laterals, fittings, tanks, and other surfaces exposed to water in accordance
with AWWA C651. Sampling locations shall be in accordance with AWWA C651 and
the DDW regulations.
   (h)   The contractor shall dechlorinate and remove pollutants from water
flushed from water mains in accordance with AWWA C655 and discharge
requirements specified in the City’s Specifications and NPDES permits.
   (i)   Prior to water service being established, the contractor shall
complete and pass the hydrostatic pressure, leakage, and disinfection tests
prior to connecting any new line to the existing pipe and mains. All tests
shall be completed in the presence of the Inspector for recording.
   (j)   The contractor shall comply with any other requirement set forth in
this chapter.
(§ 4, Ord. 3297, eff. March 18, 2025)
Sec. 6-8.806. City rights and responsibilities.
   (a)   The City is responsible for inspections made pursuant to
Article 6 of this chapter.
   (b)   The City reserves the right to install any water facility which will
become the property of the City for maintenance and operation.
   (c)   The City shall be responsible for the operation and surveillance of
all of the City’s water facilities, including, but not limited to pipelines,
treatment facilities, and appurtenances and property up to and including the
City’s meter, shall be under the management and control of the City.
   (d)   No other persons except authorized City employees shall have any right
to enter upon, inspect, operate, adjust, change, alter, move, or relocate any
portion of the foregoing or any of the City’s property. In the event that such
should occur, all charges and penalties shall be applicable and collected. Such
action shall also be in violation of any and all applicable federal, state, and
local statutes, ordinances, regulation, and other requirements.
(§ 4, Ord. 3297, eff. March 18, 2025)
Sec. 6-8.807. Customer responsibilities.
   (a)   Provision of water service includes a right-of-way on the customer’s
property for the City to gain unobstructed access to the City’s water
facilities (e.g., water meter box, fire hydrants, air release valves, etc.) at
all times.
   (b)   The customer is obligated to maintain unrestricted and visible access
to the customer’s property for the safety of City personnel and to protect the
City’s water facilities.
   (c)   The customer shall comply with any other requirement set forth in this
chapter.
(§ 4, Ord. 3297, eff. March 18, 2025)
Article 4: New Service Connection Requirements
Sec. 6-8.808. Connection fees.
   Connection fees applicable to all new, improved or expanded service
connections will be established from time to time by the City and shall include
any fees and/or rates established by IEUA through ordinance.
(§ 4, Ord. 3297, eff. March 18, 2025)
Sec. 6-8.809. New service connection.
   An applicant shall submit an application for every new, improved or expanded
service connection to the Engineering Department. The application shall be
accompanied by payment of all appropriate fees. The fee for providing the meter
shall include perpetual maintenance.
(§ 4, Ord. 3297, eff. March 18, 2025)
Sec. 6-8.810. Application for new service connection.
   (a)   An applicant requesting service connection(s) for a subdivision,
commercial, or industrial development shall submit an application to the
Engineering Department. The application shall include, but not be limited to,
the following information:
      (1)   Name and address of applicant;
      (2)   Legal description, location of service connection along the
frontage of the property to be served;
      (3)   Two (2) copies of tentative tract map, plot plan, or parcel map;
      (4)   Meter size of service connection;
      (5)   Fire flow requirements per Fire Department;
      (6)   All other required City documents, such as business license;
      (7)   Purpose for which service shall be used; and
      (8)   Other information which City may reasonably require.
   (b)   The information supplied by the applicant; the application shall be
considered authoritative and final. If any error in such application shall
cause installation of a service connection that is improper, either in size or
location, the cost of all changes required shall be borne solely by the
applicant. Once the application for water service is completed and signed, all
appropriate fees and charges are paid, a service connection is installed, a
meter is set , and the water is turned on, the charge for water service shall
begin. If water service is not required when the service connection is
installed, the water meter shall not be installed and the angle curb stop or
valve governing the supply will be left shut off and locked. When service is
required, the applicant shall contact the City for water service.
(§ 4, Ord. 3297, eff. March 18, 2025)
Sec. 6-8.811. Conditions of service.
   Applicants shall be required to accept and consent to such conditions of
pressure and service as are provided by the distribution system at the location
of the proposed service connection, and to hold the City harmless for any
damages arising out of low pressure, high pressure, fluctuations in pressure,
or interruption of service.
(§ 4, Ord. 3297, eff. March 18, 2025)
Sec. 6-8.812. No entitlement to service.
   Any water supply assessment or verifications prepared by the City will not
entitle the applicant’s project to water service or to any right, priority, or
allocation in any supply, capacity, or facility, or affect the City’s
obligation to provide service to its customers or potential future customers.
In order to receive service, the applicant must meet all of the applicable
requirements of this chapter.
(§ 4, Ord. 3297, eff. March 18, 2025)
Article 5: Design and Construction
Sec. 6-8.813. Water system design specifications and guidelines.
   (a)   (1)   The water system shall be designed and constructed in accordance
with criteria described in the most current City of Ontario “Water Master Plan”
and other City published design guidelines, specifications, and standards
including but not limited to:
         (i)   Cross-Connection Control Program,
Chapter 8E of
Title 6 of the Municipal Code;
         (ii)   Design Development Guidelines and Specifications;
         (iii)   Standard Drawings;
         (iv)   Water Master Plan;
         (v)   Water Pipeline Construction Specifications; and
         (vi)   Water Pipeline Material Specification and Approved List.
      (2)   Design elements include but are not limited to system layout and
pipeline locations, demand and usage, pipe sizing, valving, pressure regulating
facilities, air/vacuum release valves, fire hydrants, blow-off appurtenances,
service laterals, corrosivity, and tracer wires.
   (b)   In addition to subsection (a), design and construction of the water
system shall meet the applicable requirements and specifications described in
following documents:
      (1)   This chapter;
      (2)   DDW Waterworks Standards Main Separation, California Code of
Regulations Title 22, Section 64572;
      (3)   California Fire Code, as it exists or may be amended, for the
purposes of fire hydrant location and frequency;
      (4)   Greenbook; and
      (5)   Any other requirement or specification the Engineer deems
reasonably necessary to ensure compliance with state and federal laws and the
reliability and safety of the City’s water system.
(§ 4, Ord. 3297, eff. March 18, 2025)
Sec. 6-8.814. Street sub-grade.
   If recently installed mains and services are required to be removed,
relocated or adjusted to grade as a result of changes requested by the
developer or, because of incorrect survey information as to the grade of curbs
and street, location of property lines or other utilities, etc., all expenses
incurred by making said changes shall be borne solely by the developer. For
newly surfaced streets, all trench restoration and resurfacing charges shall be
paid by the developer and subject to City street moratorium requirements.
(§ 4, Ord. 3297, eff. March 18, 2025)
Sec. 6-8.815. Right-of-way and easements.
   Unless otherwise granted in writing by the Engineer:
   (a)   No public utilities shall be installed in any street or other location
not formally dedicated for such use, except by consent of the property owner
and the City. Such consent shall be prepared by the developer, reviewed and
approved by the Engineer, in an approved easement deed format provided by the
City, and recorded in favor of the City.
   (b)   Within a utility easement, water main separations shall adhere to the
California Code of Regulations, Section 64572. Additional minimum separations
shall be met for each utility and adhere to this chapter.
(§ 4, Ord. 3297, eff. March 18, 2025)
Sec. 6-8.816. Potable pipeline location.
   Crossing of non-potable lines shall adhere to DDW Waterworks Standards Main
Separation requirements as contained in California Code of Regulations, Title
22, Section 64572. If minimum clearance cannot be achieved, a separation waiver
request shall be completed and submitted to the Municipal Utilities Company.
The Municipal Utilities Company shall review and if in concurrence, submit the
request to DDW for state review and approval pursuant to California Code of
Regulations, Title 22, Section 64511.100.
(§ 4, Ord. 3297, eff. March 18, 2025)
Sec. 6-8.817. Fire hydrants.
   All fire hydrants shall be installed at a frequency and distance that is
consistent with Appendix C and CC of California Fire Code. Fire hydrants shall
be installed with a minimum separation of five (5)-feet from any driveway,
street light, power pole, sign, fence, wall, or other development that may
obstruct access.
(§ 4, Ord. 3297, eff. March 18, 2025)
Sec. 6-8.818. Water service lines.
   (a)   Service connections shall be installed to the curb or street right-of-
way line as determined by the Engineer. The property to be served shall front
on or be adjacent to a dedicated public right-of-way wherein the City maintains
or can install a standard potable water main.
   (b)   The developer or applicant shall determine the size of service
connections and meters and their location with respect to the boundaries of the
premises to be served prior to issuance of building or plumbing permits by the
City.
   (c)   Notwithstanding subsection (b), the City may determine the size of the
water service lines, the service connections, and the meters.
   (d)   The City shall determine type and size of backflow protection devices
for potable water service, in accordance with
Chapter 8E of
Title 6 of the Municipal Code, and any and all other appurtenances to the
service.
   (e)   The water service line(s) shall be installed to a curb line of the
customer’s property, or if no curb,
to the customer’s property line, abutting upon a public street, highway, alley,
easement, lane, or road (other than a freeway) in which are installed water
mains of the City. Water service line(s) should not be done until the exact
location of the service connection has been approved by the Engineer.
(§ 4, Ord. 3297, eff. March 18, 2025)
Sec. 6-8.819. Service connections.
   Unless otherwise granted in writing by the Engineer:
   (a)   Each residence and/building, excepting condominium and townhouse
projects under separate ownership shall must be provided with a single and
separate service connection and water meter except under special conditions as
determined by the City.
   (b)   Two (2) or more dwellings or buildings under one (1) ownership and on
the same lot or parcel of land shall have separate service connections for each
dwelling or building. A separate landscape irrigation meter is required for a
property under the conditions described in
Chapter 7,
Chapter 8A, or
Chapter 8C of
Title 6 of the Municipal Code.
   (c)   The customer’s pipe which connects to the outlet side of the meter
shall not be installed until the service connection is completed. If the
applicant or developer’s pipe is installed to the outlet side of the meter
before the service connection is installed and its location does not correspond
with the service connection specified on the application form and improvement
plans, then the applicant or developer shall pay the additional cost for
completing the service connection from the water main to the outlet side of the
meter. The service connection and all equipment appurtenant thereto, including
the meter and meter box, shall be the sole property of the City, and no part of
the cost thereof shall be refunded to the applicant or developer.
   (d)   The Engineer reserves the right to limit the number of houses or
buildings, such as apartments, or the area of land under one (1) ownership to
be supplied by one (1) service connection and water meter.
   (e)   The Engineer may limit the number of service connections to any
residential or other project whether under separate or multiple ownership.
   (f)   A service connection and water meter must not be used to supply
adjoining property of a different owner, or to supply property of the same
owner across a street, or alley.
   (g)   No service connection shall be installed on the public or private side
of any service lateral that is intended to service joint or adjacent parcels of
land.
   (h)   When property provided with a service connection and water meter is
subdivided, that connection and meter will be considered as serving the lot or
parcel of land that it directly or first enters. Additional water mains and/or
service lines will be required for all subdivided areas in accordance with this
chapter.
   (i)   Every service connection will be equipped with an angle curb stop, or
valve, on the inlet side of the meter; that angle curb stop, or valve, is
intended exclusively for the use of the City in controlling the water supply
through the water service line. If the angle curb stop, or valve, is for any
reason damaged by the customer’s use to an extent requiring replacement, the
City shall have the right to charge the customer for the cost to replace or
repair such angle curb stop, or valve.
   (j)   The City, at its option, may allow connection to the City’s water
system by persons outside the City limits. Said connection is at the discretion
of the City and may be disconnected upon thirty (30) days’ notice.
(§ 4, Ord. 3297, eff. March 18, 2025)
Sec. 6-8.820. Fire service connection.
   (a)   The valve controlling water flow to the service connection shall be
closed when a fire service connection is installed and remain so until a
written order is received from the owner or lessee of the premises to have the
water turned on. After the water is turned on, the City shall not be held
liable for damages of any kind whatsoever that may occur on or to the premises
serviced as a result of the installation, maintenance, or use of such service
connection, or because of fluctuation of pressure, or interruption of supply.
   (b)   If water is used through a fire service connection for any other
purpose than extinguishing of fires or conducting annual testing of the fire
system, the City Manager shall have the right to require a
meter on the fire service connection at the owner’s expense or shut off the
entire water supply for such premises. Upon the installation of such a meter,
the established water rates then in effect for water services shall apply and
be imposed for any water service provided to the property.
   (c)   The City shall have the right to take a domestic, commercial, or
industrial service connection from the fire service connection at the curb to
supply the same premises as that to which the fire service connection belongs.
The Engineer shall have the right to determine the proportion of the
installation costs properly chargeable to each service connection if such
segregation of costs becomes necessary. The established water rates then in
effect for water services shall apply and be imposed for any water service
provided to the property.
   (d)   The Engineer shall require the installation on all fire service
connections, a backflow prevention assembly device as determined in
Chapter 8E of
Title 6 of the Municipal Code.
(§ 4, Ord. 3297, eff. March 18, 2025)
Sec. 6-8.821. Automated meter reading devices.
   (a)   All new developments shall utilize automated meter reading devices as
the standard meter for all new metered services. The cost of the installation
for these devices shall be paid and borne solely by the applicant or developer
at a cost established from time to time by the City. The City reserves the
right to make an installation on the basis of actual cost.
   (b)   The City shall test each meter prior to installation.
   (c)   The Municipal Utilities Company shall set all meters after acceptance
of the installation by the Engineer, and application for service in accordance
with
Chapter 8B of
Title 6 of the Municipal Code.
(§ 4, Ord. 3297, eff. March 18, 2025)
Sec. 6-8.822. Backflow prevention assemblies.
   (a)   An applicant must provide sufficient information, including plumbing
and building plans, to enable the City to determine the level of backflow
prevention required. The proper backflow protection, as determined by the City,
shall be installed, and inspected before water service is provided.
   (b)   Backflow protection assemblies shall be installed in accordance with
the City’s standard drawings and
Chapter 8E of
Title 6 of the Municipal Code.
(§ 4, Ord. 3297, eff. March 18, 2025)
Sec. 6-8.823. Service relocation.
   (a)   The City reserves the right to relocate or modify the existing service
connection, at any time, upon notification to the consumer.
   (b)   Whenever service connections, meters, fire hydrants, or other
appurtenances are requested to be moved by a customer, the charges for such
service relocation shall be borne and solely paid by the customer at the actual
cost.
(§ 4, Ord. 3297, eff. March 18, 2025)
Sec. 6-8.824. Temporary service connection.
   (a)   An applicant shall submit an application for temporary service to a
property to the Engineer for his or her review and recommendation. Before any
temporary service shall be installed, the applicant shall agree to the
following:
      (1)   Pay the cost of the temporary service connection, appropriate
deposit, and the cost of all water delivered to the property;
      (2)   Not to provide water for or to any other property;
      (3)   Pay appropriate charges for a permanent service connection for the
property when a water main is available and the cost, if any, for removal of
the temporary service connection;
      (4)   All temporary service connections shall be limited to six (6)
months unless an extension is granted by the City Manager;
      (5)   The applicant or contractor shall be held responsible for loss or
damage to the meter from the time it is installed until it is removed, or until
48 hours after notice in writing has been given to the City that the contractor
or other person is finished using the meter. In the event that a meter is
stolen, it will be at the City's sole discretion whether the deposit shall be
forfeited. If a replacement meter is requested, a new deposit and application
may be required for the replacement meter;
      (6)   Flows through a three (3)-inch or larger temporary service fire
hydrant meter shall be limited to a maximum of 330 gallons per minute, unless
otherwise authorized in writing at the time of application. Any deliberate
attempt on the part of the applicant or user to increase the flow is just cause
for the City to discontinue service;
      (7)   The City reserves the right to interrupt service without notice if
such usage is causing pressure in the system to drop below an acceptable range;
      (8)   Each temporary service customer shall make every attempt to
maintain a constant flow through the meter. To achieve this requirement, the
customer may be required to provide and install a storage facility
(construction tank, small interim reservoir, etc.) at the sole expense of the
customer, approved by the City, in conjunction with the meter; and
      (9)   When using fire hydrants for temporary service connections, no more
than one outlet per hydrant shall be used for this purpose and shall be
accompanied by a tested and properly functioning backflow prevention assembly
in accordance with
Chapter 8E of
Title 6 of the Municipal Code.
   (b)   Temporary service connections are primarily installed for the
convenience and use of contractors during construction work.
   (c)   All meters for temporary service connections shall be installed by the
City and secured to the desired fire hydrant with a City locking device and
lock. These meters shall remain at this location until such time the
responsible person requests it to be moved or removed pursuant to § 6-8.223.
(§ 4, Ord. 3297, eff. March 18, 2025)
Article 6: Monitoring and Inspection
Sec. 6-8.825. Inspection.
   (a)   The City Inspector shall inspect all facilities installed by the
contractor to insure compliance with the improvement plans, design
specifications and requirements as described in §
6-8.813.
   (b)   Upon completion of the installation and backfill of newly installed
systems, and prior to filling the pipeline with water for the pressure test,
the contractor shall notify the City that the pipeline system is ready for
video inspection. Said notification shall be made at least three (3) working
days in advance of the actual video inspection date. The video inspection will
be made by a video inspection company approved by the City shall be made in the
presence of the City’s Inspector.
      (1)   The video inspection company shall provide the City with the color
DVD or electronic video file and a written report detailing the condition of
the interior of the mainline and joints. Subsequent to review of the video file
and report by the City, the City will notify the contractor within three (3)
business days that they may then proceed with the filling, testing, and
disinfection of the pipeline; or the City will provide a list of corrective
measures that must occur prior to acceptance.
      (2)   Should remedial activities be necessary, the reconstruction
methodology shall be approved by the City prior to commencement of the work.
Upon completion of the remedial construction, the contractor shall once again
notify the City that the newly installed systems are ready for a video
inspection. The City reserves the right to re-video any portions of the water
system they determine may have been affected by the reconstruction work
activities.
(§ 4, Ord. 3297, eff. March 18, 2025)
Sec. 6-8.826. Pressure and leakage testing.
   (a)   A minimum four (4)-hour hydrostatic pressure test shall be performed
and successfully completed in accordance with AWWA C600 or C605.
   (b)   The contractor shall apply test pressures at an approved outlet or
fitting located within five (5) feet vertically of the lowest point of each
pipe section to be tested and securely plug such fittings. Where air valves or
other suitable outlets are unavailable, the contractor shall provide approved
taps and fittings for air release, and securely plug these.
   (c)   Flushing of mains with water at a velocity of at least two and one-
half (2.5) feet per second over its entire length shall be performed using an
eccentric reducer. Velocity through outlets and fittings shall not exceed
twenty five (25) feet per second during flushing.
   (d)   Leakage shall be computed as the total quantity of water pumped into
the pipeline during the test period, including water added to reach the
specified test pressure for the final time. Leakage shall not exceed the rate
specified for the type of pipe tested. The contractor shall repeat the testing
until the leakage does not exceed the specified leakage rate. The contractor
shall repair all visible leaks regardless of the amount of leakage at their
sole expense. All tests shall be completed in the presence of the City
Inspector who shall record the results.
(§ 4, Ord. 3297, eff. March 18, 2025)
Sec. 6-8.827. Bacteriological sampling and testing.
   (a)   Prior to bacteriological tests, an application for shutdown must be
submitted pursuant to §
6-8.828.
   (b)   Bacteriological tests shall be analyzed by a certified ELAP laboratory
with approved fields of testing for said matrix.
   (c)   Passing bacteriological tests on two (2) consecutive days shall be
achieved prior to connecting the pipeline to the existing water system or
placing the pipeline into service. Satisfactory bacteriological results shall
conform to the following:
      (1)   No total or fecal coliform.
      (2)   A heterotrophic plate count less than 200 colony-forming units
(CFU) per milliliter (ml).
      (3)   Presence of chlorine residual at or below a concentration that does
not interfere with the bacteriological testing and compromise the results.
   (d)   If the initial chlorination fails to produce two (2) consecutive days
of passing bacteriological tests, chlorination shall be repeated until two (2)
consecutive days of passing bacteriological tests are achieved.
      (1)   If the third attempt fails to obtain two (2) consecutive days of
passing bacteriological test, then the City reserves the right, and at the sole
expense of the contractor, to have the contractor clean the newly installed
pipeline using a high-velocity flow that produces a neutral output discharge or
other technology that removes excessive dirt or debris that has entered in the
new installation that conforms to water conversation and NPDES requirements.
   (e)   Laboratory reports shall be furnished upon issuance to the City and
shall include, but not be limited to chain of custody, lab work sheet or
summary letter imprinted with the laboratory’s name, address, and phone number.
The report shall specify the field tests, laboratory analysis and results, and
shall be signed by the laboratory director. The Engineer may require that
laboratory reports be accompanied with any other form or document to ensure
compliance with this section.
(§ 4, Ord. 3297, eff. March 18, 2025)
Sec. 6-8.828. Shutdowns.
   (a)   Shutdown of the City’s in service potable lines shall be requested
through an application. Said application shall be submitted to the City ten
(10) working days before the first bacteriological test begins.
   (b)   Shutdowns are generally performed during Monday through Thursday
between 9:00 a.m. and 4:00 p.m., unless granted in writing by the Engineer.
   (c)   The Inspector shall sign off the application when all bacteriological
testing has passed, and results are accepted by the City.
   (d)   After all bacteriological tests have passed, the contractor or
developer shall have ten working days to perform the shutdown. If there is
failure to perform the shutdown within the ten working day window,
bacteriological testing shall be performed once to insure pipeline sterility
has been maintained.
   (e)   Water will be turned on when pipeline has passed all bacteriological
testing. There are no exceptions.
   (f)   For non-steel pipelines, sixteen (16)- inches or less, the maximum
time allowed is six (6) hours unless granted in writing by the Engineer.
(§ 4, Ord. 3297, eff. March 18, 2025)
Sec. 6-8.829. Title of water facilities.
   Title to all water facilities, whether installed by the City or a developer,
shall be vested in the City upon completion of all work, testing, chlorination,
inspection and acceptance for use.
(§ 4, Ord. 3297, eff. March 18, 2025)
Article 7: Operation and Maintenance
Sec. 6-8.830. Service connection maintained by Municipal Utilities Company.
   (a)   The Municipal Utilities Company shall maintain the service connection
extending from the water main to the meter. The applicant shall install and
maintain all pipes and fixtures extending or lying on the outlet side of the
meter, excluding a City provided shutoff valve, twelve (12)-inch brass nipple
and coupling. The Municipal Utilities Company shall set and maintain a meter on
each service connection and the customer or owner shall be held liable for any
damage to the meter due to his or her negligence. Every service connection
shall be equipped with an angle curb stop, or valve, on the inlet side of the
meter. Such valve or angle curb stop is intended for the exclusive use of the
Municipal Utilities Company to control the water supply through a service
connection. If the angle curb stop, or valve, is damaged due to the customer or
owners use or negligence, the customer or owner shall be liable for replacement
costs.
   (b)   The City assumes no responsibility for the maintenance and operation
of a customer’s water system beyond the service connection and point of
ownership by the City. All plumbing, water piping, fixtures, connections,
devices and related appurtenances beyond the service connection, and beyond the
City’s point of ownership, shall be maintained by the customer in “good
standing condition.”
(§ 4, Ord. 3297, eff. March 18, 2025)
Sec. 6-8.831. City right of ingress to and egress from customer’s property.
   The City shall have the right of ingress to and egress from the customer’s
property during reasonable hours for any purpose reasonably related to the
furnishing of water services and the exercise of any and all rights secured to
it by law or these rules, including inspection of the customer’s piping and
equipment for compliance with the Municipal Code and these rules.
(§ 4, Ord. 3297, eff. March 18, 2025)
Sec. 6-8.832. City access.
   A customer shall provide and maintain reasonable access for City
representatives to all service connections, meters, backflow prevention
devices, or other facilities pertinent to water service installed on his or her
premises.
(§ 4, Ord. 3297, eff. March 18, 2025)
Sec. 6-8.833. Obstruction of or deposit of material in meter boxes or hydrants.
   (a)   No person shall place, dispose, or deposit or permit the placement,
disposal or deposit of oil, toxic, hazardous or contaminated liquid or waste,
trash, dirt, building materials or other substances, objects or obstructions
in, on or around meter boxes, and it shall be the responsibility of each
applicant, owner, or customer to prevent meter boxes, City hydrants or other
City facilities from becoming obstructed or obscured by such applicant, owner,
or customer’s trees, shrubs, plants or in any other manner so as to impede
their use or access to them or make their location difficult to determine.
   (b)   The City shall not be held responsible nor liable for any damage or
cost for the replacement or repair of any ground cover and/or plants, shrubs,
or other obstructions, which may be removed or damaged while City personnel are
using the right-of- way or easements.
   (c)   If such substances, objects or obstructions are not cleaned and
removed or are permitted to obscure or impede such facilities, the City may,
after providing reasonable notice to the applicant, developer, customer, or
owner accomplish the cleaning and removal and charge the applicant, developer,
customer, or owner for the cost of doing so.
   (d)   The applicant, developer, customer, or owner’s failure to comply with
the clearance and right-of-way obligations set forth in this chapter shall be
deemed a violation of the chapter and termination of service.
(§ 4, Ord. 3297, eff. March 18, 2025)
Sec. 6-8.834. Quick-closing valves (or other devices).
   No person shall not install any quick-closing valves or other equipment or
device which shall cause excessive pressure surges in the City water system
without prior written approval by the Engineer.
(§ 4, Ord. 3297, eff. March 18, 2025)
Sec. 6-8.835. Change in size of connection or meter.
   Where a change or size increase of an existing service connection or meter
is requested by a customer, the charges shall be the same as for a new service
and any fees not previously paid shall be required.
(§ 4, Ord. 3297, eff. March 18, 2025)
Sec. 6-8.836. Emergency repairs.
   The City shall not accept any responsibility for the maintenance of pressure
and reserves the right to discontinue service while making emergency repairs,
and the like. Customers depending upon a continuous supply should provide
emergency storage.
(§ 4, Ord. 3297, eff. March 18, 2025)
Article 8: Violations
Sec. 6-8.837. Violations.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to violate any provisions of this
chapter, and persons violating said provisions shall be subject to any of the
following acts:
   (a)   Denial of an application;
   (b)   Termination of service; and
   (c)   Penalties pursuant to
Chapter 2 of
Title 1 of the Municipal Code.
(§ 4, Ord. 3297, eff. March 18, 2025)
CHAPTER 8E: CROSS-CONNECTION CONTROL
Article 1: General Provisions
   
6-8.900   Purpose
   
6-8.901   Applicability
   
6-8.902   Cross-Connection Control Coordinator
   
6-8.903   Other applicable rules and regulations
   
6-8.904   Severability
Article 2: Definitions
   
6-8.905   Definitions
Article 3: Protection Requirements
   
6-8.906   Backflow and unauthorized connections prohibited
   
6-8.907   Backflow installation
   
6-8.908   Entry and inspection
   
6-8.909   Backflow prevention assembly type
   
6-8.910   Where protection is required
   
6-8.911   Type of protection required
Article 4: Inspection, Testing, and Maintenance Requirements
   
6-8.912   Inspection and testing of protective assemblies
   
6-8.913   Maintenance of backflow prevention assemblies
   
6-8.914   Replacement of protective assemblies
Article 5: Notifications
   
6-8.915   Annual backflow testing notifications
   
6-8.916   Notice to install
   
6-8.917   Notice of violation
Article 6: Reporting Requirements
   
6-8.918   Reporting backflow test results
   
6-8.919   Reporting of pollution or contamination
Article 7: Administrative Remedies
   
6-8.920   Water service termination
Article 1: General Provisions
Sec. 6-8.900. Purpose.
   (a)   The purpose of this chapter is to protect the City’s potable water
supply against actual or potential cross-connections from private on-site
systems by isolating on-premises contamination or pollution that may occur due
to undiscovered or unauthorized on-site cross-connections. This chapter is
intended to protect the City’s distribution system through premises containment
and is not intended to provide regulatory measures for protecting users from
the hazards of cross-connections within their own premises. Notwithstanding the
provisions in this chapter, the City accepts no responsibility for cross-
connections or resulting hazards or contamination.
   (b)   This chapter is intended to comply with the State Water Board’s Cross-
Connection Control Policy Handbook and shall be in addition to, and not in lieu
of, the controls and requirements of other regulatory agencies, such as local
government agencies and local and State Health Departments. To the extent
anything in the provisions within this chapter conflict with applicable laws or
regulations, as may be amended from time to time, the provisions of such laws
or regulations, including the Cross-Connection Control Policy Handbook, shall
control.
(§ 5, Ord. 3297, eff. March 18, 2025)
Sec. 6-8.901. Applicability.
   The requirements imposed by this chapter shall apply to all potable water,
irrigation, and fire service connections from the City.
(§ 5, Ord. 3297, eff. March 18, 2025)
Sec. 6-8.902. Cross-Connection Control Coordinator.
   (a)   The City has developed an active Cross-Connection Control Program
(“Program”) and designated a Cross-Connection Control Coordinator
(“Coordinator”) for the Program. The Coordinator shall maintain status as a
cross-connection control specialist and be responsible for the development of,
and the reporting, tracking, and other administrative duties of the Program.
The Coordinator, or his/her designee, and the City Manager, or his/her
designee, are authorized to administer and enforce this chapter and the
Program.
   (b)   Any questions or notifications regarding these provisions or the
program should be directed to the Coordinator or the City Manager, or his/her
designee.
(§ 5, Ord. 3297, eff. March 18, 2025)
Sec. 6-8.903. Other applicable rules and regulations.
   Other guidelines, rules and regulations, ordinances, and specifications that
may be applied by the Coordinator and/or the City Manager when administering
and enforcing the Program include but are not limited to:
   (a)   Water Programs (Title 40, Chapter 1, Subchapter D of the Code of
Federal Regulations).
   (b)   Drinking Water (Division 104, Part 12 of the California Health and
Safety Code).
   (c)   Environmental Health (Title 22, Division 4 of the California Code of
Regulations).
   (d)   State Water Board’s Cross-Connection Control Policy Handbook (adopted
December 19, 2023).
   (e)   Manual of Cross-Connection Control, published by the Foundation for
Cross-Connection Control and Hydraulic Research, University of Southern
California, University Park, Los Angeles, CA, Current Edition.
   (f)   EPA-570/9-89-007 Cross-Connection Control Manual, prepared by the U.S.
Environmental Protection Agency.
   (g)   Uniform Plumbing Code, published by IAPMO, Current Edition.
   (h)   Manual M-14, published by AWWA, Current Edition.
   (i)   Water conservation provisions as established in
Chapter 8A of
Title 6 of this code.
   (j)   Water services and fees provisions as established in
Chapter 8B of
Title 6 of this code.
   (k)   Recycled water use provisions as established in
Chapter 8C of
Title 6 of this code.
   (l)   Design and construction of water facilities provisions as established
in
Chapter 8D of
Title 6 of this code.
(§ 5, Ord. 3297, eff. March 18, 2025)
Sec. 6-8.904. Severability.
   If any section, subsection, sentence, clause or phrase of this chapter
establishing rules and regulations for the use of potable water is for any
reason found to be invalid or unconstitutional, such decision shall not affect
the remaining portions of this chapter.
(§ 5, Ord. 3297, eff. March 18, 2025)
Article 2: Definitions
Sec. 6-8.905. Definitions.
   (a)   “Air-gap separation” or “AG” shall mean a physical vertical separation
of at least two (2) times the effective pipe diameter between the free- flowing
discharge end of a potable water supply pipeline and the flood level of an open
or non- pressurized receiving vessel, and in no case less than one (1) inch.
   (b)   "ANSI” shall mean the American National Standards Institute.
   (c)   “ANSI ISO 17024 accredited certifying organization” shall mean a State
Water Board-recognized organization certifying backflow prevention assembly
testers and meets CCCPH testing and performance standards.
   (d)   “Applicant” shall mean any person, firm, corporation, association, or
agency who desires to obtain water, sewer, and/or recycled water service from
the City.
   (e)   “Approved water supply” shall mean a water source that has been
approved by the State Water Board for domestic use in a public water system and
designated as such in a domestic water supply permit issued pursuant to of the
Section 116525 of the California Health and Safety Code.
   (f)   “Auxiliary water supply” shall mean a source of water, other than an
approved water supply, that is either used or equipped, or can be equipped, to
be used as a water supply and is located on the premises of, or available to, a
customer.
   (g)   "Backflow” shall mean an undesired or unintended reversal of flow of
water and/or other liquids, gases, or other substances into the City’s water
potable system.
   (h)   “Backflow prevention assembly” or “BPA” shall mean a mechanical
assembly designed and constructed to prevent backflow, such that while in-line
it can be maintained and its ability to prevent backflow, as designed, can be
field tested, inspected and evaluated.
   (i)   “Backflow prevention assembly tester” shall mean a person who is
certified by an American National Standards Institute ANSI ISO 17024 accredited
certifying organization and holds a valid certification.
   (j)   “Backsiphonage” shall mean a form of backflow due to a reduction in
system pressure, which causes a sub-atmospheric pressure to exist in the water
system.
   (k)   “City” shall mean the City of Ontario, California.
   (l)   “City Council” shall mean the City Council of the City of Ontario,
California.
   (m)   “City Manager” shall mean the City Manager of the City of Ontario, or
his or her authorized representative.
   (n)   “Contaminants” shall mean any substance that shall impair the quality
of water, in such a way as to create an actual hazard to the public health
through poisoning, the spread of disease, etc.
   (o)   “Cross-connection” shall mean any actual or potential connection or
structural arrangement between a public water system, including a piping system
connection to the City’s distribution system and located on the premises of a
customer or available to the customer, and any source or distribution system
containing liquid, gas, or other substances not from an approved water supply.
   (p)   “Cross-Connection Control Policy Handbook” or “CCCPH” shall mean the
State Water Board’s Cross-Connection Control Policy Handbook, which are
standards and principles for California’s Public Water Systems.
   (q)   “Customer” shall mean a person, firm, or corporation who is the
recipient of water service from the City.
   (r)   “Degree of Hazard” shall mean either a pollutant (non-health hazard)
or contaminant (health hazard); derived from the assessment of the materials,
which may come in contact with the City’s distribution system through a cross-
connection.
   (s)   “Distribution system” has the same meaning as defined in of the
California Code of Regulations, Title 22, Division 4, Chapter 2, Section
63750.50.
   (t)   “Double check detector backflow prevention assembly” or “DCDA” shall
mean a double check valve backflow prevention assembly that includes a bypass
with a water meter and double check backflow prevention assembly, with the
bypass’s water meter accurately registering flow rates up to two gallons per
minute and visually showing a registration for all rates of flow. This type of
assembly may only be used to isolate low hazard cross-connections.
   (u)   “Double check detector backflow prevention assembly – type II” or
“DCDA-II” shall mean a double check valve backflow prevention assembly that
includes a bypass around the second check, with the bypass having a single
check valve and a water meter accurately registering flow rates up to two
gallons per minute and visually showing a registration for all rates of flow.
This type of assembly may only be used to isolate low hazard cross-connections.
   (v)   “Double check valve backflow prevention assembly” or “DC” shall mean
an assembly consisting of two independently acting internally loaded check
valves, with tightly closing shut-off valves located at each end of the
assembly (upstream and downstream of the two check valves) and fitted with test
cocks that enable accurate field testing of the assembly. This type of assembly
may only be used to isolate low hazard cross-connections.
   (w)   “Fire protection system” shall mean automatic fire sprinkler
installations and/or private onsite fire hydrants served with potable water
through a separate service connection.
   (x)   “Hazard assessment” shall mean an evaluation of an applicant, owner,
or customer’s premises designed to evaluate the types and degrees of hazard at
a user’s premises.
   (y)   “High hazard cross-connection” shall mean a cross-connection that
poses a threat to the potability or safety of the City’s water supply.
Materials entering the City’s water supply through a high hazard cross-
connection are contaminants or health hazards.
   (z)   “Low hazard cross-connection” shall mean a cross-connection that has
been found to not pose a threat to the potability or safety of the public water
supply but may adversely affect the aesthetic quality of the potable water
supply. Materials entering the public water supply through a low hazard cross-
connection are pollutants or non-health hazards.
   (aa)   “ISO” shall mean the International Organization for Standardization.
   (bb)   “Premises” shall mean the lot, parcel, or property to which potable
water is being supplied by the City or for which potable water service has been
requested.
   (cc)   “Premises containment” shall mean protection of the City’s
distribution system from backflow from a customer’s premises through the
installation of one or more air-gaps or BPAs, installed as close as practical
to the user’s service connection, in a manner that isolates the customer’s
water supply from the City’s distribution system.
   (dd)   “Potable water” shall mean water furnished to the customer which
meets applicable local, state and federal drinking water standards.
   (ee)   “Pollutants” shall mean any substance that impairs the quality of the
water to a degree, which does not create a hazard to the public health but
which does adversely and unreasonably affect the aesthetic qualities of such
waters for domestic use.
   (ff)   “Readily accessible” shall mean capable of being reached for testing
and/or maintenance, without the need of removing any access panel, door, or
similar obstruction.
   (gg)   “Reduced pressure principle backflow prevention assembly” or “RP”
shall mean an assembly with two independently acting internally loaded check
valves, with a hydraulically operating mechanically independent differential-
pressure relief valve located between the check valves and below the upstream
check valve. The assembly shall have shut-off valves located upstream and
downstream of the two check valves, and test cocks to enable accurate field
testing of the assembly.
   (hh)   “Reduced pressure principle detector backflow prevention assembly” or
“RPDA” shall mean a reduced pressure principle backflow prevention assembly
that includes a bypass with a water meter and reduced pressure principle
backflow prevention assembly, with the bypass’ water meter accurately
registering flow rates up to two gallons per minute and visually showing a
registration for all rates of flow.
   (ii)   “Reduced pressure principle detector backflow prevention assembly –
type II” or “RPDA-II” shall mean a reduced pressure principle backflow
prevention assembly that includes a bypass around the second check, with the
bypass having a single check valve and a water meter accurately registering
flow rates up to two gallons per minute and visually showing a registration for
all rates of flow.
   (jj)   “Service connection” shall mean the terminal end of a service
connection from the City’s distribution system (i.e., where the City may lose
jurisdiction and sanitary control of the water at its point of delivery to the
consumer’s water system) and the point in a water system where the City’s water
supply can be protected from backflow using an air-gap or backflow prevention
assembly. If a water meter is installed at the end of the service connection,
then the service connection shall mean the downstream end of the water meter.
   (kk)   “State Water Board” shall mean the California State Water Resources
Control Board.
(§ 5, Ord. 3297, eff. March 18, 2025)
Article 3: Protection Requirements
Sec. 6-8.906. Backflow and unauthorized connections prohibited.
   (a)   No person is permitted to cause, permit, facilitate or maintain an
actual or potential cross-connection or any type of connection that permits an
actual or potential backflow of water to the City’s distribution system.
   (b)   No physical connection shall hereafter exist, or be installed,
located, maintained or operated, between the City’s distribution system
(including its appurtenant mains, pipes, fixtures, equipment or appliances) and
any other water supply system or any sewer or drainage system, or any steam,
gas or chemical line, pipe or conduit, or any device, boiler tank or container
whereby a contamination or pollution or any dangerous, impure, unsanitary or
nonpotable substance (solid, liquid, or gaseous or any combination thereof) may
now, or hereafter be introduced into any portion of City’s distribution system
by backflow, backsiphonage, or any other method, manner, means, or cause
whatsoever.
   (c)   It is unlawful for any person to make a permanent or temporary
connection onto a backflow prevention assembly for the purpose of bypassing the
backflow prevention assembly.
(§ 5, Ord. 3297, eff. March 18, 2025)
Sec. 6-8.907. Backflow installation.
   (a)   No person is permitted to install, maintain, or allow a metered water
service connection to any premises served by the City unless the City’s
distribution system is protected in conformance with applicable state law or
regulation (including the Cross-Connection Control Policy Handbook) and this
chapter. Any person who is required to install an approved backflow prevention
assembly must install, maintain, inspect and test such assembly in accordance
with applicable state law or regulation (including the Cross-Connection Control
Policy Handbook) and this chapter at the applicant, owner, or customer’s own
expense and within the time specified for installation. Every backflow
prevention assembly required by law, regulation, or this chapter must be of
model and size approved by the City. Failure, refusal or inability on the part
of the applicant, owner, or customer to install said assembly or assemblies
constitutes grounds for discontinuing water service to such metered or non-
metered water service connections until such assembly or assemblies have been
properly installed.
   (b)   Backflow prevention assemblies shall be installed on the premises, in
accordance with the City's standards, before the first branch line leading off
the service and not on the City’s portion of the system. Backflow prevention
assemblies shall be located as close as practical to the applicant, owner, or
customer’s service connection, or at a location approved by the City. Backflow
prevention assemblies shall be readily accessible for testing and maintenance
and no device shall be submerged at any time.
   (c)   All backflow prevention assemblies required by this chapter shall be
installed in accordance with any and all criteria set forth in Cross-
Connection Control Policy Handbook Section 3.3.2.
   (d)   Notwithstanding subsection (a), the City maintains the right to
install, test, and maintain a backflow prevention assembly on premises where
water service is provided. The cost thereof shall be borne by the applicant,
owner, or customer.
(§ 5, Ord. 3297, eff. March 18, 2025)
Sec. 6-8.908. Entry and inspection.
   All applicant, owner, or customer systems and premises shall be open for
inspection at all reasonable times to authorized representatives of the City to
enable the City to ascertain the existence of cross-connections or other
structural or sanitary hazards, including violations of the cross-connection
rules and regulations in this chapter. When such a condition becomes known, the
City shall deny or discontinue service to the premises, in accordance with this
chapter. Water service will be discontinued until the applicant, owner, or
customer has corrected the condition(s) in conformance with state laws and City
requirements relating to plumbing and water supplies, and with regulations
adopted pursuant thereto.
(§ 5, Ord. 3297, eff. March 18, 2025)
Sec. 6-8.909. Backflow prevention assembly type.
   Newly installed and replaced backflow prevention assemblies required in this
chapter shall be of models approved by the City. Approved backflow prevention
assemblies meet one of the following requirements:
   (a)   Air-gaps (AG) shall meet the requirements in Table 1, Minimum Air Gaps
for Generally used Plumbing Fixtures, page 4 of the American Society of
Mechanical Engineers (ASME) A112.1.2-2012 (R2017).
   (b)   Double check valve backflow prevention assemblies (DC) and reduced
pressure principle backflow prevention assemblies (RP) shall be inspected,
tested, and approved under the standards established in the Manual of Cross-
Connection Control, published by the Foundation for Cross-Connection Control
and Hydraulic Research, University of Southern California, University Park, Los
Angeles, CA, Current Edition.
(§ 5, Ord. 3297, eff. March 18, 2025)
Sec. 6-8.910. Where protection is required.
   Backflow protection for the City’s potable water supply shall be provided on
each water service connection downstream of the water meter but before the
structural dwelling to:
   (a)   Premises having an auxiliary water supply such as recycled or non-
potable water systems;
   (b)   Premises on which any substance is handled in such fashion that could
permit entry into the water system. This shall include the handling of process
waters and waters originating from the City’s distribution system that have
been subject to deterioration in sanitary quality;
   (c)   Premises where there is any material dangerous to health which is
handled in such a fashion as to create an actual or potential hazard. Examples
of premises where actual, or potential, health hazards, or conditions will
exist include, but are not limited to, the following: sewage treatment plants,
sewage pumping stations, chemical manufacturing plants, hospitals, mortuaries,
plating works, etc;
   (d)   Premises that have pressurized equipment installed;
   (e)   Premises that have landscape where potable water is used to irrigate;
   (f)   Premises that have fire protection systems installed;
   (g)   Premises that have internal cross-connections, unless such cross-
connections are abated to the satisfaction of the City and approved by the
state or local health agency;
   (h)   Premises having intricate plumbing and piping arrangements or where
not all portions of the premises are readily accessible for inspection
purposes;
   (i)   Premises having a repeated history of cross-connections being
established or re-established;
   (j)   Premises being served water through a temporary above ground water
service connection;
   (k)   Premises having a change in customer (either owner or tenant) on any
commercial or industrial premise(s) where a backflow prevention assembly is not
installed; the new or previous owner or customer shall notify the City
immediately. The City will then reassess the level of protection required.
Also, any alterations or improvements to existing onsite facilities that may
affect the level of protection required must be reported immediately to the
City to be evaluated; and
   (l)   Premises that meet the definition of high-hazard cross-connection
control premise under Appendix D of the Cross-Connection Control Policy
Handbook.
(§ 5, Ord. 3297, eff. March 18, 2025)
Sec. 6-8.911. Type of protection required.
   (a)   The type of protection required on potable water services is related
to the degree of hazard that exists on the premises as specified in this
chapter and Appendix D of the Cross-Connection Control Policy Handbook.
   (b)   The type of protective device authorized for potable water services is
a reduced pressure principle backflow prevention assembly (RP). This includes
premises that utilize a single potable water service to a dwelling and
irrigating landscape.
   (c)   Premises identified as a high hazard cross-connection control premise
shall install a reduced pressure principle backflow prevention assembly (RP) or
air-gap separation (AG), or both. Customers shall comply with any additional
requirements or degrees of protection for particular high hazard cross-
connections set forth in Appendix D of the Cross-Connection Control Policy
Handbook.
   (d)   Except for low hazard fire protection systems that meet the criteria
forth in Cross-Connection Control Policy Handbook Section 3.2.2.(e)(3), fire
protection systems shall be protected with either double check detector
backflow prevention assembly (DCDA or DCDA-type II) or reduced pressure
principle detector backflow prevention assembly (RPDA or RPDA-type II).
   (e)   Dedicated service for the sole purpose of irrigating landscape with
potable water shall be protected with a reduced pressure principle backflow
prevention assembly (RP). Pressure vacuum breakers are not allowed to be
installed on dedicated irrigation lines.
(§ 5, Ord. 3297, eff. March 18, 2025)
Article 4: Inspection, Testing, and Maintenance Requirements
Sec. 6-8.912. Inspection and testing of protective assemblies.
   (a)   It shall be the duty and the sole responsibility of the applicant,
owner, or customer of any premises on which backflow prevention assemblies are
installed to have inspections and testing made at least once a calendar year,
or more often in those instances where successive inspections indicate repeated
failure. All inspections and testing shall be performed by a certified backflow
prevention assembly tester that meets all requirements set forth in the State
Water Board’s Cross-Connection Control Policy Handbook.
   (b)   Backflow prevention assemblies shall also be tested immediately after
they are installed, relocated or repaired and shall not be placed in service
unless they are functioning as designed.
   (c)   Whenever a backflow prevention assembly tester observes a backflow
incident or an unprotected cross-connection at a backflow prevention assembly
or prior to the applicant, owner, or customer’s premises, the backflow
prevention assembly tester shall notify the City within twenty- four (24)
hours. The City shall immediately discontinue water service to the premises and
conduct an investigation. Water service shall not be restored until the City
receives confirmation of a passing test.
   (d)   Premises with air-gap separations shall be visually inspected at least
annually to determine compliance with this chapter by a person certified as
backflow prevention assembly tester or certified cross-connection control
specialist pursuant to the State Water Board’s Cross-Connection Control Policy
Handbook.
   (e)   From time to time, representatives of any health agency having
jurisdiction and/or the City may conduct evaluations of any premises where
water service is provided by the City. The purpose of such evaluations is to
determine if any actual or potential cross-connections exist, if there are any
unapproved uses, and to assess compliance with applicable laws and regulations.
Applicant, owner, or customer shall provide reasonable cooperation in
facilitating such evaluations.
(§ 5, Ord. 3297, eff. March 18, 2025)
Sec. 6-8.913. Maintenance of backflow prevention assemblies.
   (a)   The applicant, owner, or customer shall notify the City any time a
backflow prevention assembly is repaired, replaced, or relocated.
   (b)   A backflow prevention assembly shall be repaired or replaced by, and
at the sole expense of the applicant, owner, or customer whenever it is found
to not function properly as designed. A backflow prevention assembly that fails
a test or inspection pursuant to §
6-8.912 must be repaired or replaced within thirty (30) days of notification of
the failure.
   (c)   Records of all tests and repairs shall be maintained by the applicant,
owner, or customer and submitted to the City in accordance with §
6-8.918. The City may request records regarding any backflow prevention
assemblies on the premises.
   (d)   A backflow prevention assembly may be removed for repair or
replacement, provided that water service is discontinued until repair or
replacement is completed and the assembly is returned to service, or the
service connection is equipped with other backflow protection approved by the
City. A retest shall be performed immediately following the repair or
replacement of the assembly.
   (e)   A backflow prevention assembly may be relocated following confirmation
by the City that the relocation will continue to provide the required
protection and satisfy installation requirements. A retest shall be performed
immediately following the relocation of the assembly before water service is
restored.
(§ 5, Ord. 3297, eff. March 18, 2025)
Sec. 6-8.914. Replacement of protective assemblies.
   Whenever an existing backflow prevention assembly is to be moved from its
present location, or when it requires more than minimum maintenance, or when
the City finds that the improper maintenance of the assembly constitutes a
hazard to health, the assembly shall be replaced by the owner with a backflow
prevention assembly meeting the requirements of this chapter.
(§ 5, Ord. 3297, eff. March 18, 2025)
Article 5: Notifications
Sec. 6-8.915. Annual backflow testing notifications.
   The City will provide annual testing notifications to an owner or customer’s
premise as follows:
   (a)   First notice. The City will notify the owner or customers when routine
backflow prevention assembly testing is needed. The notice will include the
date when the test shall be completed by forty-five (45) days after the date of
the notice.
   (b)   Second notice. A second notice shall be sent to each owner or customer
that does not have the backflow prevention assembly tested as prescribed in the
first notice within the time allowed. The second notice will give the owner or
customer a twenty-one (21) day period to have the backflow prevention assembly
tested or take other corrective action.
   (c)   Notice of non-compliance. If no action is taken within the 21-day
period, then a notice of non-compliance will be sent to the owner or customer
giving the owner or customer a final ten (10) day period to have the assembly
tested or take other corrective action.
(§ 5, Ord. 3297, eff. March 18, 2025)
Sec. 6-8.916. Notice to install.
   The City shall survey its service area and conduct a hazard assessment as
required by Chapter 3, Article 2 of the Cross-Connection Control Policy
Handbook. The City shall issue a notice to install for all premises assessed
and determined to require approved backflow prevention assembly. A backflow
prevention assembly shall be installed in accordance with this chapter within
ninety (90) days from the date of the notice to install.
(§ 5, Ord. 3297, eff. March 18, 2025)
Sec. 6-8.917. Notice of violation.
   It shall be the applicant, owner, or customer’s responsibility to ensure
backflow prevention assemblies are installed appropriately and demonstrate the
assembly is functioning adequately as designed. Failure to install or
demonstrate the proper functioning of backflow prevention assemblies by the due
date prescribed in §§
6-8.915 or
6-8.916, or re-test based on criteria described in §
6-8.913, shall be considered non-compliant with this chapter. A notice of
violation shall be issued stating the cause of non-compliance with this
chapter, when water services will be discontinued, corrective actions the owner
or customer shall take to correct the deficiency or violation, and
administrative fees to restore water service as prescribed in
Chapter 8B of
Title 6 of this code.
(§ 5, Ord. 3297, eff. March 18, 2025)
Article 6: Reporting Requirements
Sec. 6-8.918. Reporting backflow test results.
   The City uses a unified cross-connection software system for the management
and reporting of backflow prevention assemblies. Test results shall be
electronically submitted to the City through an electronic portal by the due
date prescribed in §§
6-8.916 or
6-8.917 or when a device has been subjected to the criteria described in §
6-8.914. Copies of the completed forms shall also be sent to the local Health
Department. The City will maintain records in accordance with Cross-Connection
Control Policy Handbook Section 3.5.1.
(§ 5, Ord. 3297, eff. March 18, 2025)
Sec. 6-8.919. Reporting of pollution or contamination.
   In the event of contamination or pollution of the City’s distribution system
due to a cross- connection on the premises, the local health officer and City
shall be promptly advised by the person responsible for the premise so that
appropriate measures may be taken to mitigate the contamination or pollution.
(§ 5, Ord. 3297, eff. March 18, 2025)
Article 7: Administrative Remedies
Sec. 6-8.920. Water service termination.
   (a)   If the City determines that water uses or conditions encountered
represent a clear and immediate hazard to the City’s potable water supply that
cannot be immediately abated, the City shall institute the procedure for
discontinuing water service. Conditions or water uses that create a basis for
water service termination shall include, but are not limited to, the following:
      (1)   Refusal to install a required backflow prevention assembly.
      (2)   Refusal to test a backflow prevention assembly.
      (3)   Refusal to repair a faulty backflow prevention assembly.
      (4)   Refusal to replace a faulty backflow prevention assembly.
      (5)   Direct or indirect connection between the City’s distribution
system and a sewer system.
      (6)   Unprotected direct or indirect connection between the City’s
distribution system and a system or equipment containing contaminants.
      (7)   Unprotected direct or indirect connection between the City’s
distribution system and an auxiliary water system.
      (8)   A situation which presents an immediate health hazard to the City’s
distribution system, as determined by the State Water Board, health agency or
the City.
   (b)   For conditions described in §§ 6-8.920(a)(1)-(4), the City will
terminate service to an applicant, owner, or customer’s premise(s) if no action
is taken within the due date provided in the Notice of Non-Compliance as
described in §§
6-8.915(c). A final Notice of Violation shall be provided to the applicant,
owner, or customer, prescribing the necessary actions to comply with this
chapter, state, and federal regulatory requirements, and administrative
penalties to restore water service.
   (c)   Water service will be terminated and remain turned off until the
assembly is tested and passes the test or other corrective action is taken and
approved by the City in accordance with this chapter. Administrative fees to
restore water service shall be paid in advance of the water being turned on.
   (d)   For conditions described in §§ 6-8.920(a)(5)-(8), the City will make
reasonable effort to advise the applicant, owner, or customer of intent to
terminate water service. Then, the City will terminate the water service and
lock the service valve in the closed position. Water service will not be
reinstated until correction of all violations has been approved by the City.
Failure to correct the violations may result in permanent termination of water
service in accordance with this chapter.
(§ 5, Ord. 3297, eff. March 18, 2025)
CHAPTER 9: WEEDS AND REFUSE ABATEMENT *
*Chapter 9 entitled “Weeds, Dead Trees, and Refuse Accumulations,” consisting
of §§ 6-9.01 through 6-9.13, codified from Ord. 1645, eff. April 6, 1967, as
amended by Ord. 1725, eff. April 16, 1970, repealed by § 2, Ord. 2044, eff.
July 5, 1979.
   
6-9.01   Definitions
   
6-9.02   Declaration of public nuisance
   
6-9.03   Preventive abatement; Chemical control; Subsequent years
   
6-9.04   Notices; Manner of posting
   
6-9.05   Notices; Heading
   
6-9.06   Form of notice
   
6-9.07   Notice by mail
   
6-9.08   Appeals
   
6-9.09   Abatement
   
6-9.10   Entry upon private property to abate nuisance
   
6-9.11   Removal of weeds, refuse and dirt by property owner
   
6-9.12   Costs of abatement, fines, and penalties as liens against parcel,
collected by special assessment against parcel
   
6-9.13   Priority of lien of assessment
   
6-9.14   Refund of tax erroneously levied; Filing claims; When claim must be
filed; Verification
   
6-9.15   Claim for property damage; Payment from general fund; Rules governing
presentation of claims
Sec. 6-9.01. Definitions.
   (a)   "Director" means the City Manager, or his or her designee.
   (b)   "Weeds" means weeds that, when mature, bear wingy or downy seeds, that
will attain such a large growth as to become a fire menace when dry, or that
are otherwise noxious or dangerous, and includes any of the following:
      (1)   Weeds that bear seeds of a downy or wingy nature.
      (2)   Sagebrush, chaparral, and any other brush or weeds that attain such
large growth as to become, when dry, a fire menace to adjacent property.
      (3)   Weeds that are otherwise noxious or dangerous.
      (4)   Poison oak and poison ivy when the conditions of growth are such as
to constitute a menace to the public health.
      (5)   Dry grass, stubble, brush, litter, or other flammable material that
endangers the public safety by creating a fire hazard.
   (c)   "Street" includes public street, alley, lane, court or other place.
   (d)   "In front of which the nuisance exists" includes to the rear of, and
abutting, the property upon which the nuisance exists.
   (e)   "Rubbish" or "refuse" means waste material such as wastepaper, wood,
hay, straw, litter, or combustible or flammable waste.
(§ 2, Ord. 2956, eff. October 4, 2012)
Sec. 6-9.02. Declaration of public nuisance.
   (a)   It shall be unlawful, and it is hereby declared to constitute a public
nuisance, for any property to be maintained in such a manner as to allow weeds,
rubbish, refuse or dirt, or any combination thereof to exist thereon.
   (b)   If the Director, after investigation, determines that weeds, rubbish,
refuse, or dirt, or any combination thereof, exist on any premises or property
public or private anywhere within the City, the Director shall cause to be
served upon the owner and any lessee, occupant or person having charge of the
affected premises, a Notice of Violation. The Notice of Violation shall list
the conditions constituting a public nuisance and shall order the recipient(s)
to abate the nuisance or nuisances listed in the Notice of Violation in
accordance with Ontario Fire Department regulations existing at the time the
Notice of Violation is issued. Any abatement of weeds within the City shall be
done pursuant to a permit issued by the City. The Fire Marshal, or his or her
designee, shall have the authority to promulgate rules and regulations for the
issuance of abatement permits, in order to protect the public health, safety
and welfare, so long as such rules and regulations are not inconsistent with
this article. The Notice of Violation shall provide a reasonable time in which
to abate the nuisance or nuisances cited in the Notice of Violation. The Notice
of Violation shall provide that the owner and any lessee, occupant or person
having charge of the affected premises, shall have ten (10) days to request an
appeal of the Notice of Violation in writing to the Director. The Notice of
Violation shall also state that failure on the part of the recipient(s) to
abate the nuisance or nuisances cited may result in the Director causing the
abatement of the nuisances or nuisance and that the cost of abatement including
any and administrative and investigative costs will be assessed against the
property, and shall also constitute a personal obligation of the recipient. The
Notice shall also provide that a property subject to a special assessment may
be sold after three (3) or more years by the tax collector for unpaid
delinquent assessments.
   (c)   Additionally, the Director may also find and declare that weeds and/or
rubbish, refuse or dirt, or any combination thereof, on specified parcels of
property are seasonal and recurrent nuisances. Such seasonal and recurrent
nuisances shall be abated in accordance with the provisions of this article,
provided, that upon the second and any subsequent occurrence of such nuisance
on the same parcel or parcels within the same calendar year, no further notices
need be issued or hearings need be held, and it shall be sufficient to mail a
post card notice to the owner(s) of the property as they and their addresses
appear upon the current assessment roll. Said notice shall refer to and
describe the property, shall state that noxious or dangerous weeds of a
seasonal and recurrent nature are growing on or in front of the property, that
the same constitute a public nuisance that must be abated by the removal of
said noxious or dangerous weeds, that otherwise they will be removed and the
nuisance will be abated by the city, in which case the cost of such removal
shall be assessed upon the parcel and lands from which or in front of which
such weeds are removed, and that upon confirmation such cost will constitute a
lien upon and special assessment against such parcel or lands until paid and
shall constitute a personal obligation of the recipient of the post card
notice.
(§ 2, Ord. 2956, eff. October 4, 2012)
Sec. 6-9.03. Preventive abatement; Chemical control; Subsequent years.
   (a)   Where the Director finds and declares that weeds on specified parcels
of property are seasonal and recurrent nuisances as provided in §
6-9.02(c), the Director may provide for the preventive abatement of such
seasonal and recurrent nuisance as provided in this section.
   (b)   The notice required by §
6-9.02(c) shall, in addition to containing all other required matters, state
that the efficient and economical control of such seasonal and recurrent
nuisance requires preventive chemical control of such weeds, weed seeds and
weed seedlings and that the City may require preventive chemical control of
such nuisance.
   (c)   In the event the City is once required to abate such nuisance the City
may, in addition, before and during the next following germinating season of
such weeds, provide for the preventive abatement of such nuisance by using
chemical control of such weeds.
(§ 2, Ord. 2956, eff. October 4, 2012)
Sec. 6-9.04. Notices; Manner of posting.
   After issuance of a Notice of Violation that has not been appealed, or
appealed and the Notice of Violation upheld, the Director shall cause a notice
of intent to abate weeds and remove refuse, rubbish and dirt to be
conspicuously posted on or in front of the property on or in front of which the
nuisance exists. The notice shall be posted as follows:
   (a)   One (1) notice to each separately owned parcel of property of not over
fifty (50) feet frontage.
   (b)   Not more than two (2) notices to any such parcel of one hundred (100)
feet frontage or less.
   (c)    Notices at not more than one hundred (100) feet apart if the frontage
of such a parcel is greater than one hundred (100) feet.
(§ 2, Ord. 2956, eff. October 4, 2012)
 Sec. 6-9.05. Notices; Heading.
   The heading of the notices shall be "Notice to abate weeds and remove
rubbish, refuse, or dirt" in letters not less than one (1) inch in height.
(§ 2, Ord. 2956, eff. October 4, 2012)
Sec. 6-9.06. Form of notice.
   The notice shall be substantially in the following form: "NOTICE TO ABATE
WEEDS AND REMOVE RUBBISH, REFUSE, OR DIRT."
(§ 2, Ord. 2956, eff. October 4, 2012)
Sec. 6-9.07. Notice by mail.
   As an alternative to posting a notice of intent to abate weeds and remove
refuse, rubbish, and dirt, the Director may send the written notice of the
proposed abatement by certified mail, return receipt requested to the property
owner, as identified on the County Assessor's or County Recorder's records, as
of the date of the Notice of Violation.
(§ 2, Ord. 2956, eff. October 4, 2012)
Sec. 6-9.08. Appeals.
   Upon receipt of a written request for an appeal, the Director shall hear, or
designate a hearing officer to hear, all appeals of or objections to a Notice
of Violation or the City's abatement requirements for a specific parcel or
property as detailed in a Notice of Violation, or any combination thereof. The
decision of the Director or the designated hearing officer pertaining to the
appeal or the objections to the Notice of Violation or the City's abatement
requirement is final. Failure to file a written appeal within the required
time, including the payment of any applicable appeal fee, shall constitute a
failure to exhaust the recipient's administrative remedies. If the Notice of
Violation is upheld and objections to abatement requirements are overruled, the
Director acquires jurisdiction to proceed with the abatement of weeds, refuse,
rubbish, and dirt. If the abatement requirements are modified or the appellant
(s) agree to perform the abatement by a date certain as a result of the appeals
hearing, the Director acquires jurisdiction to perform the abatement work as
modified by the appeals hearing and to proceed with the abatement work should
the appellant(s) fail to fully perform the work by the agreed upon date.
(§ 2, Ord. 2956, eff. October 4, 2012)
Sec. 6-9.09. Abatement.
   If appeals or objections have not been properly made to a Notice of
Violation, or after the Director or designated hearing officer has disposed of
such appeals or objections, the Director shall have the right to cause the
abatement of the nuisance by having the weeds, rubbish, refuse, and dirt
removed.
(§ 2, Ord. 2956, eff. October 4, 2012)
Sec. 6-9.10. Entry upon private property to abate nuisance.
   The Director, or persons contracted by the City, may enter upon private
property to abate the nuisance.
(§ 2, Ord. 2956, eff. October 4, 2012)
Sec. 6-9.11. Removal of weeds, refuse and dirt by property owner.
   Before the Director causes any abatement of weeds, rubbish, refuse or dirt,
any property owner may remove the weeds, rubbish, refuse, or dirt at his own
expense. Nevertheless, in any case in which an order to abate is issued, the
City Council, by motion or resolution, may further order that a special
assessment and lien be imposed pursuant to §
6-9.12. In that case the assessment and lien shall be limited to the costs
incurred by the City in enforcing abatement upon the parcel(s), including
investigation, boundary determination, measurement, clerical, legal, and other
related costs.
(§ 2, Ord. 2956, eff. October 4, 2012)
Sec. 6-9.12. Costs of abatement, fines, and penalties as liens against parcel,
collected by special assessment against parcel.
   (a)   The cost of abatement in front of or upon each parcel of land and the
costs incurred by the City in enforcing abatement upon the parcels, including
investigation, boundary determination, measurement, clerical, legal, and other
related costs, as well as any fines or other financial penalties issued against
the property, shall constitute a lien against that parcel and may be collected
as a special assessment as specified in §
1-4.05 of this Municipal Code, and shall constitute a personal charge of the
recipient of the notices required by this chapter.
   (b)   The amount of the assessment shall be collected at the same time and
in the same manner of ordinary municipal taxes. If delinquent, the amount is
subject to the same penalties and procedure of foreclosure and sale provided
for ordinary municipal taxes; provided however, that the sale of the property
for unpaid taxes may be conducted following three (3) years, rather than five
(5) years, as provided by state law.
   (c)   The Director may determine that, in lieu of collecting the entire
assessment at the time and in the manner of ordinary municipal taxes, such
assessments of an amount determined by the Director may be made in annual
installments and collected one (1) installment at a time at the times and in
the manner of ordinary municipal taxes in successive years. If any installment
is delinquent, the amount thereof is subject to the same penalties and
procedure for foreclosure and sale provided for ordinary municipal taxes. The
payment of assessments so deferred shall bear interest on the unpaid balance at
a rate of six percent (6%) per annum.
(§ 2, Ord. 2956, eff. October 4, 2012)
Sec. 6-9.13. Priority of lien of assessment.
   The lien of said assessment shall have the same priority as municipal taxes.
(§ 2, Ord. 2956, eff. October 4, 2012)
Sec. 6-9.14. Refund of tax erroneously levied; Filing claim; When claim must be
filed; Verification.
   The Director may order refunded all or part of an abatement charge paid
pursuant to this chapter if the Director finds that all or part of the charge
has been erroneously levied. An abatement charge, or part thereof, shall not be
refunded unless and until a claim is filed with the City Clerk on or before
November 1 after the tax became due and payable. The claim shall be verified by
the person who paid the abatement charge, or by the person's guardian,
conservator, executor, or administrator.
(§ 2, Ord. 2956, eff. October 4, 2012)
Sec. 6-9.15. Claim for property damage; Payment from general fund; Rules
governing presentation of claims.
   If the Director finds that property damage was caused by the negligence of a
city officer, employee or agent, in connection with the abatement of a nuisance
pursuant to this chapter, a claim for such damages may be paid from the City
general fund. Claims therefor are governed by Part 3 (commencing with § 900)
and Part 4 (commencing with § 940) of Division 3.6 of Title 1 of the California
Government Code and City procedures implementing such claims.
(§ 2, Ord. 2956, eff. October 4, 2012)
CHAPTER 10: MASSAGE* (REPEALED)
*Chapter 10 of Title 6, incorporating §§ 6-10.01 through 6-10.14, was repealed
in its entirety by § 3, Ord. 2911, eff. October 1, 2009.
CHAPTER 11: CERTIFICATION OF WORKER COMPETENCY AND FOOD INDUSTRY SANITARY
PROCEDURES
   
6-11.01   Adoption of County Ordinance No. 1964 providing for the certification
of worker competency and food industry sanitary procedures
   
6-11.02   Definitions
Sec. 6-11.01. Adoption of County Ordinance No. 1964 providing for the
certification of worker competency and food industry sanitary procedures.
   For the purpose of providing regulations for the training, testing, and
certification of worker competency in food industry sanitation procedures,
providing for the issuance of certificates and the collection of fees, and
providing for penalties for the violation of such regulations in the City, that
certain Ordinance No. 1964, an ordinance of the County entitled “An Ordinance
of the County of San Bernardino, State of California, Adding Chapter 6 to
Division 4, Title 3 and Amending Section 16.0213B of the San Bernardino County
Code, Providing for the Certification of Worker Competency and Food Industry
Sanitary Procedures,” three (3) copies of which are on file in the office of
the City Clerk for public record and inspection, is hereby adopted by reference
and made a part of this chapter as though set forth in this chapter in full,
subject, however, to the amendments, additions, and deletions set forth in this
chapter.
(§ 1, Ord. 1869, eff. October 2, 1975)
Sec. 6-11.02. Definitions.
   Wherever the term “County” or “County of San Bernardino” is used in said
Ordinance No. 1964, the term “City” or “City of Ontario” shall be substituted
therefor; provided, however, all certificates shall be issued by, and all
administrative enforcement proceedings shall be conducted by the Department of
Environmental Health Services of the County. All fees and costs shall be paid
to the Department of Environmental Health Services of the County.
(§ 1, Ord. 1869, eff. October 2, 1975)
CHAPTER 12: CONTROL OF BLOWING SAND AND PREVENTION OF SOIL EROSION BY WIND
   
6-12.01   Statement of hazardous condition
   
6-12.02   Enforcement
   
6-12.03   Permit: Requirement: Exceptions: Fee
   
6-12.04   Prevention of dust storms
   
6-12.05   Permit: Application: Appeal
   
6-12.06   Stop work orders
   
6-12.07   Violation, penalty
Sec. 6-12.01. Statement of hazardous condition.
   The City Council of the City of Ontario does hereby find and declare that
there exist within the City serious and hazardous wind erosion problems
creating conditions that affect the health, safety, welfare and property of the
residents of the City. These conditions exist because of the improper and
untimely disturbance of the surface or subsurface of the land, the soil of
which is coarse-textured and of a sandy nature, and because of the character
and presence of strong prevailing winds, seasonal and otherwise, which
progressively erode the land and blow it in substantial quantity onto public
roads and other public and private properties.
(§ 2, Ord. 2138, eff. August 20, 1981, as amended by § 1, Ord. 2548, eff. July
1, 1993)
Sec. 6-12.02. Enforcement.
   The Building Official will be responsible for the enforcement of this
chapter.
(§ 2, Ord. 2138, eff. August 20, 1981, as amended by § 1, Ord. 2548, eff. July
1, 1993)
Sec. 6-12.03. Permit: Requirement: Exceptions: Fee.
   (a)   Except as provided in subsection (c), it shall be unlawful for any
person or any agent thereof who owns or is in possession or control of land to
disturb the surface or subsurface of land (by excavating, leveling,
cultivating, discing, plowing, blading, removing residues, natural or planted,
tree, vine or root crops, or by disturbing or spreading a substantial quantity
of similar soil on said land, or by any other action likely to cause or
contribute to wind erosion of said land, or to aggravate said erosion thereon
at any time) without first having obtained a valid permit therefor and having
complied with the terms of said permit as provided for in this chapter.
   (b)   It shall be unlawful for any person or any agent thereof who obtains a
valid permit to fail to comply with the terms of said permit.
   (c)   A permit will not be required to disturb the surface or subsurface of
the land under the following circumstances; however, prevention of dust storms
pursuant to §
6-12.04 will still be required:
      (1)   When such activities are required by another ordinance, statute,
rule or regulation;
      (2)   When necessary to grade, trench or otherwise install, repair or
replace utility services within the boundaries of utility or public rights-of-
way; or
      (3)   When the disturbance or the proposed activity is confined to an
area of one (1) acre or less.
   (d)   The term of the permit shall be one (1) calendar year from the date of
issue.
   (e)   The annual permit fee shall be as follows:
      (1)   For agriculture, Ten Dollars ($10.00) plus Fifty Cents ($0.50) per
acre; and
      (2)   For other than agriculture, Two Hundred Fifty Dollars ($250.00)
plus Five Dollars ($5.00) per acre for each acre over ten (10).
(§ 2, Ord. 2138, eff. August 20, 1981, as amended by § 1, Ord. 2548, eff. July
1, 1993)
Sec. 6-12.04. Prevention of dust storms.
   To conserve the natural resources within the City, and to minimize the
injurious effects of dust storms, the owner and all persons in possession of
real property within the City shall prevent dusts blowing therefrom as nearly
as that can be done by the taking of reasonable measures and means.
(§ 2, Ord. 2138, eff. August 20, 1981, as amended by § 1, Ord. 2548, eff. July
1, 1993)
Sec. 6-12.05. Permit: Application: Appeal.
   (a)   Application for the permit required by this chapter shall be made in
writing to the Building Official on forms provided by the City for this
purpose, and shall set forth such information required to enable the Building
Official or his or her deputy to fix and prescribe appropriate conditions which
will prevent or minimize wind erosion of the permittee's soil.
   (b)   The permit shall be subject to such conditions as the Building
Official may require which will assure that surface protection at or prior to
the time of the disturbance of the surface or subsurface of the land is
provided for, so as to prevent the soil on said land from being eroded by wind
and blown onto public roads or other public or private property. Such
protective measures as required by the Building Official shall be provided by
means of agricultural measures, or any other effective method or combination of
methods of holding the soil in place as determined by the City Council.
   (c)   Any applicant may appeal to the City Council the decision of the
Building Official in disapproving a permit as required herein, or the
conditions of approval imposed by said Building Official. The appeal shall be
taken in accordance with
Chapter 4 of Title 1 of this Code.
(§ 2, Ord. 2138, eff. August 20, 1981, as amended by § 1, Ord. 2548, eff. July
1, 1993)
Sec. 6-12.06. Stop work orders.
   The Building Official may issue a temporary stop work order, and the subject
soil disturbing operation shall be stopped subject thereto, whether a permit
has been issued or not, when:
   (a)   A permit has been issued, but not all of the permit requirements have
been complied with. The stop work order may require that all work cease until
all the permit requirements have been met.
   (b)   Operations are in progress, with a permit or not, and weather
conditions are such that substantial dust is being carried into the air. The
stop work order may require that all work cease until the current dust air
pollution is abated.
   (c)   Operations are in progress, regardless of weather conditions, and a
soil disturbance permit has not been issued.
   The provisions of this section shall not be subject to an appeal.
(§ 2, Ord. 2138, eff. August 20, 1981, as amended by § 1, Ord. 2548, eff. July
1, 1993)
Sec. 6-12.07. Violation, penalty.
   No person shall violate any provision or fail to comply with any of the
requirements of this chapter, the provisions of the San Bernardino County Code,
or any secondary code referred to therein. Any person violating any of the
provisions of filing to comply with any of the mandatory requirements of this
chapter, the provisions of the San Bernardino County Code, or any secondary
code referred to therein, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, and upon
conviction, shall be punishable by a fine of not more than Five Hundred Dollars
($500.00), or by imprisonment for a period not exceeding six (6) months, or by
both such fine and imprisonment. Each person shall be guilty of a separate
offense for each and every day during any portion of which the violation of any
provision is committed, continued or permitted by such person, and shall be
punishable accordingly.
(§ 2, Ord. 2138, eff. August 20, 1981)
CHAPTER 13: SMOKING *
* Editor's note: Local regulations on smoking in enclosed places of employment
have been suspended by Cal. Labor Code § 6404.5; however, pursuant to Cal.
Labor Code § 6404.5(i), if the statute is repealed or amended so that the
smoking prohibition is no longer applicable to all enclosed places of
employment in the State, then this chapter shall be fully enforceable.
   
6-13.01   Findings and declaration
   
6-13.02   Definitions
   
6-13.03   Publicly owned buildings
   
6-13.04   Elevators
   
6-13.05   Day-care centers
   
6-13.06   Theaters, auditoriums, sports arenas, and the like
   
6-13.07   Eating establishments
   
6-13.08   Public restrooms
   
6-13.09   Rooms or areas designated by owner or manager
   
6-13.10   Office workplace
   
6-13.11   Posting of no smoking signs
   
6-13.12   Structural modifications not required
   
6-13.13   Exemptions
   
6-13.14   Penalties
Sec. 6-13.01. Findings and declaration.
   (a)   The Legislature of the State of California, in enacting the California
Indoor Clean Air Act of 1976 (Cal. Health & Safety Code §§ 118875 et seq.)
found and declared that tobacco smoke is a hazard to the health of the general
public.
   (b)   Cal. Health & Safety Code § 118910 provides: “The Legislature declares
its intent not to preempt the field of regulation of the smoking of tobacco. A
local governing body may ban completely the smoking of tobacco, or may regulate
such smoking in any manner not inconsistent with this chapter or any other
provision of state law.”
   (c)   The City Council hereby declares its intent to prohibit or regulate,
as the case may be, the smoking of tobacco and other substances in certain
public and privately owned buildings, or portions of buildings, as set forth in
the succeeding sections of this chapter. In the event the provisions of this
chapter and state law both apply to regulate smoking in a building or a portion
of a building, then the more restrictive provisions shall apply.
(§ 1, Ord. 2389, eff. June 18, 1987)
Sec. 6-13.02. Definitions.
   (a)   “Smoking” means the combustion of tobacco or any other substance in a
cigar, cigarette, pipe or any similar smoking device. “Smoking” shall include
the act or carrying a lighted cigar, cigarette, pipe or other similar smoking
device.
   (b)   “Building” is any structure used or intended for supporting or
sheltering any use or occupancy.
   (c)   “Publicly owned buildings” include privately owned buildings, or
portions thereof, which are used or occupied by a governmental entity.
“Publicly owned building” does not include any building, or portion thereof,
owned by a governmental entity but used or occupied as a private residence or
privately owned business.
   (d)   “Enclosed” means a space within a building which is separated from
other portions of the building by a roof or ceiling and walls where all indoor
openings thereto are capable of being closed off from other portions of the
building.
   (e)   “Bar” means an area which is devoted to the serving of alcoholic
beverages for on-premises consumption and in which the service of food is only
incidental to the consumption of such beverages.
   (f)   “Office workplace” means any building or portion thereof intended for
occupancy by business entities which will provide primarily clerical,
professional or business services of the business entity, or which will provide
primarily clerical, professional or business services to other business
entities or to the public, at that location.
(§ 1, Ord. 2389, eff. June 18, 1987)
Sec. 6-13.03. Publicly owned buildings.
   Smoking is regulated in publicly owned buildings as follows:
   (a)   Smoking is prohibited in all portions of publicly owned buildings
which are normally used or visited by members of the public, such as assembly
rooms, conference rooms, counter areas, hallways, corridors and work areas
immediately adjacent to the foregoing.
   (b)   In other portions of publicly owned buildings which meet the
definition of “office workplace,” smoking shall be regulated in the manner
prescribed by §
6-13.10 of this Code.
   (c)   Subsection (a) of this section shall not apply to the terminal
buildings at the Ontario International Airport.
   (d)   The provisions of this section do not apply to publicly owned
buildings, or portions thereof, which are used or occupied by the United
States, the State of California, or any agency or instrumentality thereof.
(§ 1, Ord. 2389, eff. June 18, 1987)
Sec. 6-13.04. Elevators.
   Smoking is prohibited in elevators except those located in a single-family
residence.
(§ 1, Ord. 2389, eff. June 18, 1987)
Sec. 6-13.05. Day-care centers.
   During hours when children are present, smoking is prohibited in all indoor
rooms of day-care centers which are or which may be used or occupied by
children.
(§ 1, Ord. 2389, eff. June 18, 1987)
Sec. 6-13.06. Theaters, auditoriums, sports arenas, and the like.
   Other than in a portion of that area commonly known as the lobby which the
owner or manager has designated as a smoking area, smoking is prohibited within
that portion of any building open to the general public for the primary purpose
of exhibiting any motion picture, stage drama, music recital, sporting event or
any other performance. Such prohibition shall not apply except during those
times when that portion of the building is actually open to the public.
(§ 1, Ord. 2389, eff. June 18, 1987)
Sec. 6-13.07. Eating establishments.
   (a)   Smoking is prohibited in every restaurant, coffee shop, cafeteria or
other eating establishment whose seating capacity is fifty (50) or more
persons, excluding from that calculation of capacity any portion of such
facility which is located outdoors and any portion of such facility which is
utilized for bar purposes; provided, however, this prohibition shall not apply
to any such establishment maintaining a contiguous no smoking area of not less
than one- quarter of both the seating capacity and the floor space in which
customers are being served, excluding from said calculations any portion of
such facility which is utilized for bar purposes; and further provided,
however, that this prohibition shall not apply to enclosed banquet rooms in use
for private functions.
   (b)   In eating establishments having a seating capacity of forty-nine (49)
or less persons, reasonable efforts shall be made to provide seating for
nonsmoking patrons away from patrons who smoke.
   (c)   The no smoking provisions of this section shall not apply to bars or
outdoor areas.
   (d)   The provisions of this section shall not apply to eating
establishments located in the terminal buildings at the Ontario International
Airport.
(§ 1, Ord. 2389, eff. June 18, 1987)
Sec. 6-13.08. Public restrooms.
   Smoking is prohibited in all restrooms which are open to use by the general
public.
(§ 1, Ord. 2389, eff. June 18, 1987)
Sec. 6-13.09. Rooms or areas designated by owner or manager.
   Notwithstanding any other provision of this chapter, smoking is prohibited
in any enclosed room or any other portion of a building occupied by a business
establishment which is designated by the owner or manager of such business
establishment as a no smoking area, and which is posted as a no smoking area
with signs meeting the requirements of §
6-13.11.
(§ 1, Ord. 2389, eff. June 18, 1987)
Sec. 6-13.10. Office workplace.
   (a)   Each employer who operates an office workplace shall within three (3)
months of the effective date of this chapter adopt, implement and maintain a
written smoking policy which shall contain, at a minimum, the following
provisions and requirements:
      (1)   Any nonsmoking employee may object to his or her employer about
smoke in his or her workplace. Using already available means of ventilation or
separation of partitions of office space, the employer shall attempt to reach a
reasonable accommodation, insofar as possible, between the preferences of
nonsmoking and smoking employees. However, an employer is not required by this
chapter to make any expenditures or structural changes to accommodate the
preferences of nonsmoking or smoking employees.
      (2)   If an accommodation which is satisfactory to all affected
nonsmoking employees cannot be reached in any given office workplace, the
preferences of the nonsmoking employees shall prevail and the employer shall
prohibit smoking in that office workplace. Where the employer prohibits smoking
in an office workplace, the area in which smoking is prohibited shall be posted
as a no smoking area with signs meeting the requirements of §
6-13.11.
   (b)   The smoking policies shall be announced within three (3) weeks of
adoption to all employees working in the office workplace, and shall be posted
conspicuously in the office workplace.
   (c)   This section shall not apply to:
      (1)   A single-family residence which is incidentally used as an office
workplace;
      (2)   Any property used or occupied by the federal or state government or
any agency or instrumentality thereof;
      (3)   An enclosed room in an office workplace occupied exclusively by
smokers, even though such room may be visited by nonsmokers.
(§ 1, Ord. 2389, eff. June 18, 1987)
Sec. 6-13.11. Posting of no smoking signs.
   Wherever this chapter prohibits smoking, conspicuous signs containing the
words “NO SMOKING” in all capital letters not less than one inch in height on a
contrasting background shall be posted. It shall be the duty of the owner,
operator, manager or other persons having control of any room, building or
other place where smoking is prohibited to clearly post such signs or cause the
same to be clearly posted within ninety (90) days of the effective date of the
ordinance codified in this chapter.
(§ 1, Ord. 2389, eff. June 18, 1987)
Sec. 6-13.12. Structural modifications not required.
   (a)   Nothing in this chapter shall require the incurring of any expense to
make structural or other physical modifications to buildings.
   (b)   Nothing in this section shall relieve any person from the duty to post
signs as required by this chapter.
(§ 1, Ord. 2389, eff. June 18, 1987)
Sec. 6-13.13. Exemptions.
   (a)   Any owner or manager of a business or other establishment subject to
the provisions of this chapter may apply to the City Manager or his designee
for an exemption or modification to any provision of this chapter based upon
unusual circumstances or conditions. After a hearing before the City Manager or
his designee, the City Manager may grant the exemption or modification, but
only if the City Manager or his designee finds from the evidence presented
that, due to such unusual circumstances, the failure to comply with the
provisions for which the exemption or modification is requested will not result
in a danger to health or in annoyance, inconvenience or discomfort to
nonsmoking persons.
   (b)   The applicant for an exemption or modification shall pay such sum as
is established by resolution of the City Council to cover actual investigation
and administrative costs to be incurred.
(§ 1, Ord. 2389, eff. June 18, 1987)
Sec. 6-13.14. Penalties.
   (a)   It shall be unlawful to wilfully mutilate or destroy any signs
required by this chapter.
   (b)   It shall be unlawful for any person who is required by this chapter to
post no smoking signs to wilfully fail to do so.
   (c)   It shall be unlawful for any person to smoke in any area posted as a
no smoking area.
   (d)   Violation of any of the provisions of this chapter shall be deemed an
infraction which is punishable under the applicable provisions of §
1-2.01 of this Code.
(§ 1, Ord. 2389, eff. June 18, 1987)
CHAPTER 13A: SMOKE-FREE PARKS
   
6-13A.01   Prohibition and policy
   
6-13A.02   Definitions
   
6-13A.03   Interpretation
   
6-13A.04   Notice
   
6-13A.05   Penalties for failure to comply
Sec. 6-13A.01. Prohibition and policy.
   (a)   The use of Tobacco, Electronic Delivery Devices, and Cannabis are
prohibited in all Public Parks in the City at All Times. This prohibition is
enacted in order to preserve the public health, safety, and welfare of the
residents of the City, as well as the environment of the City.
   (b)   The provisions of this section do not apply to publicly owned areas
and places, or portions thereof, used by or used for events of the United
States, the State of California, or any agency or instrumentality thereof.
(§ 2, Ord. 3112, eff. September 20, 2018, § 3, Ord. 3236, eff. January 19,
2023)
Sec. 6-13A.02. Definitions.
   (a)   “Use of Tobacco And/or Electronic Delivery Devices And/or Cannabis”
means the act of Smoking, chewing, or the use of any other Tobacco and/or
Electronic Delivery Devices and/or Cannabis products in any form.
   (b)   “Smoke” or “Smoking” means inhaling or exhaling Smoke from any lighted
or heated cigar, cigarette, pipe, or any other Tobacco plant or product, or
inhaling or exhaling aerosol or vapor from any Electronic Delivery Devices.
“Smoking” includes being in possession of a lit or heated cigar, cigarette,
pipe, or any part of Tobacco or plant product intended for inhalation, or an
Electronic Delivery Device that is turned on or otherwise activated.
   (c)   “Tobacco Product” means any substance made or derived from any parts
of the Tobacco plant, including, but not limited to, cigarettes, cigars, pipe
Tobacco, snuff, chewing Tobacco, and smokeless Tobacco, or products prepared
from Tobacco and designed for Smoking or ingestion, or any other product name
of descriptor.
   (d)   “Electronic Delivery Device” means any product containing or
delivering nicotine, lobelia, or any other substance that can be used to
stimulate Smoking through inhalation of aerosol or vapor from the product. This
term includes, but is not limited to, devices manufactured, distributed,
marketed, or sold as electronic cigarettes, electronic cigars, electronic
pipes, vape pens, electronic hookah, electronic cigarillo, or any other product
name or descriptor.
   (e)   “Cannabis” means all parts of the plant Cannabis sativa L, whether
growing or not; the seeds thereof; the resin extracted from any part of the
plant; and every compound, manufacture, salt, derivative, mixture, or
preparation of the plant, its seeds or resin. It does not include:
      (1)   Industrial hemp, as defined in Cal. Health & Safety Code § 11018.5;
or
      (2)   The weight of any other ingredient combined with Cannabis to
prepare topical or oral administrations, food, drink, or other product.
   (f)   “Public Parks” means all Public Parks within the City that are
currently, or in the future, listed on the City’s website as a park. All City
golf courses, as they appear on the City’s website, now or in the future, are
excluded from the definition of Public Parks and the applicability of this
chapter. The term includes, but is not limited to, restrooms, spectator and
concession areas, playgrounds, athletic fields, aquatic areas, in or on City-
owned vehicles, and in City-owned parking lots at those Public Parks.
   (g)   “All Times” means twenty-four (24) hours a day, seven (7) days a week,
three hundred and sixty-five (365) days a year.
(§ 2, Ord. 3112, eff. September 20, 2018, §§ 4-5, Ord. 3236, eff. January 19,
2023)
Sec. 6-13A.03. Interpretation.
   This chapter shall not be interpreted or construed to permit Smoking where
it is otherwise restricted by other applicable laws.
(§ 2, Ord. 3112, eff. September 20, 2018)
Sec. 6-13A.04. Notice.
   (a)   Wherever this chapter prohibits Smoking, conspicuous signs containing
the words “NO SMOKING,” in all capital letters not less than one inch in height
on a contrasting background, shall be posted. It shall be the duty of the
owner, operator, manager or other persons having control of any Public Parks to
clearly post such signs or cause the same to be clearly posted within ninety
(90) days of the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter.
   (b)   The “NO SMOKING” signs shall be posted in multiple languages at
strategic locations to inform all persons about the policy.
   (c)   City staff and volunteers shall be notified about this no Smoking
policy through an internal memorandum.
   (d)   City staff shall communicate this policy to all event organizers.
(§ 2, Ord. 3112, eff. September 20, 2018)
Sec. 6-13A.05. Penalties for failure to comply.
   (a)   Each incident in violation of this chapter is an infraction subject
to:
      (1)   A fine of $50 for a first violation.
      (2)   A fine not exceeding $100 for a second violation of this chapter
within one (1) year.
      (3)   A fine not exceeding $200 for each additional violation of this
chapter within one (1) year.
   (b)   Enforcement of this chapter shall begin one (1) year after the
effective date of this chapter.
(§ 2, Ord. 3112, eff. September 20, 2018)
CHAPTER 14: GRAFFITI SUPPRESSION *
*Prior ordinance history: Ord. 2501, eff. April 18, 1991, Ord. 2519 and Ord.
2541, eff. April 1, 1993.
   
6-14.01   Purpose and intent
   
6-14.02   Definitions
   
6-14.03   Graffiti: Unlawful to apply
   
6-14.04   Graffiti implement: Possession by minors
   
6-14.05   Graffiti implement: Possession in designated public places
   
6-14.06   Graffiti implement: Furnishing to minors prohibited
   
6-14.07   Graffiti implement: Wrongful display for sale
   
6-14.08   Loitering for graffiti purposes
   
6-14.09   Detection of graffiti
   
6-14.10   Removal of graffiti
   
6-14.11   Nuisance
   
6-14.12   Condition tentative maps
   
6-14.13   Prevention of graffiti
   
6-14.14   Parental civil liability
   
6-14.15   Penalties for violation
Sec. 6-14.01. Purpose and intent.
   It is the purpose and intent of the City Council of the City, through the
adoption of this chapter, to provide additional enforcement tools to protect
public and private property from acts of vandalism and defacement especially,
but not limited to, graffiti on privately and publicly-owned walls which are
hostile and destructive of the rights and values of private property owners as
well as the total community. The power of graffiti to create fear within the
community and blight upon the hardscapes, devaluing property and detracting
from the sense of community enjoyed by residents of Ontario, is beyond the cost
of cleanup or removal. Not only is graffiti a property crime, but a social
crime on the quality of life and freedom from intimidation citizens desire
within their neighborhoods.
(§ 1, Ord. 2563, eff. January 20, 1994)
Sec. 6-14.02. Definitions.
   (a)   “Aerosol paint container” means any aerosol container, regardless of
the material from which it is made, which is adapted or made for the purpose of
spraying paint or any other substance capable of defacing property.
   (b)   “Etching substance” means any type of liquid or paste product used to
permanently etch glass. Ingredients of such etching liquids, etching pastes or
etching baths may include, but are not limited to, ammonia/sodium bifluorides
and sulfuric acid.
   (c)   “Felt tip marker” means any indelible marker or similar implement with
a tip which, at its broadest width, is greater than one-half (½) inch,
containing an ink that is not water-soluble.
   (d)   “Graffiti” means any unauthorized inscription, word, figure, or design
that is marked, etched, scratched, drawn, or painted on any public or privately
owned real or personal property.
   (e)   “Graffiti implement” means an aerosol paint container, a felt tip
marker, paint stick, etching substance, or an etching tool capable of scarring
glass, metal, concrete or wood.
   (f)   “Paint stick” means a device containing a solid form of paint, chalk,
wax, epoxy, or other similar substance capable of being applied to a surface by
pressure, and upon application, leaving a mark at least one-half (½) inch in
width, visible from a distance of twenty (20) feet, and not water-soluble.
(§ 1, Ord. 2563, eff. January 20, 1994, as amended by § 1, Ord. 2745, eff.
September 4, 2001)
Sec. 6-14.03. Graffiti: Unlawful to apply.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to apply graffiti on any public or
privately-owned real or personal property within the City.
(§ 1, Ord. 2563, eff. January 20, 1994)
Sec. 6-14.04. Graffiti implement: Possession by minors.
   Except as set forth in this chapter, it shall be unlawful for any person
under the age of eighteen (18) years to have in his or her possession any
graffiti implement, while upon public property, or upon private property,
without the prior written consent of the owner of such private property, which
consent shall specifically authorize the minor's presence while in the
possession of a graffiti implement. The foregoing provision shall not apply
while the person is attending or traveling to or from a school at which the
person is enrolled, if the person is participating in a class at said school
which has, as a written requirement of class, the need to use a graffiti
implement.
(§ 1, Ord. 2563, eff. January 20, 1994)
Sec. 6-14.05. Graffiti implement: Possession in designated public places.
   No person shall have in his or her possession any graffiti implement while
on any public lands or facilities, such as: public park, parkway, median,
playground, swimming pool, recreational facility, or while in or near an
underpass, bridge abutment, storm drain, and other similar types of
infrastructure not normally used by the public, except as may be authorized by
the City.
(§ 1, Ord. 2563, eff. January 20, 1994)
Sec. 6-14.06. Graffiti implement: Furnishing to minors prohibited.
   It shall be unlawful for any person, other than a parent or legal guardian,
to sell, exchange, give, loan, or otherwise furnish, or cause or permit to be
exchanged, given, or otherwise furnished, any felt tip marker or paint stick to
any person under the age of eighteen (18) years without the consent of the
parent or other lawfully designated custodian of the person, which consent
shall be given in advance in writing.
(§ 1, Ord. 2563, eff. January 20, 1994)
Sec. 6-14.07. Graffiti implement: Wrongful display for sale.
   No person, engaged in a commercial enterprise shall display for sale, trade
or exchange, any graffiti implement except in an area from which the public
shall be securely precluded without employee assistance. Two (2) such
acceptable methods for displaying a graffiti implement for sale shall be by
containment in:
   (a)   A completely enclosed cabinet or other storage device which shall be
permanently affixed to a building or building structure, and which shall, at
all times except during access by authorized representatives, remain securely
locked; or
   (b)   In an enclosed area behind a sales or service counter from which the
public is precluded from entry.
(§ 1, Ord. 2563, eff. January 20, 1994)
Sec. 6-14.08. Loitering for graffiti purposes.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to loiter in, on or near any public or
private property for the purpose of engaging in graffiti activity.
(§ 1, Ord. 2563, eff. January 20, 1994)
Sec. 6-14.09. Detection of graffiti.
   (a)   Rewards. Pursuant to Cal. Gov't Code § 53069.5, the City does hereby
offer a reward of Five Hundred Dollars ($500.00) for information leading to the
arrest and conviction of any person for violation of Cal. Penal Code § 594, by
the use of graffiti. In the event of multiple contributors of information, the
reward amount shall be divided by the City in the manner it shall deem
appropriate. For the purposes of this section, diversion of the offending
violator to a community service program, or at plea bargain to a lesser
offense, shall constitute a conviction.
   (b)   Claims for rewards under this section shall be filed with the City.
Each claim shall:
      (1)   Specifically identify the date, location and kind of property
damaged or destroyed;
      (2)   Identify by name the person who was convicted of or who confessed
to the damage or destruction of the City property;
      (3)   Identify the court and the date upon which the conviction occurred
or the place and the date of the confession.
   (c)   No claim for a reward shall be allowed by the City Council unless an
authorized representative of the City investigates and verifies the accuracy of
the claim and recommends that it be allowed. The investigation must determine
that the claimant's information was relevant and directly responsible for the
arrest and conviction of the suspect.
   (d)   The person committing the graffiti and, if that person is an
unemancipated minor, then the custodial parent of the minor, shall be liable
for any rewards paid pursuant to this section.
   (e)   Reimbursement of car phone air time. The City shall reimburse to any
person reporting by means of a mobile or cellular phone an act of graffiti
vandalism or existence of graffiti within the City limits in the amount of the
direct phone charges exclusive of taxes, and the like, incurred by the person.
(§ 1, Ord. 2563, eff. January 20, 1994)
Sec. 6-14.10. Removal of graffiti.
   (a)   Maintaining graffiti unlawful. It is unlawful for any person who is
the owner or who has primary responsibility for control of property or who has
primary responsibility for the repair or maintenance of property (“responsible
party”) to permit property which is defaced with graffiti to remain so defaced
for a period of seven (7) days after notice of violation and order to remove,
unless:
      (1)   The person shall demonstrate by a preponderance of evidence that he
or she does not have the financial or physical ability to remove the defacing
graffiti; or
      (2)   It can be demonstrated that the responsible party has an active
program for the removal of graffiti and has scheduled the removal of the
graffiti as part of that program in which case it shall be unlawful to permit
such property defaced with graffiti to remain defaced for a period of fifteen
(15) days after notice of same.
   (b)   Use of public funds. Whenever the City becomes aware, or is notified
and determines that graffiti is so located on public or privately-owned
property within the City, the City shall be authorized to use public funds for
the removal of same, or for the painting or repairing of same, but shall not
authorize or undertake to provide for the painting or repair of any more
extensive area than that where the graffiti is located, unless the City
Manager, or designee, determines in writing that a more extensive area is
required to be repainted or repaired in order to avoid an aesthetic
disfigurement to the neighborhood or community, or unless the responsible party
agrees to pay for the costs of repainting or repairing the more extensive area.
   (c)   Entry on private or public property; consent. Prior to entering upon
private property or property owned by a public entity other than the City, for
the purpose of removal of graffiti, the City shall secure the consent of the
property owner, and a release of the City from liability for private or public
property or liability damage.
   (d)   Notice of violation. A notice of violation and order to remove shall
be served on the responsible party by the City in the same manner as summons in
a civil action in accordance with Article 3 of Chapter 4 of Title 5 of Part 2
of the Code of Civil Procedure (commencing with Cal. Code Civ. Proc. § 415.10).
If the owner of record, after diligent search cannot be found, the notice may
be served by posting a copy thereof in a conspicuous place upon the property
for a period of ten (10) days and publication thereof in a newspaper of general
circulation published in the county in which the property is located pursuant
to Cal. Gov't Code § 6062.
   (e)   Failure to remove after notice. If a responsible party fails to remove
the offending graffiti within the time specified in this section, or if the
City shall have required consent to remove or paint over the offending graffiti
and the responsible party shall have refused consent for entry on terms
acceptable to the City consistent with the terms of this section, the City may
abate the graffiti as a nuisance as provided under this chapter.
   (f)   Special assessment. In the event the City removes graffiti with the
consent of the responsible party and the responsible party fails to reimburse
the City for the cost of removal within thirty (30) days of notice of the
amount of such costs, such costs shall be a special assessment against the
property pursuant to Cal. Gov't Code § 38773.5 as set forth in
Title 5, Chapter 22, §§
5-22.05 through
5-22.08.
(§ 1, Ord. 2563, eff. January 20, 1994)
Sec. 6-14.11. Nuisance.
   The existence of graffiti within the City is a public and private nuisance,
and may be abated pursuant Cal. Gov't Code § 38773.5 by procedures set forth in
Title 5, Chapter 22, §§
5-22.05 through
5-22.08.
(§ 1, Ord. 2563, eff. January 20, 1994)
Sec. 6-14.12. Condition tentative maps.
   In approving tentative or parcel maps, conditional use permits, variances,
or other similar land use entitlements, the Planning Commission shall consider
imposing any or all of the following conditions, or other similar or related
conditions, at the public hearing required by law for approval of the tentative
map, conditional use permit, variance or other similar land use entitlement:
   (a)   Use of anti-graffiti material. Anti-graffiti material of a type and
nature that is acceptable to the Director of Public Works shall be applied to
each of the publicly viewable surfaces on the improvements to be constructed on
the site deemed by the Director of Public Works to be likely to attract
graffiti (“graffiti attracting surfaces”);
   (b)   Right of access to remove graffiti. City shall be granted the right of
entry over and access to parcels, upon forty-eight (48) hours of posting of
notice by authorized City employees or agents, for the purpose of removing or
“painting over” graffiti from graffiti attracting surfaces previously
designated by the Director of Public Works, and the right to remove such
graffiti; and
   (c)   Supply City with graffiti removal material. City shall be provided
sufficient matching paint and/or anti-graffiti material on demand for a period
of two (2) years after imposing the condition, for use in the painting over or
removal of designated graffiti attracting surfaces;
   (d)   Owner to remove graffiti. Conditions, covenants and restrictions, or
separate covenants recorded against individual lots, prior to resale of same,
which covenants shall run with the land and shall be for the benefit of the
City, in a form satisfactory to the City, that the owner of the lots shall
remove any graffiti placed thereon within seven (7) days after notice thereof.
(§ 1, Ord. 2563, eff. January 20, 1994)
Sec. 6-14.13. Prevention of graffiti.
   Any surface of a structure on a parcel of land placed in any land use other
than residential which has been defaced with graffiti after removal more than
five (5) times in six (6) months, or the immediate area surrounding the
surface, shall be required to be retro- fitted, at the cost of the property
owner of the lot, with such features or qualities as may be established by the
City as necessary to reduce the attractiveness of the surface for graffiti, or
as necessary to permit more convenient or efficient removal thereof.
(§ 1, Ord. 2563, eff. January 20, 1994)
Sec. 6-14.14. Parental civil liability.
   Any parent or other legal guardian who consents to, permits, or otherwise
knowingly allows her, or his child under the age of eighteen (18) to possess a
graffiti implement shall be personally liable for any and all costs to any
person incurred in connection with the removal of graffiti caused by the child,
or by the graffiti implement, and for all attorney's fees and court costs
incurred in connection with the civil prosecution of any claim for damages.
(§ 1, Ord. 2563, eff. January 20, 1994)
Sec. 6-14.15. Penalties for violation.
   Any violation of this chapter shall be a misdemeanor.
(§ 1, Ord. 2563, eff. January 20, 1994)
CHAPTER 15: SOLID WASTE DISPOSAL AND RECYCLING (REPEALED*)
*Chapter 15 of Title 6, incorporating §§ 6-15.01 through 6-15.06, was repealed
in its entirety by § 2, Ord. 2785, eff. November 16, 2003).
CHAPTER 16: REGULATION OF EPHEDRINE PURCHASES
Section
   
6-16.01   Legislative purpose
   
6-16.02   Definitions
   
6-16.03   Limitations on sales
   
6-16.04   Penalties
Sec. 6-16.01. Legislative purpose.
   (a)   The City Council finds that there is a current and immediate threat to
the public health, safety, and welfare in that the manufacture, processing,
transportation, possession, and sales of illicit narcotics and drugs are
inherently dangerous and that chemicals, compounds, substances, by-products and
wastes which are associated with the manufacture of illicit narcotics and drugs
are both dangerous and injurious to the health, welfare, and safety of citizens
of the City.
   (b)   The City Council finds that there has been a dramatic increase of
sales, reports of sales, thefts, and possession of over-the-counter drugs which
contain substances known as ephedrine, pseudoephedrine, and pseudoephedrine
hydrochloride along with other substances and products associated with the
manufacture of methamphetamine and that retailers are regularly victimized by
those persons who steal those substances, drugs, and products on a regular
basis.
   (c)   The City Council finds that the general public does not normally
purchase the described products in multiple quantities and it is not the City
Council's intent to restrain legitimate businesses or customers from selling or
purchasing the described products.
   (d)   No provisions of this chapter shall hinder or supersede any other
applicable state or federal statute.
(§ 1, Ord. 2671, eff. August 22, 1998)
Sec. 6-16.02. Definitions.
   As used in this chapter:
   (a)   “Ephedrine” means any drug, substance, or compound, whether legal or
illegal, that contains pseudoephedrine hydrochloride, pseudoephedrine, or
ephedrine. These are commonly known as, but not limited to, decongestants,
nasal decongestants, antihistamines, and pep pills.
   (b)   “Retailer” means any retail business, company, corporation, person,
employee, associate, or wholesaler who furnishes, distributes, sells or gives
away products as described in this section.
   (c)   “Customer” means any person who purchases or acquires the products
described in this section, or persons who are present for the purchase or
acquisition of the products described in this section.
   (d)   “Sell” means to furnish, give away, exchange, transfer, deliver,
surrender, or supply whether for monetary gain or not.
   (e)   “Count” means the number of pills, tablets, capsules or individual
units of a substance contained within an individual package, box or container.
(§ 1, Ord. 2671, eff. August 22, 1998)
Sec. 6-16.03. Limitations on sales.
   No retailer shall knowingly sell to a single customer and no single customer
shall acquire more than three packages, per transaction, of a product
containing ephedrine. No retailer shall knowingly sell to a single customer,
per transaction, products containing ephedrine where the total count exceeds
one hundred (100) or such other count as may be established by state or federal
law.
(§ 1, Ord. 2671, eff. August 22, 1998)
Sec. 6-16.04. Penalties.
   Any person, customer, or retailer violating any of the provisions of this
chapter shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction shall be punished
by a fine not exceeding one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) or imprisonment for a
term not exceeding six (6) months, or by both such fine and imprison- ment.
(§ 1, Ord. 2671, eff. August 22, 1998)
CHAPTER 17: REGULATION OF BUTANE PURCHASES
   
6-17.01   Legislative purpose
   
6-17.02   Definitions
   
6-17.03   Limitations on sales
   
6-17.04   Penalties
Sec. 6-17.01. Legislative purpose.
   (a)   The City Council finds that there is a current and immediate threat to
the public health, safety, and welfare in that the manufacture, processing,
transportation, possession, and sales of illicit narcotics and drugs are
inherently dangerous and that chemicals, compounds, substances, by-products and
wastes which are associated with the manufacture of illicit narcotics and drugs
are both dangerous and injurious to the health, welfare, and safety of citizens
of the City.
   (b)   The City Council finds that there has been a dramatic increase in
reports of explosions occurring as a result of the manufacture of butane honey
oil and butane hash oil, which require butane to extract tetrahydrocannabinol
(THC) from parts of the Cannabis plant.
   (c)   The City Council finds that the general public does not normally
purchase butane in large quantities and it is not the City Council’s intent to
restrain legitimate businesses or customers from selling or purchasing it.
   (d)   No provisions of this chapter shall hinder or supersede any other
applicable state or federal statute.
(§ 2, Ord. 3048, eff. June 2, 2016, § 6, Ord. 3236, eff. January 19, 2023)
Sec. 6-17.02. Definitions.
   For the purposes of this article:
   (a)   “Butane” means five times refined (“5x”) or higher of any of the
following: iso-butane, n-butane, and butane.
   (b)   “Retailer” means any retail business, company, corporation, person,
employee, associate, or wholesaler who furnishes, distributes, sells or gives
away products as described in this section.
   (c)   “Customer” means any person who purchases or acquires the products
described in this section, or persons who are present for the purchase or
acquisition of the products described in this section.
   (d)   “Sell” means to furnish, give away, exchange, transfer, deliver,
surrender, or supply whether for monetary gain or not.
(§ 2, Ord. 3048, eff. June 2, 2016)
Sec. 6-17.03. Limitations on sales.
   (a)   No retailer shall knowingly sell to a single customer and no single
customer shall acquire more than one thousand two hundred (1,200) milliliters
of butane, per transaction.
   (b)   Retailers shall keep a log of all butane sales cumulatively or
individually amounting to greater than six hundred (600) milliliters in a
single transaction, including the date of sale, amount purchased, and the name
and address of the individual purchasing the butane, as verified by a driver’s
license or other official, government-issued photo identification listing a
place of residence. Retailers shall retain records for a period of at least one
(1) year and shall furnish copies of records to City officials upon request.
   (c)   No retailer shall display for sale, trade or exchange, any butane
except in an area from which the public shall be securely precluded without
employee assistance. Two (2) such acceptable methods for displaying butane for
sale shall be by containment in:
      (1)   A completely enclosed cabinet or other storage device which shall
be permanently affixed to a building or building structure, and which shall, at
all times except during access by authorized representatives, remain securely
locked; or
      (2)   In an enclosed area behind a sales or service counter from which
the public is precluded from entry.
(§ 2, Ord. 3048, eff. June 2, 2016)
Sec. 6-17.04. Penalties.
   Any person, customer, or retailer violating any of the provisions of this
chapter shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction shall be punished
by a fine not exceeding one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) or imprisonment for a
term not exceeding six (6) months, or by both such fine and imprisonment.
(§ 2, Ord. 3048, eff. June 2, 2016)
CHAPTER 18: MARIJUANA
   
6-18.01   Purpose
   
6-18.02   Definitions
   
6-18.03   Regulation on the personal use of cannabis, cannabis accessories, and
cannabis products
   
6-18.04   Regulation on the medical use of cannabis, cannabis accessories, and
cannabis products
   
6-18.05   Regulation on the commercial use of cannabis, cannabis accessories,
and cannabis products
   
6-18.06   Penalty of violations
Sec. 6-18.01. Purpose.
   The purpose of this chapter is to regulate personal, medical, and commercial
cannabis uses. Nothing in this chapter shall preempt or make inapplicable any
provision of state or federal law.
(§ 2, Ord. 3059, eff. November 3, 2016, § 2, Ord. 3236, eff. January 19, 2023)
Sec. 6-18.02. Definitions.
   For purposes of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply:
   (a)   "Cannabis" means all parts of the plant Cannabis sativa L., whether
growing or not; the seeds thereof; the resin extracted from any part of the
plant; and every compound, manufacture, salt, derivative, mixture, or
preparation of the plant, its seeds or resin. It does not include:
      (1)   Industrial hemp, as defined in Section 11018.5 of the California
Health & Safety Code; or
      (2)   The weight of any other ingredient combined with cannabis to
prepare topical or oral administrations, food, drink, or other product.
   (b)   "Cannabis accessories" means any equipment, products or materials of
any kind which are used, intended for use, or designed for use in planting,
propagating, cultivating, growing, harvesting, manufacturing, compounding,
converting, producing, processing, preparing, testing, analyzing, packaging,
repackaging, storing, smoking, vaporizing, or containing cannabis, or for
ingesting, inhaling, or otherwise introducing cannabis or cannabis products
into the human body.
   (c)   "Cannabis products" means cannabis that has undergone a process
whereby the plant material has been transformed into a concentrate, including,
but not limited to, concentrated cannabis, or an edible or topical product
containing cannabis or concentrated cannabis and other ingredients.
   (d)   “Commercial cannabis activity” includes the cultivation, possession,
manufacture, distribution, processing, storing, laboratory testing, labeling,
transportation, delivery or sale of cannabis and cannabis products.
   (e)   “Cultivation” means any activity involving the planting, growing,
harvesting, drying, curing, grading, or trimming of cannabis.
   (f)   “Delivery” means the commercial transfer of cannabis or cannabis
products to a customer. "Delivery" also includes the use by a retailer of any
technology platform owned and controlled by the retailer, or independently
licensed under California law that enables customers to arrange for or
facilitate the commercial transfer by a licensed retailer of cannabis or
cannabis products.
   (g)   “Distribution” means the procurement, sale, and transport of cannabis
and cannabis products between entities for commercial use purposes.
   (h)   “Licensee” means the holder of any state issued license related to
cannabis activities, including but not limited to licenses issued under
Division 10 of the Business & Professions Code.
   (i)   “Manufacture” means to compound, blend, extract, infuse, or otherwise
make or prepare a cannabis product.
   (j)   “Person” includes any individual, firm, co-partnership, joint venture,
association, corporation, limited liability company, estate, trust, business
trust, receiver, syndicate, or any other group or combination acting as a unit,
and the plural as well as the singular.
   (k)   “Private residence” means a house, an apartment unit, a mobile home,
or other similar dwelling.
   (l)   "Sale" includes any transaction whereby, for any consideration, title
to cannabis is transferred from one person to another, and includes the
delivery of cannabis or cannabis products pursuant to an order placed for the
purchase of the same and soliciting or receiving an order for the same, but
does not include the return of cannabis or cannabis products by a licensee to
the licensee from whom such cannabis or cannabis product was purchased.
   (m)   Any term defined in this Section also means the very term as defined
in the California Business & Professions Code or the California Health & Safety
Code, unless otherwise specified.
(§ 2, Ord. 3059, eff. November 3, 2016, § 2, Ord. 3236, eff. January 19, 2023)
Sec. 6-18.03. Regulation on the Personal Use of Cannabis, Cannabis Accessories,
and Cannabis Products.
   (a)   For purposes of this section, personal recreational use, possession,
purchase, transport, or dissemination of cannabis shall be considered unlawful
in all areas of the City to the extent it is unlawful under California law.
   (b)   Outdoor Cultivation. A person may not plant, cultivate, harvest, dry,
or process cannabis plants outdoors in any zoning district of the City. No use
permit, building permit, variance, or any other permit or entitlement, whether
administrative or discretionary, shall be approved or issued for any such use
or activity.
   (c)   Indoor Cultivation.
      (1)   A person may not plant, cultivate, harvest, dry, or process
cannabis plants inside a private residence, or inside an accessory structure to
a private residence located upon the grounds of a private residence, or inside
any other enclosed structure within any zoning district of the City. No use
permit, building permit, variance, or any other permit or entitlement, whether
administrative or discretionary, shall be approved or issued for any such use
or activity.
      (2)   To the extent a complete prohibition on indoor cultivation inside a
private residence, or inside an accessory structure to a private residence
located upon the grounds of a private residence, is not permitted under
California law:
         (i)   A person may not plant, cultivate, harvest, dry, or process
cannabis plants inside a private residence (or any accessory structure to such
private residence located upon the grounds of that private residence) if such
residence (or accessory structure) is not fully enclosed and secure;
         (ii)   A person may not plant, cultivate, harvest, dry, or process
cannabis plants inside a private residence (or any accessory structure to such
private residence located upon the grounds of that private residence) which the
individual cultivating those plants does not maintain as his or her primary
residence;
         (iii)   A person may not plant, cultivate, harvest, dry, or process
more than a combined total of 6 cannabis plants inside the private residence or
accessory structure located upon the grounds of the private residence;
         (iv)   No pesticides or fertilizers may be used for any cannabis
cultivation inside a private residence or accessory structure located on the
grounds of a private residence;
         (v)   No artificial light, ventilation, heating, or air conditioning
may be used in support of cannabis cultivation in any accessory structure to a
private residence located upon the grounds of a private residence except in
compliance with the California Building Code, the Ontario Municipal Code, and
any other permitting requirements which may be imposed; and
         (vi)   No artificial light, ventilation, heating, or air conditioning
may be used in support of cannabis cultivation inside a private residence
except in compliance with the California Building Code, the Ontario Municipal
Code, and any other permitting requirements which may be imposed.
(§ 2, Ord. 3059, eff. November 3, 2016, § 2, Ord. 3236, eff. January 19, 2023)
Sec. 6-18.04. Regulation on the Medical Use of Cannabis, Cannabis Accessories,
and Cannabis Products.
   (a)   Cultivation of medical cannabis pursuant to Section 11362.77 of the
California Health & Safety Code is subject to the cultivation requirements laid
out in subsection (c) of Section
6-18.03.
   (b)   The establishment or operation of any medical cannabis collective,
cooperative, dispensary, delivery service, operator, establishment, or provider
shall be considered a prohibited use in all zoning districts of the City. No
use permit, variance, building permit, or any other entitlement or permit,
whether administrative or discretionary, shall be approved or issued for the
establishment of any collective, cooperative, dispensary, delivery service,
operator, establishment, or provider in any zoning district, and no person
shall otherwise establish such businesses or operations in any zoning district.
(§ 2, Ord. 3059, eff. November 3, 2016, § 2, Ord. 3236, eff. January 19, 2023)
Sec. 6-18.05. Regulation on the Commercial Use of Cannabis, Cannabis
Accessories, and Cannabis Products.
   The establishment or operation of any business of commercial cannabis
activity is prohibited. No use permit, variance, building permit, or any other
entitlement or permit, whether administrative or discretionary, shall be
approved or issued for the establishment or operation of any such business or
operation. Such prohibited businesses or operations may include, but are not
limited to:
   (a)   The transportation, delivery, storage, distribution, or sale of
cannabis, cannabis products, or cannabis accessories;
   (b)   The cultivation of cannabis;
   (c)   The manufacturing or testing of cannabis, cannabis products, or
cannabis accessories; or
   (d)   Any other business licensed by the state or other government entity
under Division 10 of the California Business & Professions Code, as it may be
amended from time to time.
(§ 2, Ord. 3059, eff. November 3, 2016, § 2, Ord. 3236, eff. January 19, 2023)
Sec. 6-18.06. Penalty for Violations.
   (a)   Generally. No person, whether as principal, agent, employee or
otherwise, shall violate, cause the violation of, or otherwise fail to comply
with any of the requirements of this Chapter. Every act prohibited or declared
unlawful, and every failure to perform an act made mandatory by this Chapter,
shall be a misdemeanor or an infraction, at the discretion of the City Attorney
or the District Attorney.
   (b)   Administrative Citations.
      (1)   In addition to the penalties provided in this section and all other
legal remedies available to the City, any person in violation of this chapter
is subject to an administrative citation and fine, without prior issuance of a
Notice of Violation. Each and every day a violation of this chapter exists
shall constitute a separate and distinct violation of this chapter.
      (2)   Notwithstanding subsection (b)(1), each cannabis plant present in
excess of the number of cannabis plants allowed under §
6-18.03(c)(2)(iii) shall constitute a separate and distinct violation of this
chapter. Any violation of §§
6-18.03(c)(2)(iii) shall constitute a "transient" violation within the meaning
of Chapter 5 of Title 1 of the Ontario Municipal Code.
      (3)   The amount of the administrative fine shall be in the amount set
forth and amended by resolution of the City Council. If no amount has been set
by resolution of the City Council, the amount of the administrative fine shall
be up to One Thousand Dollars ($1,000) but not less than One Hundred Dollars
($100) per violation.
      (4)   The provisions and procedures concerning administrative citations
set forth in Chapter 5 of Title 1 of the Ontario Municipal Code shall apply to
administrative citations issued for violations of this chapter. To the extent
there are any conflicts between the provisions of Chapter 5 of Title 1 and this
chapter, the provisions of this chapter shall supersede and control
administrative citations issued for violations of this chapter.
   (c)   Liability of Property Owners.
      (1)   No property owner in charge of, or in possession of, any real
property within the City of Ontario shall cause, permit, maintain, conduct, or
otherwise suffer or allow a public nuisance or violation of this Chapter to
exist.
      (2)   It is the duty of every property owner, and person that controls
any real property or interest therein, within the City to remove, abate, and
prevent the reoccurrence of a violation of this Chapter upon such real
property. Such duty of the property owner exists regardless of whether the
property owner is in actual possession of their real property, and includes an
obligation to remove an illegal cannabis operation which exists or creates a
public nuisance upon the property owner's real property.
      (3)   An administrative citation may be issued to property owners for the
illegal cultivation of cannabis in violation of this Chapter without prior
issuance of a Notice of Violation. However, property owners shall have a
reasonable time for the correction or remedy of the violation of this Chapter
prior to the imposition of administrative fines or penalties provided all of
the following are true:
         (i)   A tenant is in possession of the property that is the subject of
the administrative action.
         (ii)   The rental property owner or agent can provide evidence that
the rental or lease agreement prohibits the cultivation of cannabis.
         (iii)   The rental property owner or agent did not know the tenant was
illegally cultivating cannabis and no complaint, property inspection, or other
information caused the rental property owner or agent to have actual notice of
the illegal cannabis cultivation.
   (d)   Nuisance. Any condition caused or permitted to exist in violation of
any of the provisions of this chapter is declared a public nuisance and may be
abated as provided in §
1-2.01 of Chapter 2 of Title 1 of the Ontario Municipal Code and/or under state
law.
   (e)   The remedies and penalties provided herein are cumulative, alternative
and nonexclusive. The use of one does not prevent the use of any other
criminal, civil, or administrative remedy or penalty authorized by law.
(§ 2, Ord. 3059, eff. November 3, 2016, § 2, Ord. 3236, eff. January 19, 2023)
TITLE 7. PUBLIC WORKS
      Chapter
         
1.   AIRPORT RULES AND REGULATIONS
         
2.   DATUM PLANE
         
3.   PUBLIC RIGHTS-OF-WAY
         
4.   STREET FRONTAGE IMPROVEMENTS
         
5.   UNDERGROUND PUBLIC UTILITY DISTRICTS
         
6.   UNDERGROUND UTILITY SERVICE CONNECTIONS
         
7.   UNDERGROUNDING OF OVERHEAD UTILITIES
CHAPTER 1: AIRPORT RULES AND REGULATIONS *
* Chapter 1, consisting of Article 1 entitled “Definitions,” consisting of §§
7-1.101 through 7-1.117, Article 2 entitled “General Provisions,” consisting of
§§ 7-1.201 through 7-1.207, Article 3 entitled “Aircraft Operation,” consisting
of §§ 7-1.301 through 7-1.333, Article 4 entitled “Aircraft Fueling and
Defueling,” consisting of §§ 7-1.401 through 7-1.413, Article 5 entitled “Fire
Protection,” consisting of §§ 7-1.501 through 7-1.511, Article 6 entitled
“General Rules of Conduct,” consisting of §§ 7-1.601 through 7-1.606, and
Article 7 entitled “Motor Vehicle Regulations,” consisting of §§ 7-1.701
through 7-1.709, codified from Ord. 863, eff. June 14, 1950, as amended by Ord.
1115, eff. March 16, 1956 and Ord. 1457, eff. March 22, 1962, repealed by § 2,
Ord. 1775, eff. March 16, 1972.
Article 1. Definitions
   
7-1.101   Scope of provisions
   
7-1.102   Aircraft
   
7-1.103   Airport
   
7-1.104   Air traffic
   
7-1.105   Board
   
7-1.106   Bus
   
7-1.107   Commercial vehicle
   
7-1.108   Crosswalk
   
7-1.109   Department
   
7-1.110   For hire vehicle
   
7-1.111   General Manager
   
7-1.112   Itinerant aircraft
   
7-1.113   Manager
   
7-1.114   Motor vehicle
   
7-1.115   Official traffic control devices
   
7-1.116   Official traffic signals
   
7-1.117   Parking area
   
7-1.118   Peace officer
   
7-1.119   Person
   
7-1.120   Police officer
   
7-1.121   Private parking area
   
7-1.122   Private roadway
   
7-1.123   Public parking area
   
7-1.124   Public roadway
   
7-1.125   Roadway
   
7-1.126   Safety officer
   
7-1.127   Service roadway
   
7-1.128   Sidewalk
   
7-1.129   Superintendent
   
7-1.130   Traffic
   
7-1.131   Vehicle
   
7-1.132   Vehicle Code
Article 2. General Provisions
   
7-1.201   Use of terminal property
   
7-1.202   Commercial activity
   
7-1.203   Taxicab or limousine service
   
7-1.204   Soliciting
   
7-1.205   Photographs and pictures
   
7-1.206   Animals
   
7-1.207   Signs
   
7-1.208   Travel
Article 3. Rules of Conduct
   
7-1.301   Intoxicating liquor
   
7-1.302   Firearms and explosives
Article 4. Aircraft Operations
   
7-1.401   General
   
7-1.402   Two-way radio
   
7-1.403   Tail skids
   
7-1.404   Aircraft taxiing
   
7-1.405   Aircraft engines
   
7-1.406   Itinerant aircraft registration
   
7-1.407   Itinerant aircraft control
   
7-1.408   Itinerant aircraft charges
   
7-1.409   Aircraft parking, storage, or repair
   
7-1.410   Moving of aircraft
   
7-1.411   Unattended aircraft
   
7-1.412   Compliance by operators
   
7-1.413   Accident reports
   
7-1.414   Boarding: Influence of liquor or narcotics
   
7-1.415   Removal of damaged aircraft
Article 5. Aircraft Refueling and Defueling
   
7-1.501   Authorized fuel dispensary
   
7-1.502   Fueling regulations
   
7-1.503   Smoking regulations
   
7-1.504   Passengers during fueling
   
7-1.505   Grounding apparatus
   
7-1.506   Fuel overflow
   
7-1.507   Radio or electrical apparatus during fueling
   
7-1.508   Spilled gasoline
Article 6. Fire Protection
   
7-1.601   Storage
   
7-1.602   Fire extinguishers
   
7-1.603   Compliance with Fire Code
Article 7. Traffic Regulations Within the Airport
   
7-1.701   Powers of General Manager
   
7-1.702   Vehicle Code application
   
7-1.703   Use of service roadways
   
7-1.704   Driving in parking areas: Compliance with signs
   
7-1.705   Drivers' licenses
   
7-1.706   Removal of debris from accidents
   
7-1.707   Presumption of validity of signs, devices, signals, and markings
   
7-1.708   Manner of direction of traffic
   
7-1.709   Parking areas: Entering and exiting: Compliance with attendants
   
7-1.710   Powers of General Manager regarding parking
   
7-1.711   Parking at red curbs
   
7-1.712   Parking at green curbs
   
7-1.713   Parking at yellow curbs
   
7-1.714   Parking at white curbs
   
7-1.715   Parking prohibited or limited
   
7-1.716   Parking restricted to hotel/motel operated vehicles
   
7-1.717   Parking in parking areas
   
7-1.718   Impounding of vehicles
   
7-1.719   Emergency suspension of parking
   
7-1.720   Parking of for hire vehicles
   
7-1.721   Parking restricted to for hire vehicles
   
7-1.722   Pedestrians to use sidewalks
   
7-1.723   Vehicles in restricted areas
   
7-1.724   Accident reports
Article 8. Damages to Airport Property
   
7-1.801   Payment for damages
Article 9. Arrests and Penalties
   
7-1.901   Violations
   
7-1.902   Citations
   
7-1.903   Penalty
Article 10. Drone Regulations
   
7-1.1001   Purpose and intent
   
7-1.1002   Definitions
   
7-1.1003   Operating requirements and restrictions
   
7-1.1004   Protected sites
   
7-1.1005   Exemptions
   
7-1.1006   Commercial operations
   
7-1.1007   Permit requirements
   
7-1.1008   Enforcement
Article 1. Definitions
Sec. 7-1.101. Scope of provisions.
   The words and phrases set forth in this article, whenever used in this
chapter, shall be construed as defined in this article unless from the context
a different meaning is specifically defined and more particularly directed to
the use of such words or phrases.
(§ 1, Ord. 1775, eff. March 16, 1972)
Sec. 7-1.102. Aircraft.
   “Aircraft” shall mean any contrivance used or designed for navigation of or
flight in the air.
(§ 1, Ord. 1775, eff. March 16, 1972)
Sec. 7-1.103. Airport.
   “Airport” shall mean the Ontario International Airport.
(§ 1, Ord. 1775, eff. March 16, 1972)
Sec. 7-1.104. Air traffic.
   “Air traffic” shall mean any aircraft in operation on that area of the
airport normally used for the movement of aircraft.
(§1, Ord. 1775, eff. March 16, 1972)
Sec. 7-1.105. Board.
   “Board” shall mean the Board of Airport Commissioners of the City of Los
Angeles.
(§1, Ord. 1775, eff. March 16, 1972)
Sec. 7-1.106. Bus.
   “Bus” shall mean any motor vehicle, other than a motor truck or truck
tractor, designed for carrying more than ten (10) persons, including the
driver, and used or maintained for the transportation of passengers.
(§ 1, Ord. 1775, eff. March 16, 1972)
Sec. 7-1.107. Commercial vehicle.
   “Commercial vehicle” shall mean any vehicle used or maintained for the
transportation of persons or property for hire, compensation, or profit.
(§ 1, Ord. 1775, eff. March 16, 1972)
Sec. 7-1.108. Crosswalk.
   “Crosswalk” shall mean:
   (a)   That portion of a roadway included within the prolongation or
connection of the boundary lines of sidewalks at intersections where the
intersecting roadways meet at approximately right angles, except the
prolongation of such lines from an alley across a street, and except where
signs have been placed indicating no crossing; and
   (b)   Any portion of a roadway distinctly indicated for pedestrian crossing
by lines or other markings on the surface thereof.
(§ 1, Ord. 1775, eff. March 16, 1972)
Sec. 7-1.109. Department.
   “Department” shall mean the Department of Airports of the City of Los
Angeles.
(§ 1, Ord. 1775, eff. March 16, 1972)
Sec. 7-1.110. For hire vehicle.
   “For hire vehicle” shall mean a vehicle used for the transportation of
persons and baggage for hire, other than a bus.
(§ 1, Ord. 1775, eff. March 16, 1972)
Sec. 7-1.111. General Manager.
   “General Manager” shall mean the General Manager of the Department of
Airports of the City of Los Angeles.
(§ 1, Ord. 1775, eff. March 16, 1972)
Sec. 7-1.112. Itinerant aircraft.
   “Itinerant aircraft” shall mean any aircraft using the airport for other
than scheduled operations.
(§ 1, Ord. 1775, eff. March 16, 1972)
Sec. 7-1.113. Manager.
   “Manager” shall mean the Manager of the Ontario International Airport.
(§ 1, Ord. 1775, eff. March 16, 1972)
Sec. 7-1.114. Motor vehicle.
   “Motor vehicle” shall mean a vehicle which is self-propelled.
(§ 1, Ord. 1775, eff. March 16, 1972)
Sec. 7-1.115. Official traffic control devices.
   “Official traffic control devices” shall mean all signs, signals, markings,
and devices not inconsistent with the provisions of this chapter, placed or
erected by authority of the General Manager.
(§ 1, Ord. 1775, eff. March 16, 1972)
Sec. 7-1.116. Official traffic signals.
   “Official traffic signals” shall mean any device, whether manually,
electrically, or mechanically operated, by which traffic is alternately
directed to stop and to proceed and which is erected by authority of the
General Manager.
(§ 1, Ord. 1775, eff. March 16, 1972)
Sec. 7-1.117. Parking area.
   “Parking area” shall mean any portion of the airport which is set aside for
the parking of vehicles. “Aircraft parking area” shall mean the area set aside
for the parking of aircraft.
(§ 1, Ord. 1775, eff. March 16, 1972)
Sec. 7-1.118. Peace officer.
   “Peace officer” shall mean those persons who come within the provisions of
Cal. Penal Code §§ 830 et seq.
(§ 1, Ord. 1775, eff. March 16, 1972)
Sec. 7-1.119. Person.
   “Person” shall mean a natural person, joint venture, joint stock company,
partnership, association, club, company, corporation, business trust,
organization, or the manager, lessee, agent, servant, officer, or employee of
any of them.
(§ 1, Ord. 1775, eff. March 16, 1972)
Sec. 7-1.120. Police officer.
   “Police officer” shall mean any officer of the Police Department of the
City.
(§ 1, Ord. 1775, eff. March 16, 1972)
Sec. 7-1.121. Private parking area.
   “Private parking area” shall mean any portion of the airport, other than a
“public parking area,” which is set aside for the parking of vehicles.
(§ 1, Ord. 1775, eff. March 16, 1972)
Sec. 7-1.122. Private roadway.
   “Private roadway” shall mean a roadway not open to the public.
(§ 1, Ord. 1775, eff. March 16, 1972)
Sec. 7-1.123. Public parking area.
   “Public parking area” shall mean any portion of the airport which is set
aside for the parking of private vehicles for compensation.
(§ 1, Ord. 1775, eff. March 16, 1972)
Sec. 7-1.124. Public roadway.
   “Public roadway” shall mean a roadway open to the public.
(§ 1, Ord. 1775, eff. March 16, 1972)
Sec. 7-1.125. Roadway.
   “Roadway” shall mean any street or roadway, either improved or unimproved,
within the boundaries of the airport set aside or designated for the use of
vehicles.
(§ 1, Ord. 1775, eff. March 16, 1972)
Sec. 7-1.126. Safety officer.
   “Safety officer” shall mean any person employed by the Department of
Airports, City of Los Angeles, having a civil service classification of
“Airport Safety Officer.”
(§ 1, Ord. 1775, eff. March 16, 1972)
Sec. 7-1.127. Service roadway.
   “Service roadway” shall mean a roadway set aside for the use of vehicles
furnishing supplies and the like for the use of the Department of Airports or
any lessee occupying any portion of the airport.
(§ 1, Ord. 1775, eff. March 16, 1972)
Sec. 7-1.128. Sidewalk.
   “Sidewalk” shall mean that portion of a roadway set apart for pedestrian
movement.
(§ 1, Ord. 1775, eff. March 16, 1972)
Sec. 7-1.129. Superintendent.
   “Superintendent” shall mean the Superintendent of Operations of the Ontario
International Airport.
(§ 1, Ord. 1775, eff. March 16, 1972)
Sec. 7-1.130. Traffic.
   “Traffic” shall mean pedestrians or vehicles, either singly or together,
while using any driveway.
(§ 1, Ord. 1775, eff. March 16, 1972)
Sec. 7-1.131. Vehicle.
   “Vehicle” shall mean any device in, upon, or by which any person or property
is or may be propelled, moved, or drawn upon a roadway, excepting a device
moved by human power.
(§ 1, Ord. 1775, eff. March 16, 1972)
Sec. 7-1.132. Vehicle Code.
   “Vehicle Code” shall mean the Vehicle Code of the State.
(§ 1, Ord. 1775, eff. March 16, 1972)
Article 2. General Provisions
Sec. 7-1.201. Use of terminal property.
   (a)   Any permission granted by the Board, General Manager, or Manager,
directly or indirectly, expressly or by implication, for any person to enter
upon or use the airport shall be conditional upon compliance with airport rules
and regulations; and entry upon or into the airport by any person shall be
deemed to constitute an agreement by such person to comply with such rules and
regulations.
   (b)   The Board reserves the right to deny any or all usage of the airport
to any person for any cause.
   (c)   The General Manager or Manager may, when he shall determine that
public safety or convenience requires the same, designate any area on the
airport as a restricted area and post appropriate signs and notices indicating
such areas.
   (d)   No person shall enter any restricted area so posted except those duly
authorized to do so by the General Manager or the Manager.
(§ 1, Ord. 1775, eff. March 16, 1972)
Sec. 7-1.202. Commercial activity.
   No person shall engage in any business or commercial activity on the airport
without first having obtained the proper lease, license, or permit from the
Board.
(§ 1, Ord. 1775, eff. March 16, 1972)
Sec. 7-1.203. Taxicab or limousine service.
   No person who does not have a proper license, permit, or specific permission
in writing from the Board to do so shall, on the airport, furnish taxicab,
limousine, or vehicle for hire service to any person who has not called for
such service, or directly or indirectly offer to furnish or provide any service
prohibited by this chapter, or directly or indirectly solicit customers for any
service prohibited by the provisions of this chapter.
(§ 1, Ord. 1775, eff. March 16, 1972)
Sec. 7-1.204. Soliciting.
   No person shall solicit funds for any purpose on the airport without first
having obtained a permit to do so from the Board.
(§ 1, Ord. 1775, eff. March 16, 1972)
Sec. 7-1.205. Photographs and pictures.
   No person shall take any photograph, motion picture, or television picture
on the airport for commercial purposes without having first obtained a permit
to do so from the Board. The provisions of this section shall not apply to:
   (a)   Representatives of the press taking pictures for news purposes;
   (b)   Representatives of any tenant taking such pictures for the use of such
tenant; or
   (c)   Persons taking such pictures on any leased portion of the airport with
the consent of the lessee.
(§ 1, Ord. 1775, eff. March 16, 1972)
Sec. 7-1.206. Animals.
   (a)   No person shall bring any animal upon the airport unless such animal
is on a leash.
   (b)   No person shall bring any animal into any airport building except an
assistance dog, as defined in Cal. Food & Agric. Code § 30850, in the custody
of his master or an animal properly confined for shipment by air.
(§ 1, Ord. 1775, eff. March 16, 1972)
Sec. 7-1.207. Signs.
   No person shall post, distribute, or display signs, posted billboards,
pictures, or any printed or written matter on the airport without having first
obtained permission from the Manager to do so.
(§ 1, Ord. 1775, eff. March 16, 1972)
Sec. 7-1.208. Travel.
   No person shall travel on any portion of the airport except upon the roads,
walks, or places provided for the particular class of traffic nor occupy the
roads or walks in such a manner as to hinder or obstruct their proper use.
(§ 1, Ord. 1775, eff. March 16, 1972)
Article 3. Rules of Conduct
Sec. 7-1.301. Intoxicating liquor.
   No person shall drink any intoxicating liquors upon any portion of the
airport open to the public except in such restaurant or other place as shall be
properly designated and licensed for on-sale liquor dispensing.
(§ 1, Ord. 1775, eff. March 16, 1972)
Sec. 7-1.302. Firearms and explosives.
   (a)   No person, except peace officers, Ontario Fire Department personnel,
safety officers, post office employees, customs employees, express and air
carrier employees, members of the Armed Forces of the United States on official
duty, or other persons authorized by state or federal law, shall carry any
firearms or explosives on the airport.
   (b)   All persons, other than those in the excepted classes, shall, while on
the airport, surrender all such objects in their possession to the first
policeman or safety officer on the airport.
(§ 1, Ord. 1775, eff. March 16, 1972)
Article 4. Aircraft Operations
Sec. 7-1.401. General.
   No person shall navigate any aircraft upon, fly aircraft from, or conduct
any aircraft operations on or from the airport otherwise than in conformance
with the current federal Aviation Administration and Civil Aeronautics Board
rules and the rules and regulations of the airport, parts of which such rules
and regulations are set forth in this article.
(§ 1, Ord. 1775, eff. March 16, 1972)
Sec. 7-1.402. Two-way radio.
   All aircraft based at the airport shall be equipped with two-way radio for
communication.
(§ 1, Ord. 1775, eff. March 16, 1972)
Sec. 7-1.403. Tail skids.
   No aircraft equipped with tail skids may land or take-off at the airport
without special permission of the Manager, except in cases of emergency.
(§ 1, Ord. 1775, eff. March 16, 1972)
Sec. 7-1.404. Aircraft taxiing.
   No person shall taxi any aircraft on the airport:
   (a)   In excess of a safe and reasonable speed;
   (b)   On any portion of the airport except regular taxiways, ramps, and
aprons;
   (c)   Across runways without having first obtained permission from the
control tower;
   (d)   Without having first ascertained by visual inspection that it is safe
to proceed without danger of collision with persons or objects:
   (e)   Near buildings or parked aircraft or persons unless equipped with
adequate operable brakes;
   (f)   Who is not a pilot or mechanic licensed by the Federal Aviation
Administration; or
   (g)   Into or out of any hangar or building.
(§ 1, Ord. 1775, eff. March 16, 1972)
Sec. 7-1.405. Aircraft engines.
   No person shall start or run any aircraft engine on the airport:
   (a)   Unless he is a pilot or mechanic licensed by the Federal Aviation
Administration;
   (b)   Unless blocks have been previously placed and are in front of the main
landing wheels at the time the engine or engines are started, or unless the
aircraft is equipped with adequate parking brakes which are in operating
condition and which have been applied to and at the time of starting the engine
or engines;
   (c)   Without the exercise of every reasonable precaution to protect other
aircraft, buildings, property, and persons; or
   (d)   Within fifty (50) feet of a hangar or other building or structure.
(§ 1, Ord. 1775, eff. March 16, 1972)
Sec. 7-1.406. Itinerant aircraft registration.
   The operator of any itinerant aircraft engaged in a commercial revenue
producing flight shall immediately, upon landing at the airport, give his name,
home address, and the type and registry number of the aircraft to the
Superintendent, or his authorized representative, and shall park or tie down
such itinerant aircraft in the area designated by the Superintendent.
(§ 1, Ord. 1775, eff. March 16, 1972)
Sec. 7-1.407. Itinerant aircraft control.
   All itinerant aircraft shall at all times be under the control of the
operator thereof, and no employee of the Department shall move or handle such
aircraft except in cases of emergency.
(§ 1, Ord. 1775, eff. March 16, 1972)
Sec. 7-1.408. Itinerant aircraft charges.
   No operator of itinerant aircraft shall take off from the airport without
first paying all charges incurred by him at the airport in connection with such
aircraft, or making satisfactory arrangements with the Superintendent as to the
payment thereof.
(§ 1, Ord. 1775, eff. March 16, 1972)
Sec. 7-1.409. Aircraft parking, storage, or repair.
   No person shall park, store, or repair any aircraft except in places
designated therefor by the Manager.
(§ 1, Ord. 1775, eff. March 16, 1972)
Sec. 7-1.410. Moving of aircraft.
   Upon direction from the Manager, or his designated representative, the
operator of any aircraft parked or stored at the airport shall move such
aircraft from the place where it is parked or stored to any other designated
place at the airport. If the operator refuses to comply with such direction,
the Manager may order such aircraft towed to such designated place at the
operator's expense and without liability to the airport for damages which may
result from, or in the course of, such moving.
(§ 1, Ord. 1775, eff. March 16, 1972)
Sec. 7-1.411. Unattended aircraft.
   No person shall leave an aircraft unattended on the airport unless the
aircraft is properly secured or within a hangar.
(§ 1, Ord. 1775, eff. March 16, 1972)
Sec. 7-1.412. Compliance by operators.
   Any person operating any aircraft on the airport shall at all times comply
with any order, signal, or direction of any authorized employee of the
Department.
(§ 1, Ord. 1775, eff. March 16, 1972)
Sec. 7-1.413. Accident reports.
   The pilot or person in charge of any aircraft involved in an accident on the
ground shall immediately report such accident to the Manager or his authorized
representative.
(§ 1, Ord. 1775, eff. March 16, 1972)
Sec. 7-1.414. Boarding: Influence of liquor or narcotics.
   No person in control of any aircraft shall permit any person under the
influence of intoxicating liquor or narcotics to board such aircraft.
(§ 1, Ord. 1775, eff. March 16, 1972)
Sec. 7-1.415. Removal of damaged aircraft.
   The pilot or person in charge of any aircraft involved in an accident shall
immediately remove such aircraft and any wreckage or debris caused by such
accident to a place designated by the Manager unless such person is required by
Federal law or regulation to leave the same in place for investigation.
(§ 1, Ord. 1775, eff. March 16, 1972)
Article 5. Aircraft Refueling and Defueling
Sec. 7-1.501. Authorized fuel dispensary.
   No aircraft shall be refueled except by the authorized fuel dispensary so
designated by the Board.
(§ 1, Ord. 1775, eff. March 16, 1972)
Sec. 7-1.502. Fueling regulations.
   No aircraft shall be fueled or defueled while the aircraft engine is running
or while such aircraft is in a hangar or other enclosed space.
(§ 1, Ord. 1775, eff. March 16, 1972)
Sec. 7-1.503. Smoking regulations.
   No smoking shall be permitted within fifty (50) feet of the fuel tank while
the aircraft is being fueled or defueled.
(§ 1, Ord. 1775, eff. March 16, 1972)
Sec. 7-1.504. Passengers during fueling.
   During fuel handling in connection with any aircraft, no passengers shall be
permitted in the aircraft unless a cabin attendant is stationed at or near the
cabin door.
(§ 1, Ord. 1775, eff. March 16, 1972)
Sec. 7-1.505. Grounding apparatus.
   During fuel handling in connection with any aircraft, the fuel dispensing or
draining apparatus shall be properly grounded to prevent the possibility of
static ignition of volatile liquids.
(§ 1, Ord. 1775, eff. March 16, 1972)
Sec. 7-1.506. Fuel overflow.
   Persons engaged in aircraft fuel handling shall exercise care to prevent the
overflow of fuel.
(§ 1, Ord. 1775, eff. March 16, 1972)
Sec. 7-1.507. Radio or electrical apparatus during fueling.
   During fuel handling in connection with any aircraft, no person shall
operate any radio transmitter or receiver or switch electrical appliances off
or on in such aircraft.
(§ 1, Ord. 1775, eff. March 16, 1972)
Sec. 7-1.508. Spilled gasoline.
   No person shall start the engine of any aircraft when there is gasoline on
the ground under such aircraft. When gasoline is spilled or leaks around a
ship, the Airport Fire Station shall be notified so that personnel may wash
down the area.
(§ 1, Ord. 1775, eff. March 16, 1972)
Article 6. Fire Protection
Sec. 7-1.601. Storage.
   No person shall store or stock material in such a manner as to constitute a
fire hazard.
(§ 1, Ord. 1775, eff. March 16, 1972)
Sec. 7-1.602. Fire extinguishers.
   Adequate and readily accessible fire extinguishers shall be provided by
lessees and maintained improper working order. Each fire extinguisher shall
carry a suitable tag showing the date of the most recent inspection.
(§ 1, Ord. 1775, eff. March 16, 1972)
Sec. 7-1.603. Compliance with Fire Code.
   All tenants shall comply with the Uniform Fire Code of the City and fire
prevention directives issued by the Manager.
(§ 1, Ord. 1775, eff. March 16, 1972)
Article 7. Traffic Regulations Within the Airport
Sec. 7-1.701. Powers of General Manager.
   The General Manager may, when he shall determine that public safety or
convenience requires the same, or that the movement of traffic will be
expedited thereby, designate:
   (a)   Roadways as entrances to or exits from the airport;
   (b)   Points where vehicles shall come to a stop before proceeding;
   (c)   Places for crosswalks;
   (d)   Roadways as service roadways, public roadways, or private roadways;
   (e)   Places where roadways shall be divided into lanes; and
   (f)   The direction and manner in which vehicles shall proceed.
   The General Manager may erect signs, make markings, and erect or place
official traffic control devices and official traffic signals giving notice
thereof, which signs, markings, devices, and signals shall conform with the
provisions of the Manual of Uniform Traffic Control Devices.
(§ 1, Ord. 1775, eff. March 16, 1972)
Sec. 7-1.702. Vehicle Code application.
   All sections of the California Vehicle Code shall be applicable at all
locations within the Ontario International Airport.
Sec. 7-1.703. Use of service roadways.
   No person shall use any service roadway for any purpose other than that for
which it is designated as provided in this chapter.
(§ 1, Ord. 1775, eff. March 16, 1972)
Sec. 7-1.704. Driving in parking areas: Compliance with signs.
   All drivers of vehicles entering upon any public parking area shall follow
and comply with any directional markers or signs therein.
(§ 1, Ord. 1775, eff. March 16, 1972)
Sec. 7-1.705. Drivers' licenses.
   No person shall drive a motor vehicle upon any roadway or in any parking
area unless he then holds a valid driver's license issued under the provisions
of the Vehicle Code of the State, except such persons as are expressly exempted
by said Vehicle Code.
(§ 1, Ord. 1775, eff. March 16, 1972)
Sec. 7-1.706. Removal of debris from accidents.
   The driver of any vehicle which is involved in any collision shall remove,
or cause to be removed, all glass and other debris which may have fallen upon
any roadway as a result of such collision from such roadway before leaving the
place of the collision, and every person hired or employed to move or remove
any such vehicle shall remove all glass and other debris which may have fallen
upon the roadway as a result of the collision in which the vehicle was involved
before removing the vehicle, unless such person is required by law or
regulation to leave the same in place for investigation.
(§ 1, Ord. 1775, eff. March 16, 1972)
Sec. 7-1.707. Presumption of validity of signs, devices, signals, and markings.
   Whenever traffic signs or traffic control devices, signals, or markings are
placed in position, such signs, devices, signals, and markings shall be
presumed to have been so placed by authority of the General Manager unless the
contrary shall be established by competent evidence.
(§ 1, Ord. 1775, eff. March 16, 1972)
Sec. 7-1.708. Manner of direction of traffic.
   Police officers, peace officers, on-duty firemen, and safety officers are
authorized to direct all traffic by voice, hand, or signal in conformance with
traffic laws; provided, however, in the event of a fire or other emergency,
they may direct traffic as conditions may require notwithstanding the
provisions of this chapter.
(§ 1, Ord. 1775, eff. March 16, 1972)
Sec. 7-1.709. Parking areas: Entering and exiting: Compliance with attendants.
   (a)   No person shall enter any public parking area except at the places
marked “entrance” nor leave such area except at the places marked “exit.”
   (b)   All persons entering and driving a vehicle into, out of, or within a
public parking area shall follow the instructions of any parking area attendant
therein.
(§ 1, Ord. 1775, eff. March 16, 1972)
Sec. 7-1.710. Powers of General Manager regarding parking.
   The General Manager may, when he shall determine that the movement of
traffic will be expedited thereby, designate:
   (a)   Places where vehicles may or may not be parked; and
   (b)   The period of time for which vehicles may be parked at any place. The
General Manager may make appropriate markings giving notice thereof, which
markings shall conform to the provisions of the Manual of Uniform Traffic
Control Devices.
(§ 1, Ord. 1775, eff. March 16, 1972)
Sec. 7-1.711. Parking at red curbs.
   No person shall stop any vehicle at any time adjacent to a curb marked in
red.
(§ 1, Ord. 1775, eff. March 16, 1972)
Sec. 7-1.712. Parking at green curbs.
   No person shall park any vehicle adjacent to any curb marked in green for
any period in excess the time indicated and in no case in excess of fifteen
(15) minutes.
(§ 1, Ord. 1775, eff. March 16, 1972)
Sec. 7-1.713. Parking at yellow curbs.
   No person shall stop, stand, or park a vehicle between the hours of 7:00
a.m. and 6:00 p.m. on any day except Sunday in a commercial loading zone
indicated by a yellow curb, except that commercial vehicles may stop or stand
for the purpose of loading or unloading freight for the time necessary therefor
but not to exceed twenty (20) minutes.
   Passenger vehicles may stop or stand in such yellow zone between the hours
of 6:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. and on Sunday for the purpose of loading or
unloading passengers and their personal baggage and then only for the time
necessary therefor, but in no event for more than three (3) minutes.
(§ 1, Ord. 1775, eff. March 16, 1972)
Sec. 7-1.714. Parking at white curbs.
   No person shall park any vehicle, other than a private passenger automobile,
adjacent to any white curb and shall not park such vehicle for any greater
period of time than is actually necessary for the loading or unloading of
passengers or personal baggage and in no event for a longer period than three
(3) minutes. The provisions of this section shall not apply to buses.
(§ 1, Ord. 1775, eff. March 16, 1972)
Sec. 7-1.715. Parking prohibited or limited.
   (a)   Stopping or standing prohibited. Whenever authorized signs are in
place giving notice that stopping or standing are prohibited during such hours
or on such days as are indicated on such signs, it shall be unlawful for any
person to stop, stand, or park any vehicle at any time during such hours or
such days.
   (b)   Parking prohibited. Whenever authorized signs are in place giving
notice that parking is prohibited at any time during certain hours, it shall be
unlawful for any person to park any vehicle during such prohibited times.
   (c)   Parking time limits. Whenever authorized signs are in place giving
notice thereof, it shall be unlawful for any person to stop, stand, or park any
vehicle for a period of time in excess of the parking time limit indicated by
such sign.
(§ 1, Ord. 1775, eff. March 16, 1972)
Sec. 7-1.716. Parking restricted to hotel/motel operated vehicles.
   No person shall stop, stand, or park any vehicle, other than a hotel/motel
vehicle operating under a permit issued by the Board, for the purpose of
loading and unloading passengers and/or personal luggage in any place
designated and posted for the parking of hotel/motel operated vehicles.
(§ 1, Ord. 1775, eff. March 16, 1972)
Sec. 7-1.717. Parking in parking areas.
   (a)   No person shall park any vehicle in any public parking area except
between the painted lines indicating where such vehicles shall be parked.
   (b)   No person shall so park a vehicle as to use or occupy more than one
such marked parking space.
   (c)   No person shall remove a vehicle from any public parking area without
first paying all fees or charges due for the use of such parking space.
(§ 1, Ord. 1775, eff. March 16, 1972)
Sec. 7-1.718. Impounding of vehicles.
   The General Manager is authorized to remove any vehicle parked on any
roadway, parking area, or other airport property in the airport in violation of
the provisions of this chapter and to impound such vehicle. No owner or
operator of any such vehicle shall thereafter remove such vehicle without first
paying the impound charge and regular parking charge therefor.
(§ 1, Ord. 1775, eff. March 16, 1972)
Sec. 7-1.719. Emergency suspension of parking.
   (a)   The General Manager is authorized, when he shall determine that
traffic congestion or hazard is likely to result from the holding of any
assemblage, celebration, or function, no prohibit the parking or movement of
vehicles on any part of the airport until such congestion or hazard is
eliminated.
   (b)   The General Manager is further authorized to post signs giving notice
of such suspension of parking. Such signs shall bear the word “Temporary” in
addition to the other matters appearing thereon.
   (c)   No person shall drive or park any vehicle contrary to the instruction
of any sign posted pursuant to the provisions of this section.
(§ 1, Ord. 1775, eff. March 16, 1972)
Sec. 7-1.720. Parking of for hire vehicles.
   No person shall park any for hire vehicle in any place other than a place
provided therefor and appropriately marked as such.
(§ 1, Ord. 1775, eff. March 16, 1972)
Sec. 7-1.721. Parking restricted to for hire vehicles.
   No person shall park any vehicle other than a for hire vehicle in any place
set aside for the parking of for hire vehicles.
(§ 1, Ord. 1775, eff. March 16, 1972)
Sec. 7-1.722. Pedestrians to use sidewalks.
   No person shall walk within any roadway which is bounded by or adjacent to a
sidewalk, except within a marked crosswalk or within an unmarked crosswalk at
an intersection.
(§ 1, Ord. 1775, eff. March 16, 1972)
Sec. 7-1.723. Vehicles in restricted areas.
   (a)   No vehicle shall be permitted within the restricted areas of the
airport unless such vehicle has the prior approval of the Manager and unless it
is in sound mechanical order.
   (b)   No vehicle shall be operated within the restricted areas of the
airport except by a person authorized by the Manager.
   (c)   All vehicles shall be operated in restricted areas in accordance with
published rules and regulations approved by the Manager.
(§ 1, Ord. 1775, eff. March 16, 1972)
Sec. 7-1.724. Accident reports.
   All persons involved in any accident on the airport shall immediately report
such accident to the Manager or his authorized representative.
(§ 1, Ord. 1775, eff. March 16, 1972)
Article 8. Damages to Airport Property
Sec. 7-1.801. Payment for damages.
   Any and all property of the airport destroyed, injured, or damaged by
accident or otherwise shall be paid for by the parties responsible for such
damages, injury, or destruction thereto.
(§ 1, Ord. 1775, eff. March 16, 1972)
Article 9. Arrests and Penalties
Sec. 7-1.901. Violations.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to violate any provision or to fail to
comply with any provision of this chapter.
(§ 1, Ord. 1775, eff. March 16, 1972)
Sec. 7-1.902. Citations.
   Any police officer of the City and any safety officer employed by the
Department is authorized and empowered to make arrests and issue citations to
any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter.
(§ 1, Ord. 1775, eff. March 16, 1972, as amended by § 12, Ord. 2094, eff.
August 14, 1980, § 2, Ord. 3311, eff. September 18, 2025)
Sec. 7-1.903. Penalty.
   Any person guilty of violating any provisions of this chapter shall be
deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and punishable by a fine not to exceed $1,000 or
imprisonment not to exceed six (6) months in the County Jail, or both such fine
and imprisonment.
(§ 2, Ord. 3311, eff. September 18, 2025)
Article 10. Drone Regulations
Sec. 7-1.1001. Purpose and intent.
   The purpose of this regulation is to effectively regulate an unmanned
aircraft system or drone (collectively, “drone”) within the City of Ontario
(“City”) in order to promote the health, safety, and general welfare (“safety”)
of City residents, visitors, and businesses (“public”). The City seeks to
implement appropriate regulations of drones pursuant to the City's police
powers under the California Constitution (Section 7 to Article XI) and its
authority to issue regulations related to zoning, land use, privacy, trespass,
and law enforcement operations. All regulations herein are intended to protect
the safety of the public and address specific areas of the City’s concern where
a drone incident could cause harm and injury. It is not intended to restrict
persons operating commercial drones in compliance with all applicable Federal
Aviation Administration (FAA) rules pursuant to Part 107 (Small Unmanned
Aircraft Systems) to Title 14 of the Code of Federal Regulations and other
applicable laws, or outside of prohibited areas. This regulation is not
intended to preempt FAA rules, but to operate in conjunction with those rules
to promote public safety and privacy while recognizing the limitations in the
FAA's enforcement authority.
(§ 2, Ord. 3310, eff. September 18, 2025)
Sec. 7-1.1002. Definitions.
   The following definitions shall apply, unless the context clearly indicates
otherwise:.
   (a)   “City Manager” means the City Manager or any agent of the City as
designated by the City Manager.
   (b)   “Drone” or “unmanned aircraft system (UAS)” means an aircraft without
a human pilot on board, that is controlled from an operator on the ground and
operates without the possibility of direct human intervention from within, or
on, the aircraft. Each reference to “drone” hereinafter shall include reference
to “UAS.”
   (c)   “Drone operator” means any person who operates a drone, whether for
recreational or commercial purposes.
   (d)   “Emergency responder” means any person engaged in providing emergency
services who is an agent of the City, the County of San Bernardino, a public
agency, a law enforcement agency, the Fire Department, emergency management, or
a public safety organization.
   (e)   “FAA” means the Federal Aviation Administration.
   (f)   “Government building” is defined to be a public building as it appears
under Government Code Section 7596(a) which is as follows: “Public building”
means a building owned and occupied, or leased and occupied, by the state, a
county, a city, a city and county, or a California community college district.”
   (g)   “Person” means and includes any individual, corporation, company,
firm, association, organization, co-partnership, joint venture, trust, business
trust, syndicate, estate, receiver, society, club, fraternal organization, any
group or combination acting as an unit; and any officer, agent, employee, or
servant of any of the foregoing.
   (h)   “Public UAS” means a UAS that is used or operated on behalf of any
government agency that meets the qualifications as defined in 49 U.S.C. §
40102S to operate a public aircraft.
   (i)   “Special event” means any event, assembly, or gathering held on public
land or open-air facility, private property, or commercial or industrial
facility that is open to the public and intended to attract people. This
includes but is not limited to sporting events, concerts, festivals, farmer's
markets, street fairs, and other similar events.
   (j)   “Visual line of sight (VLOS)” refers to the ability of a drone
operator or visual observer (FAA Part 107 regulations for alternative VLOS) to
have a direct, unaided, and unobstructed view of the operator’s controlled
drone. The operator must use his or her own natural vision (which includes
vision corrected by standard eyeglasses or contact lenses) to observe the UAS.
The use of vision-enhancing devices such as binoculars, night vision goggles,
powered vision magnifying devices, goggles, or other devices designed to
provide a "first-person" view from the drone do not constitute visual line of
sight.
   (k)   “Weapon” means any instrument, article or substance that under the
circumstances in which it is used, attempted to be used, or threatened to be
used is readily capable of causing death or serious physical injury to a person
or damage to property (such as a firearm; an air gun that uses small spherical
projectiles or pellets propelled by compressed air, gas, or a spring mechanism
(BB device); an explosive; a device; or container assembled for the purpose of
causing an explosion or any other device intended to harm someone).
(§ 2, Ord. 3310, eff. September 18, 2025)
Sec. 7-1.1003. Operating requirements and restrictions.
   No person shall operate any drone in a manner that is prohibited by any
federal, state, or local regulations. The following shall apply to the
operation of drones within the City:
   (a)   No person shall operate any drone without a license or certification
where one is required by Federal and state law.
   (b)   A drone operator shall provide their required license and/
certification upon request from a law enforcement agent or City official.
   (c)   No person shall land or takeoff any drone in the City beyond the
visual line of sight of the person operating the drone, or within the visual
line of sight of an observer who is co-located and in direct communication with
the drone operator.
   (d)   No person shall land or takeoff any drone other than during daylight
hours, unless operating in compliance with 14 CFR 107.29.
   (e)   No person shall land or takeoff any drone closer than twenty-five (25)
feet to any individual, except the operator agents of the operator.
   (f)   No person shall operate any drone under the influence of alcohol,
cannabis, or any other drug or intoxicating compound.
   (g)   No person shall operate any drone in a careless or reckless manner so
as to endanger the safety of another person or another person's property. The
standard for what constitutes careless and reckless operation under this
subsection shall be the same as the standard set forth in any Federal statutes
or regulations governing aeronautics including but not limited to Public
Utilities Code Section 21407, Federal Aviation Rule 91.13, and 14 CFR 91.13.
   (h)   No person shall land or takeoff any drone in a manner that violates an
individual's reasonable expectation of privacy as set forth by all applicable
state laws; or record or transmit any visual image, sound recording, or other
physical impression of any person or private real property located in the City
under circumstances in which the subject person or owner of the subject real
property has a reasonable expectation of privacy (including but not limited to
inside the premises or curtilage of a private residence, office, or hotel room,
or inside an enclosed yard or exterior deck).
   (i)   No person shall land or takeoff a drone in a manner that directly
interferes with the lawful efforts of any emergency responder responding to an
emergency or providing emergency services.
   (j)   No person shall land or takeoff any drone that contains or has affixed
or attached to it hazardous materials, a weapon, a firearm, a BB device, an
explosive, a device, or container assembled for the purpose of causing an
explosion; or any other item that may be used as a weapon.
   (k)   No person shall land or takeoff any drone in a way that interferes
with manned aircraft operations including but not limited to traffic patterns
at airports, and the operator shall always yield to any manned aircraft.
   (l)   No person shall land or takeoff any drone within the City in violation
of any temporary flight restriction or "Notice to Airmen" issued by the FAA.
   (m)   No person shall land or takeoff any drone within five hundred (500)
feet of any other privately-owned drone. No person shall land or takeoff any
drone within one thousand five hundred (1,500) feet of any other publicly owned
drone. Any person operating a drone shall see and avoid other aircraft and
obstacles at all times.
   (n)   No person shall land or takeoff any drone in the area of active
parade, motorcade, or City event without the authorization of the City Manager
in writing.
   (o)   No person shall operate a drone in a manner that emits a sound level
that unreasonably disturbs the peace, quiet, or comfort of any person
(particularly in residential areas). Nothing in this subsection shall preclude
additional enforcement under any other applicable noise control regulation.
   (p)   Any person who causes injury to another person while operating a drone
shall comply with the following:
      (1)   The drone operator shall notify the City's Police Department of the
injury within twenty-four (24) hours of the incident.
      (2)   The drone operator shall give the operator's name and current
residential address to the City's Police Department, and shall also present a
valid and unexpired form of identification issued by a state government or the
United States federal government.
      (3)   Each failure to report injury to another person as required by this
subsection shall constitute a separate violation of this regulation.
   (q)   Any person who causes damage to the property of another person while
operating a drone shall comply with following:
      (1)   The drone operator shall immediately locate and notify the owner or
person in charge of the damaged property of the name and current residential
address of the drone operator and of the owner of the drone involved. The drone
operator shall also present a valid and unexpired form of identification issued
by a state government or the United States federal government.
      (2)   In the event the owner or person in charge of the damaged property
cannot reasonably be ascertained or located, the drone operator shall leave in
a conspicuous place on the property damaged a written notice giving the name
and current residential address of the drone operator and of the owner of the
drone involved, as well as a statement of the circumstances of the incident
resulting in the property damage. The drone operator must also provide this
information to the City Police Department within twenty-four (24) hours of the
incident.
      (3)   Each failure to report an incident of property damage as required
by this subsection shall constitute a separate violation of this regulation.
   (r)   The City Manager, Chief of Police, Fire Chief, or their respective
designees with the authorization of the FAA may issue "No Fly" proclamations
prohibiting drone operations as necessary to protect public safety. "No Fly"
proclamations shall specify the locations, dates, and times that drone
operations are prohibited and shall be posted on the City's website, at City
Hall, and at the Police Department. Drone operators are required to verify
whether a "No Fly" proclamation is in effect prior to initiating drone
operations. “No Fly” proclamations may be imposed Citywide or limited to
certain areas, and may be in effect for certain times or for certain dates in
their entirety as necessary to protect public safety. It is a violation to
operate a drone during "No Fly" hours, or to fail to immediately cease drone
operations after being notified by an agent of a public safety agency that a
"No Fly" restriction is in effect.
   (s)   This regulation shall not prohibit the use of drones that both:
      (1)   Are flown in compliance with Section 336 of the Federal Aviation
Administration Modernization and Reform Act of 2012; and
      (2)   Do not transmit or record visual images or audio recordings of any
person or real property located in the City without the person or property
owner's written consent
(§ 2, Ord. 3310, eff. September 18, 2025)
Sec. 7-1.1004. Protected sites.
   (a)   Airports. No person shall land or takeoff a drone within five (5)
miles of any airport, unless authorized by the air traffic control tower.
   (b)   Government building. No person shall land or take off a drone within a
five hundred (500)- foot horizontal distance of any government building, unless
authorized by the chief administrator of the building in writing.
   (c)   City Hall. No person shall land or takeoff a drone within a five
hundred (500)-foot horizontal distance of City Hall, unless authorized by the
City Manager in writing.
   (d)   Jails. No person shall land or takeoff a Drone within a five hundred
(500)-foot horizontal distance of any jail or prison facility, unless
authorized by the chief administrator of the jail or prison facility in
writing.
   (e)   Police station. No person shall land or takeoff a drone within a five
hundred (500)-foot horizontal distance of any police station or structure,
unless authorized by the Chief of Police or the Chief’s designee in writing.
   (f)   Fire station. No person shall land or takeoff a drone within a five
hundred (500)-foot horizontal distance of any fire station or structure, unless
authorized by the Fire Chief or the Chief’s designee in writing.
   (g)   Schools. No person shall land or takeoff a drone within a five hundred
(500)-foot horizontal distance of any school or school yard, while school is in
session unless authorized by the principal or superintendent of the school in
writing.
   (h)   Public utility facilities. No person shall land or takeoff a drone
within a five hundred (500)-foot horizontal distance of any public utility
facility including, but not limited to any water, sewage, or electric
generating facility without the authorization of the chief administrator of the
facility in writing (and subject to any restrictions that the chief
administrator of the facility may impose).
   (i)   Communication and utility lines. No person shall land or takeoff a
drone within the airspace above or within a one hundred (100)-foot horizontal
distance of any cell tower, overhead wire, cable, conveyor, or similar
equipment for the transmission of sounds, signal, heat, light, power, utility,
or data; or upon or along any public way within the City without the
authorization of the owner or chief administrator of the equipment in writing
(and subject to any restrictions that the owner or chief administrator of the
equipment may impose).
   (j)   Churches. No person shall land or takeoff a drone at any open-air
assembly area, place of worship, or public building or facility without the
authorization of the chief administrator in writing (and subject to any
restrictions that the chief administrator may impose).
   (k)   Private property. No person shall land or takeoff a drone within any
populated or developed private property, unless authorized by the property
owner in writing. This subsection shall not apply to persons on the premises
who are engaging in activities protected by the Constitutions of the State of
California or the United States of America, or to persons who are on the
premises at the request of a resident or management and who are not loitering
or otherwise violating any law or ordinance.
   (l)   Special events. No person shall land or takeoff a drone within a five
hundred (500)-foot horizontal distance of any special event in the City, unless
authorized by the City Manager in writing.
(§ 2, Ord. 3310, eff. September 18, 2025)
Sec. 7-1.1005. Exemptions.
   (a)   The provisions of this regulation shall not apply to any drone that is
used or operated by or on behalf of the City or any law enforcement, public
safety, emergency management, or government agency in compliance with all
applicable federal, state, and local laws and policies.
   (b)   This regulation shall not apply to any drones used by the City or any
City-contracted agent or agency engaging in City business including but not
limited to flight training, surveying and mapping property, inspecting
infrastructure, monitoring traffic, or recording local events.
(§ 2, Ord. 3310, eff. September 18, 2025)
Sec. 7-1.1006. Commercial operations.
   (a)   In addition to the other requirements of this regulation, commercial
drone operators must comply with all applicable FAA, federal, state, and local
regulations while operating within the City.
   (b)   A drone operating permit as well as a business license must be
obtained from the City before commencing any commercial drone activities within
the City. If commercial drone activities involve operating in or passing
through multiple jurisdictions, the commercial drone operator is responsible
for paying the proportionate business license fees and taxes due to the City
for the proportion of operations occurring within the limits of the City and
its airspace.
   (c)   Commercial drone operators must submit a report to the City prior to
commencing commercial drone operations. The report must include the intended
flight plan, areas of operation, and the purpose of the commercial operations.
(§ 2, Ord. 3310, eff. September 18, 2025)
Sec. 7-1.1007. Permit requirements.
   (a)   Any drone operating in a commercial capacity or in a protected site
must obtain an operating permit. Once the permit is obtained, the office of the
Chief of Police or the Chief’s designee must be notified in writing of the
intended flight plan. The operating permit can be obtained at https://
www.ontarioca.gov/Flysafe. Permit requirements are in addition to any other
provisions outlined within this code.
   (b)   Drones used for recreational purposes are not required to obtain a
permit prior to operation within the city. Recreational flyers are still
required to meet all FAA regulations including obtaining registration through
the FAA if the drone weighs more than point fifty-five (.55) pounds. The
registration number shall be affixed to the drone itself.
(§ 2, Ord. 3310, eff. September 18, 2025)
Sec. 7-1.1008. Enforcement.
   (a)   Any condition created, caused, committed, or maintained in violation
of any provision of this regulation is hereby declared to be unlawful and a
public nuisance.
   (b)   Any person who engages in a violation of this regulation or who owns,
possesses, manages, controls, or has charge of any drone in violation of this
regulation shall be subject to the penalties and remedies provided by this
regulation.
   (c)   Any violation of this regulation shall constitute a separate offense
for each and every day the violation occurs or persists.
   (d)   Any person in violation of any provision of this regulation may:
      (1)   Be guilty of a misdemeanor, punishable by imprisonment of up to six
(6) months in County Jail or by a fine not exceeding one thousand dollars
($1,000) or by both; and/or
      (2)   Subject to the issuance of an administrative citation.
   (e)   Any intentional injury or property damage caused while operating a
drone will be referred to the County District Attorney for criminal
prosecution.
   (f)   Upon any violation of this regulation, the City Manager, any emergency
responder, or any other law enforcement officer (collectively "officer") can
request the violating drone operator to land the drone. Neither the City, nor
the officers involved, shall be liable for any damage to a drone caused by an
officer while enforcing this regulation.
   (g)   Neither the City, nor any emergency responders involved, shall be
liable for any damage to a drone caused by the emergency responder while
performing emergency services if such damage was reasonably necessary to ensure
unhindered performance of emergency services.
(§ 2, Ord. 3310, eff. September 18, 2025)
CHAPTER 2: DATUM PLANE
   
7-2.01   Established
Sec. 7-2.01. Established.
   The level or datum plane for the City is hereby established at sea level,
and the official bench mark of the City is hereby established as a point at the
intersection of the vertical and horizontal lines on a round brass plate, two
(2) inches in diameter, set in the wall at the southwest corner of the north
wing of old City Hall at 225 South Euclid Avenue which presently houses the
Ontario Museum of History and Art, two (2) feet, more or less, from the ground,
and at an elevation of 995.405 feet above sea level. All grades, elevations,
and levels of the City shall be based upon such datum plane and bench mark.
(§§ 1 and 2, Ord. 599, eff. May 19, 1937)
CHAPTER 3: PUBLIC RIGHTS-OF-WAY *
*Sections 7-3.01 through 7-3.17, codified from Ord. 1663, eff. October 5, 1967,
amended in their entirety by § 1, Ord. 1879, eff. February 5, 1976.
   
7-3.01   Title and scope of provisions
   
7-3.02   Purpose of provisions
   
7-3.03   Definitions
   
7-3.04   Permits
   
7-3.05   Building and oversize load permits
   
7-3.06   Right to appeal to the Council: Hearings
   
7-3.07   Safety devices, lights, and barricades
   
7-3.08   Storage, displays, and advertising
   
7-3.09   Removal and damaging of structures and vegetation
   
7-3.10   Parking in parkways
   
7-3.11   Sight distance
   
7-3.12   Maintenance of parkways
   
7-3.13   Landscaping parkways
   
7-3.14   Surface drainage
   
7-3.15   Underground utilities and franchised services
   
7-3.16   Aboveground utilities, franchised services, and airspace encroachments
   
7-3.17   Temporary street closures
   
7-3.18   Improvement standards
   
7-3.19   Administration of provisions
   
7-3.20   Violations: Penalties
Sec. 7-3.01. Title and scope of provisions.  
   This chapter may be cited as the "Public Right-of-Way Regulations" of the
City. The provisions of this chapter shall constitute a supplement to all
applicable State Code sections concerning rights-of-way and encroachments
thereon. In the event of conflicting provisions, the most restrictive shall
prevail.
(§ 1, Ord. 1879, eff. February 5, 1976)
Sec. 7-3.02. Purpose of provisions.
   The purpose of this chapter shall be to regulate the development,
maintenance, use, and encroachment of public rights-of-way and other public
places to achieve the maximum service of the public interest with respect to
health, safety, and aesthetic values.
(§ 1, Ord. 1879, eff. February 5, 1976)
Sec. 7-3.03. Definitions.  
   For the purposes of this chapter, unless otherwise apparent from the
context, certain words and phrases used in this chapter are defined as follows:
   (a)   "Applicant" shall mean any person who proposes to encroach upon a
right-of-way and has applied for a permit for the proposed encroachment
pursuant to the provisions of this chapter.
   (b)   "Base course" shall mean that portion of the highway structural
section located between the pavement and the native soil.
   (c)   "Building" shall mean any type of structure normally used as a place
of habitation, business, or storage or for the shelter of animals.
   (d)   "City" shall mean the City of Ontario, a municipal corporation: the
Council thereof; or any employee or agent thereof designated by the Council to
administer the provisions of this chapter.
   (e)   "Curb line" shall mean the face of existing curbs or the location at
which the curb face is to be built in conformance with the Master Plan of
Streets and Highways, design standards, or approved improvement plans.
   (f)   "Development" shall mean any improvement required or permitted by the
City pursuant to the provisions of this chapter or any ordinance within the
areas to which the provisions of this chapter apply.
   (g)   "Driveway" shall mean that portion of the right-of-way between the
property line and curb, or between the property line and the pavement if no
curb exists, where vehicles enter or leave the highway to or from adjacent
property.
   (h)   "Encroachment" shall mean any obstruction, tower, pole, pole line,
pipe, fence, wire, cable, conduit, stand, or building, or any structure or
object of any kind or character not particularly mentioned in this chapter,
which is placed on, in, along, under, over, or across the highway. This section
shall not apply to the temporary use of the highway for the ordinary
maintenance of any existing authorized or permitted encroachment; nor to the
suspension or stringing on existing pole lines of additional cable, wires,
transmission lines, conduits, or service connections solely for telephone,
electric, or cable television power purposes.
   (i)   "Engineer" shall mean the City Engineer of the City or his authorized
representative.
   (j)   "Excavation" shall mean any depression below the surrounding surface
formed by the removal or displacement of surface or subsurface materials,
including the area occupied by such materials, or any boring, tunneling,
jacking, or other subsurface removal or dig placement.
   (k)   "Ground cover" shall mean prostrate or low- growing evergreen plants
cultivated in lieu of turf and which may not be suitable for foot traffic.
   (l)   "Height" shall mean that dimension measured from the level surface
upon which the vehicle or conveyance stands to the highest protrusion in a
vertical line.
   (m)   "Highway" shall mean any public highway, street, way, place, or alley
within the City limits, either owned by the City or dedicated to the public for
the purpose of travel. The term shall include all or any part of the entire
width of the right-of-way, and above and below the same, whether or not such
entire area is actually used for highway purposes.
   (n)   "Moving Contractor" shall mean any person who for himself, herself or
for another moves, or causes to be moved, any building or oversized load over,
upon, along, or across any highway.
   (o)   "Native Soil" shall mean the compacted native material.
   (p)   "Oversize Load" shall mean and refer exclusively to the size and
weight of loads upon vehicles exceeding the limitations set forth in Cal. Veh.
Code Division 15 relating to the height, length, width, size, or weight of a
vehicle or load.
   (q)   "Owner" shall mean any person holding title to real property abutting
upon a public right-of-way, or any lessee, assignee, tenant, or agent thereof.
For the purposes of this chapter, the prime responsibility for compliance shall
rest upon whichever of such persons is the occupant or user of the property,
and ultimate responsibility shall rest upon the legal title holder.
   (r)   "Parkway" shall mean that portion of any public highway right-of-way
between the property line or right-of-way boundary line and the curb line and
also the area enclosed within the curb lines of a median divider.
   (s)   "Pavement" shall mean the surface and subsurface portion of the
highway structural section which is composed of various size aggregates mixed
with Portland cement and/or asphaltic cement compounds.
   (t)   "Permittee" shall mean any person who proposes to encroach upon a
right-of-way and has been issued a permit for the proposed encroachment by the
City pursuant to the provisions of this chapter.
   (u)   "Person" shall mean any individual, firm, copartnership, association,
corporation, joint venture, estate, trust, business trust, district, company,
or organization of any kind.
   (v)   "Right-of-way" shall mean any area dedicated to public use for street
purposes and shall include any real property, or portion thereof, owned by the
municipal corporation which is used for, and in the same manner as, dedicated
right-of-way.
   (w)   "Shall" shall be mandatory. "May" is permissive.
   (x)   "Shrub" shall mean plants characterized by moderate mature height,
usually having multiple woody stems.
   (y)   "State" shall mean the State of California.
   (z)   "Structure" shall mean any fixed or movable object or portion thereof,
or paving material of any kind, but shall not include vegetation.
   (aa)   "Tree" shall mean plants having a single upright woody stem or trunk,
maturing at a height in excess of ten (10) feet.
   (ab)   "Turf" shall mean cultivated grasses, clovers, mosses, dichondra, and
similar vegetation usually suitable for foot traffic.
   (ac)   "Vegetation" shall mean all volunteer plants and the following
categories of cultivated plant materials:
      (1)   Ground cover as defined in subsection (k) of this section;
      (2)   Shrubs as defined in subsection (x) of this section;
      (3)   Trees as defined in subsection (aa) of this section;
      (4)   Turf as defined in subsection (ab) of this section.
   (ad)   "Vehicle" shall mean any vehicle or combination of vehicles as
described in the Vehicle Code of the State which:
      (1)   Whether laden or unladen, is required by the Vehicle Code to have a
special permit to be on any highway; or
      (2)   Is so laden that it is required to have a special permit.
   (ae)   "Vehicle Code" shall mean the provisions of the Vehicle Code of the
State in effect at the time of the issuance of the permit.
   (af)   "Width" shall mean that dimension measured at right angles to the
anterior-posterior axis of the conveyance upon which a load, or portion
thereof, is, or is to be, loaded or moved or to the median line of the highway
over which the same is being, or is to be, moved.
(§ 1, Ord. 1879, eff. February 5, 1976)
Sec. 7-3.04. Permits.
   (a)   Required. No person shall do work within or encroach upon public
rights-of-way without prior authorization from the City. Permits shall be
obtained from the City for, but not limited to, the following:
      (1)   Moving, or causing to be moved, on, over, along, or across any
highway any building or oversize load;
      (2)   Making, or causing to be made, any excavation or encroachment in
any highway;
      (3)   Placing, constructing, or repairing any curb, gutter, sidewalk,
driveway, pavement, base course, retaining wall, storm drain, culvert, pipe,
conduit, cable, or other work of similar nature in, over, along, across or
through any highway;
      (4)   Constructing, reconstructing, or repairing any highway light or
lighting system in any highway. This subsection shall not apply if any
agreement with the City exists for the construction or maintenance of such
installation;
      (5)   Placing or leaving any impediment to travel upon any highway;
      (6)   Erecting or maintaining any post, sign, banner, pole, fence, guard
rail, wall, or any other structure on, over, under, or within any right-of-way;
      (7)   Planting or removing any tree within any right-of-way;
      (8)   Causing or permitting excessive amounts of water (other than water
from natural sources) or any amount of any other liquid to flow onto or upon
any right-of-way which shall cause or create a public nuisance or hazard or be
detrimental to the improvements within the right-of-way; and
      (9)   Constructing, installing, or removing any sprinkler or irrigation
system or pipes.
   (b)   (Reserved)
   (c)   No permit: Procedure. Any person who shall commence any work for which
a permit is required by this chapter without first having obtained a permit
therefor shall stop such work and apply for such permit. Failure on the part of
such person to stop the work and to obtain a proper permit shall make him or
her in violation of this chapter and subject to all the penalties thereof.
   (d)   Denial of permits. The Engineer may refuse to issue a permit under the
following conditions:
      (1)   When he or she finds that it is not in the best interests of the
general public to do so; and
      (2)   When he or she finds that it will be detrimental to the public
health, safety, or welfare.
   (e)   Cancellation of permits. A permit may be canceled by the Engineer for
any of the following reasons:
      (1)   When permitted work is not started within the time specified and/or
is started but not diligently prosecuted to completion;
      (2)   The failure on the part of the permittee to comply with any or all
of the requirements of the permit;
      (3)   The failure on the part of the permittee to provide for the public
safety; and
      (4)   When the work, or any portion thereof, is in violation of
applicable State, County, or City Codes, regulations, or laws.
   (f)   Restoration of rights-of-way. Upon the completion of any encroachment
work authorized by a permit, the permittee shall restore the right-of-way and
any structure thereon by replacing, repairing, or rebuilding it to no less than
its original condition before the encroachment work was commenced. The
permittee shall remove all obstructions, materials, and debris upon the right-
of-way and shall do any other work necessary to restore the right-of-way to a
safe and usable condition as directed by the Engineer. In the event the
permittee fails to act promptly to restore the right-of-way as herein provided,
or should the nature of any damage to the right-of-way require restoration
before the permittee can be notified or can respond to notification, the
Engineer may, at his or her option, cause the necessary restoration to be made.
All costs of such restoration shall be borne by the permittee.
   (g)   Applications for issuance of permits. Applications for permits shall
be made in writing to the City on the forms provided by the City.
      (1)   Application requirements. An applicant for a permit shall state in
his or her application his or her name and address, the contractor's name and
address, the location of the work to be performed, and such other information
as is required by this chapter and as required by the City.
      (2)   Exhibits. When required by the City, the applicant shall provide
copies of a map, plat, sketch, diagram, or similar exhibit which plainly shows
any and all information necessary to locate, delineate, illustrate, or identify
the proposed encroachment.
      (3)   Changes in applications. The City may make such changes or
additions in any application for a permit as are necessary for the protection
of the highways; for the prevention of undue interference with traffic; as to
the route upon which to move any building or oversize load; as to the location,
depth, dimensions, character, and number of excavations; as to encroachments
made or placed; and as to other permits issued pursuant to the provisions of
this chapter.
      (4)   Permits nontransferable. Permits issued under the authority of this
chapter shall be nontransferable.
   (h)   Fees and deposits. All applications for permits pursuant to the
provisions of this chapter shall be accompanied by the fees established by the
City by resolution of the Council to defray the costs of administering the
provisions of this chapter, together with any deposits which may be deemed
necessary to guarantee the replacement of improvements temporarily removed in
the performance of the permitted activity and the restoration of the right-of-
way to its original condition.
   (i)   Fee waivers. The City may grant a waiver of the permit fees for
permits issued to other public agencies and for permits for work to be under
City contracts.
   (j)   Exceptions. The provisions of this section shall not apply to approved
landscaping activities, including the installation of shrubs, turf, and ground
covers, nor to the removal of shrubs, turf, and ground covers.
   (k)   Excavation permits. No excavation permit shall be issued by the City
for any excavation that will be more than five (5) feet deep until the
applicant has obtained a "Permit to Excavate" from the State Department of
Industrial Relations, Division of Industrial Safety, and has given the City
proof of same.
      (1)   Acceptance: Conditions. By accepting the permit, the permittee
agrees to be bound by all the terms and conditions set forth in the permit and
in this chapter.
(§ 1, Ord. 1879, eff. February 5, 1976)
Sec. 7-3.05. Building and oversize load permits.
   (a)   Required. No person shall move, or cause to be moved, any building or
oversize load upon, over, along, or across any highway without first obtaining
a permit to do so from the Engineer as provided for in this chapter.
Applications for such permits shall be made with the Engineer not less than
forty-eight (48) hours prior to the proposed entry of any building or oversize
load upon any highway within the City, which building or load:
      (1)   Exceeds sixteen (16) feet in width;
      (2)   Exceeds eighteen (18) feet in height;
      (3)   Is to proceed along non-designated truck routes; or
      (4)   Is judged by the Engineer to require advance notice.
   The Engineer may shorten or extend such time period as he or she deems
necessary or appropriate in order to carry out the provisions of this chapter.
No person shall move or cause to be moved any building or oversize load upon,
over, along, or across any highway contrary to the terms, provisions, and
conditions of a permit issued hereunder by the Engineer or in violation of any
provision of this chapter or of the Vehicle Code. This section shall not apply
to an oversize load moved by a authorized public officer in the event of flood,
fire, earthquake, or other public disaster or act of God, or for the purpose of
national defense.
   (b)   Types of permits and fees. The following types of permits and fees
shall apply for moving any building or oversize load within the City:
      (1)   One-day Permits. The Engineer may issue a one-day permit to move a
specified building, or separate section thereof, or a specified oversize load
on specifically designated City highways during a time specified by the
Engineer.
      (2)   Temporary permits. The Engineer may issue a temporary permit to
move any number of specified, identical, oversize loads on specifically
designated City highways at specified times by six (6) or less specified
vehicles for a time not to exceed thirty (30) consecutive calendar days.
      (3)   Annual permits. The Engineer may issue an annual permit to move any
number of oversize loads on specifically designated City highways at specified
times by six (6) or less vehicles as provided in the permit by the Engineer
during a period of time not to exceed 365 consecutive calendar days provided
each of such oversize loads does not exceed fourteen (14) feet in width,
fifteen (15) feet in height, and one hundred (100) tons in gross weight and
conforms to the weight, axle number, and wheel loading requirements of the
State as provided in Cal. Veh. Code §§ 35550 and 35551. The Engineer may, at
the time of the issuance of such annual permit, reduce the gross weight
limitations set forth in this section provided the specifically designated City
highways to be used in moving such oversize loads would, in his or her opinion,
be materially damaged thereby.
      (4)   Fees: Deposits. All permits issued pursuant to the provisions of
this section shall be accompanied by the fees established by the City by
resolution of the Council to defray the costs of administering the provisions
of this section, together with any deposits which may be deemed necessary.
   (c)   Public liability and property damage insurance. The applicant for the
permit required by this section shall indemnify and save harmless the City and
all officers and employees thereof from any suits, claims, or actions brought
by any person or persons for, or on account of, any injuries or damages
sustained because of, or arising from, moving or relocating any building or
oversize load upon, over, along, or across City highways. The applicant shall
furnish to the City, and maintain during the period for which a moving permit
is issued, a public liability and property damage insurance policy insuring the
City, and its officers and employees while acting within the scope of their
duties, against all claims, suits, or actions arising out of or in connection
with the movement of, or having on a City highway, a building or oversize load.
Such policy shall provide coverage in amounts as determined by the Engineer,
but not less than One Hundred Thousand Dollars ($100,000.00) for bodily injury
for each person, Three Hundred Thousand Dollars ($300,000.00) for bodily injury
for each accident, and property damage insurance of not less than One Hundred
Thousand Dollars ($100,000.00).
   Such insurance or a certificate thereof shall be placed on file with the
Engineer prior to the issuance of any moving permit.
   (d)   Permit information. The application for any moving permit required by
this chapter shall be made on a form furnished by the Engineer and shall
contain the following information:
      (1)   The present location and the proposed location to which the
building or oversize load is to be moved;
      (2)   The length of time for which the permit is requested;
      (3)   A complete description of the vehicle or vehicles to be operated,
including the make, license number, number of axles, wheel loading ratios,
height, width, gross weight, and name of the registered owner of the vehicles.
In the case of annual or temporary permits contemplating the use of more than
one vehicle, the permittee may substitute or add vehicles or loads being
operated or transported under such permit, upon the submission to the Engineer
of the required information regarding such vehicles or loads and his or her
approval thereof, by addendum to the permit at least twenty four (24) hours
prior to their operation or transportation, along with any additional permit
fees as are required;
      (4)   A complete description of the load to be moved, including the
height, width, length, and gross weight of such load, and, if the request is
for a temporary or annual permit for an oversize load, the number of trips
contemplated for each load described. If the request is for moving a building,
the number of sections in which the building or structure will be moved and the
type and number of conveyances upon which the building or structure is to be
moved;
      (5)   The proposed route or routes of travel for any movement of such
building or oversize load upon, over, along, or across any City highway;
      (6)   The date and hour of the proposed entry onto, and the date and hour
of clearance of the building or oversize load from, any City highway. In the
case of temporary or annual permits for the movement of oversize loads, the
proposed days and times during the day such movement will occur on City
highways;
      (7)   Such other information and data as the Engineer determines is
necessary and required to carry out the provisions of this chapter; and
      (8)   If the application is for moving a building within the City, the
application shall be accompanied by a certificate in writing from the Chief
Building Official to the effect that the Building Department has issued a
permit and approved the relocating of such building within the City in
compliance with City building regulations.
   (e)   Conditions for granting permits. The Engineer shall have the right to
require any reasonable conditions for granting a permit to move, or cause to
move, any building or oversize load upon, over, along, or across any public
highway and to take all actions he deems necessary to protect the public
highway or property of any person and the public health, peace, safety, and
welfare, including, but not limited to, the following:
      (1)   The right to inspect all rollers, trucks, wheels, dollies,
tractors, or other proposed apparatus or equipment proposed to be used in the
moving operations and the right to require the use of only such apparatus and
equipment as in his judgment will not cause injuries to highways, pavement, or
other property or persons;
      (2)   The right to restrict the number of trips and the weight, length,
width, height, and size of a building or oversize load;
      (3)   The times and dates of the periods during which trips may be made;
      (4)   The right to require a police escort for all trips made under such
permit as deemed necessary by the Police Chief to protect the public safety.
The actual cost of such police escort shall be borne by the permittee, who
shall make a deposit in advance;
      (5)   The right to require every person moving, or causing to be moved,
any building or oversize load within the City to provide warning flags, extra
lights, or reflectors in such locations on the building or oversize load so as
to clearly indicate the existence of a hazard in all directions from which
traffic may approach;
      (6)   The right to require the applicant to notify and obtain the written
approval of any person or public utility whose property or facilities will be
unduly disturbed or endangered by the applicant moving an overload upon, over,
along, or across City highways. All costs for the protection of such property
or facilities, or the relocation or temporary removal and replacement of the
same, shall be home by the applicant;
      (7)   The right to require the moving of any building or oversize load to
be accomplished under the supervision of a City Inspector. The permittee shall
pay the City an amount equal to the compensation for, and transportation of,
such inspector, plus overhead costs during the time he is assigned to inspect
such move; and
      (8)   The right to require any other reasonable conditions he or she
deems necessary to carry out the provisions of this chapter and to protect the
public health, peace, safety, and welfare.
   (f)   Issuance of permits. If, after receiving an application for a permit
to move a building or oversize load, accompanied by the required fees and
deposits and insurance or certificate thereof, and after the Engineer has
determined within the reasonable period of time that the movement as proposed
in the application will not be detrimental to the public health, peace, safety,
and welfare, and that the permittee has complied with all fire, police, safety,
sanitary, health, building, planning, and general welfare requirements of the
pertinent rules, regulations, Codes, ordinances, and other laws of the City or
State relating thereto in effect at the time, the Engineer shall issue a permit
to move a building, or sections thereof, or an oversize load or loads subject
to such reasonable terms, provisions, and conditions as required by this
chapter and as he or she deems necessary to protect the public highways and
property or structures of any person and the public health, peace, safety, and
welfare. The granting of such permit shall in no way relieve the permittee from
liability for damages to public highways or to any persons or property.
   (g)   Denial of permits. The Engineer shall have the authority, within his
or her discretion, to deny the issuance of a permit if, in his or her opinion,
the moving of a building or oversize load will cause damages to City-owned
property or will be detrimental to the public health, peace, safety, and
welfare or will be in violation of any pertinent rules, regulations, Codes,
ordinances, and other laws of the City or State.
   (h)   Flammable and explosive materials. No person shall transport
explosive, flammable, or corrosive materials by means of any building or
oversize load within the City.
   (i)   Suspension and revocation of permits. The Engineer may at any time
suspend or revoke a permit issued pursuant to the provisions of this chapter
when he or she has reasonable cause to believe a permittee has violated, or is
causing or permitting a violation of, this chapter, including the conditions
set forth by the Engineer in granting such permit or any pertinent laws of the
City or the State or when it has been shown to his or her satisfaction that the
activities so permitted are being conducted in a manner detrimental to the
public health, peace, safety, or welfare of the City. The Engineer may also
suspend or revoke any permit hereunder if he or she has probable cause to
believe the permittee, or any agent, official, or employee of the permittee,
has misrepresented, falsified, or concealed any material fact in the
application therefor.
   (j)   Permits to be carried in vehicles or with operators. Every building or
oversize load permit, or facsimile thereof, shall be carried in the vehicle to
which it refers and shall be presented upon demand to any peace officer or duly
authorized agent of the City charged with the care and protection of the City
highways.
(§ 1, Ord. 1879, eff. February 5, 1976, as amended by § 1, Ord. 1893, eff. May
6, 1976)
Sec. 7-3.06. Right to appeal to the Council: Hearings.
   Any applicant who deems himself or herself aggrieved by any action or
determination of the Engineer as provided in this chapter may appeal to the
Council within five (5) days after such action or determination by filing a
written notice of appeal with the Engineer and paying a filing fee of Fifty
Dollars ($50.00). Failure on the part of the applicant to file such notice of
appeal within the five (5) days as herein specified shall constitute the
acceptance of such action or determination of the Engineer.
   The notice of appeal shall be sufficient in form if it contains the names
and addresses of the applicants and states that the appeal is from an action of
the Engineer in either granting or denying such application for a building or
oversize load moving permit.
   Any person or persons who may consider themselves aggrieved by the moving of
buildings or oversize loads as provided in this chapter may file written signed
objections with the Engineer at least twenty four (24) hours prior to the
issuance of such permit, setting forth the name and address of the party
aggrieved and the reasons for the objections, and, upon such objections being
filed with the Engineer, the permit shall not be issued. The Engineer shall
forthwith send any notice of appeal or written signed objections, together with
a copy of the application and the objections thereto, to the City Clerk, upon
any such notice of appeal or objection, the application, together with such
notice of appeal or written objection, with the report and file relating
thereto, shall be forwarded to the Council as soon as reasonably practical, and
the Council shall thereupon determine whether or not the permit shall be issued
as provided herein after a hearing thereupon, and such hearing shall be held
within the City at the earliest reasonable time thereafter; provided, however,
the applicant and any such objector shall be mailed certified notice thereof to
their last known address at least five (5) days prior to such hearing.
   All determinations by the Council after any hearing as provided in this
section shall be considered final and conclusive.
(§ 1, Ord. 1879, eff. February 5, 1976)
Sec. 7-3.07. Safety devices, lights, and barricades.
   Any activity or encroachment on a right-of-way which is hazardous, creates a
hazard, or is in conflict with the normal use of a right-of-way shall be
adequately safeguarded as required by the City. In the conduct of such activity
or encroachment, materials, supplies, excavated material, and equipment shall
be properly placed, and the permittee shall provide and maintain such safety
devices, including, but not limited to, lights, barricades, signs, and guards,
as are necessary to protect the public. Any omission on the part of the
Engineer to specify in the permit the type and locations of such devices that
shall be provided by, or preventive action required of, the permittee shall not
excuse the permittee from complying with all the laws and regulations relating
to the protection of persons or property under the circumstances. Any
disturbance of, or interference with, such safety devices by any person shall
be prohibited. If the Engineer or any authorized representative of the City
finds that suitable safety devices are not being provided, the City may provide
such devices and may bill the permittee for the same and collect such costs in
any lawful manner.
(§ 1, Ord. 1879, eff. February 5, 1976)
Sec. 7-3.08. Storage, displays, and advertising.
   The use of any right-of-way for the purposes of storing, displaying, or
advertising personal property, merchandise, services, or activities shall be
prohibited. No person shall post, store, display, stick, stamp, paint, or
otherwise fix, or cause the same to be done by any person, any notice, sign,
placard, bill, card, poster, advertisement, or other paper or device calculated
to attract the attention of the public to or upon any right-of-way except such
paper or device which may be authorized or required by the laws of the United
States, State, or City.
(§ 1, Ord. 1879, eff. February 5, 1976, as amended by § 3, Ord. 2921, eff. June
3, 2010)
Sec. 7-3.09. Removal and damaging of structures and vegetation.
    No person shall remove, damage, destroy, mutilate, deface, relocate, alter,
or injure any improvement, structure, tree, or other cultivated vegetation
within any public right-of-way or other public place. The provisions of this
section shall not apply to the proper care and cultivation of landscaping
materials, including the minor pruning of trees.
(§ 1, Ord. 1879, eff. February 5, 1976)
Sec. 7-3.10. Parking in parkways.
   The use of any parkway area for the parking of bicycles, motor vehicles, or
trailers of any kind shall be prohibited.
(§ 1, Ord. 1879, eff. February 5, 1976)
Sec. 7-3.11. Sight distance.
   No hedge, shrub, or other planting, and no fence or other structure, shall
be planted, erected, or maintained in a right-of-way without a permit or upon
any sidewalk or shoulder or in such a manner which impedes, obstructs, denies,
or impairs the sight distance for safe pedestrian and vehicular traffic.
(§ 1, Ord. 1879, eff. February 5, 1976)
Sec. 7-3.12. Maintenance of parkways. 
   Except as otherwise provided, every owner, occupant, or person having charge
of property shall install, maintain and use as frequently as necessary an
irrigation sprinkler system and shall make every reasonable effort to maintain
the abutting parkway in a safe and neat condition devoid of debris, bare dirt,
dead, dying or uncultivated vegetation, obstructions, structures, excavations,
or other significant deviations from a grade of one-fourth (1/4) inch per foot
from the top of the curb to the right-of-way boundary.
(§ 1, Ord. 1879, eff. February 5, 1976, as amended by § 2, Ord. 2740, eff. July
5, 2001)
Sec. 7-3.13. Landscaping parkways.
   The planting and removal of all trees within parkway areas shall be subject
to approval by a permit from the City and shall conform to the requirements of
the Master Plan of Parkway Trees. No vegetation shall be planted, cultivated,
or allowed to exist within any right-of-way which produces thorns, spines, or
any form of fruit or other growth which may constitute a hazard or grievous
nuisance.
   Any ground cover or shrubbery cultivated in a parkway area shall not be
permitted to grow above eighteen (18) inches in height or be permitted to
spread over the adjoining pavement, curb, or sidewalk. The cultivation of any
ground cover not suited to foot traffic shall be allowed only under the
following conditions: in addition to the standard sidewalk, where such sidewalk
is not adjacent to the curb, a sidewalk not less than eighteen (18) inches wide
shall be provided adjacent to the curb with a connecting sidewalk not less than
twenty-four (24) inches wide between it and the standard sidewalk, located at
or near the middle of each curbside parking space. This provision shall not
apply where parking is prohibited.
   It shall be the responsibility of the owner, occupant, or person having
charge or control of property to plant grass and/or groundcover, as well as to
sufficiently water, trim, and otherwise maintain all vegetation within the
abutting parkway, including trimming of trees to provide a minimum clearance of
eight (8) feet from grade. The City shall be responsible for all divider-median
parkway maintenance, for all major pruning or other tree surgery, and for all
pruning of parkway trees which cannot be pruned from the ground.
(§ 1, Ord. 1879, eff. February 5, 1976, as amended by § 2, Ord. 2740, eff. July
5, 2001)
Sec. 7-3.14. Surface drainage.
   Any activity which adversely affects surface drainage shall not be
considered completed until acceptable drainage has been restored.
(§ 1, Ord. 1879, eff. February 5, 1976)
Sec. 7-3.15. Underground utilities and franchised services.
   Prior to the construction or major reconditioning of pavement or other
improvements within any right-of-way, the City shall notify any person holding
a franchise to install, maintain, or operate any underground facility of the
impending work. When so notified, such person shall undertake, in a timely
manner, to perform any maintenance or installation for which there is a
foreseeable need.
   Any person who, after such notice, fails to complete such work in a timely
manner and within one year thereafter makes an application for a permit to do
work within the area involving the improvements described in such notice, the
nature of which work is such that it should have been foreseen, may be denied
the issuance of the requested permit until there exists other justification for
the partial removal and replacement of such improvements. The applicant may be
allowed the option of securing the permit on the condition that the
improvements involved be completely replaced to the satisfaction of the City.
(§ 1, Ord. 1879, eff. February 5, 1976)
Sec. 7-3.16. Aboveground utilities, franchised services, and airspace
encroachments. 
   Except as otherwise provided under franchise provisions, no public utility
or other person shall erect, or cause to have erected any pole or structure
within any right-of-way from which to suspend any power or communication
conductor or any structure, or portion thereof, which for any purpose
encroaches within the airspace of any right-of-way without having first
obtained approval by the City of the nature and location thereof.
(§ 1, Ord. 1879, eff. February 5, 1976)
Sec. 7-3.17. Temporary street closures.
   For the purpose of the construction or maintenance of any improvement within
any public right-of-way, or for any other purpose the City deems appropriate,
the City may close or permit the closure of such right-of-way, or portion
thereof, to vehicular traffic and, when necessary, to pedestrian traffic. The
closure shall be effected by the placement of substantial barriers or
barricades at the ends and at each intersection of the closed area with any
other right-of-way and shall have signs as required. Detour signs shall be
placed at such intersections as are necessary for the orderly flow of traffic
around such closed areas. Barriers or barricades and detour signs shall be
lighted in accordance with the provisions of §
7-3.07 of this chapter.
   No person shall move, remove, or obscure such barriers, barricades, or
signs, or travel through any closed area without prior authorization from the
City.
(§ 1, Ord. 1879, eff. February 5, 1976)
Sec. 7-3.18. Improvement standards.
   Improvements and restorations constructed or modified within any right-of-
way shall conform to the Standard Specifications and Standard Plans and to the
Master Plan of Streets and Highways, as amended, of the City.
   Any deviation from such standards shall be constructed in accordance with an
improvement plan approved by the Engineer.
   The construction of Portland cement sidewalk in addition to the standard
sidewalk within any parkway area may be authorized by the City, subject to the
conditions contained in the permit issued therefor. Such additional sidewalk
may have decorative surface treatment, including, but not limited to, permanent
color, exposed aggregate or brick, unglazed tile, or flagstone set in the
concrete. The use of asphaltic concrete pavement or loose materials within
parkway areas shall be prohibited.
(§ 1, Ord. 1879, eff. February 5, 1976)
Sec. 7-3.19. Administration of provisions.
   The Council shall designate the officials to administer the provisions of
this chapter, unless hereinabove defined.
(§ 1, Ord. 1879, eff. February 5, 1976)
Sec. 7-3.20. Violations: Penalties.
   The failure of any person to comply with the provisions of this chapter
within forty-eight (48) hours after receiving a notice of a violation thereof
shall be a violation of the provisions of this chapter, and each day such
noncompliance continues shall constitute a separate offense. The foregoing
provisions notwithstanding, when any violation is deemed by the City to
constitute an immediate hazard to health or safety, the City shall eliminate
such hazardous violation and thereafter shall recover the costs incurred from
the owner in any lawful.
   Notices of violations shall be given in writing by the City, served upon the
owner in person, if possible. If personal service is not possible, the notice
shall be sent by mail, receipt requested, and a copy of the notice shall be
conspicuously posted at the site of the violation.
   In addition to the penalty for violations provided in
Chapter 2 of Title 1 of this Code, when the owner fails to respond to a notice,
the City may cause the violative condition to be corrected and the costs levied
against the property and collected from the owner in any lawful manner.
(§ 1, Ord. 1879, eff. February 5, 1976)
CHAPTER 4: STREET FRONTAGE IMPROVEMENTS
   
7-4.01   Lack of improvements hazardous
   
7-4.02   Required improvements
   
7-4.03   Improvement security
   
7-4.04   Exceptions
   
7-4.05   Exceptions: Determination by resolution
   
7-4.06   Reimbursement agreement fee
Sec. 7-4.01. Lack of improvements hazardous.
   The lack of full frontage improvements adjoining a lot or parcel occupied or
to be occupied by a building, dwelling, or use, as defined in Articles
2 and
12,
Chapter 1 of Title 9 of this Code, is hereby found and declared to be hazardous
for pedestrians and vehicular traffic and detrimental to the health safety, and
general welfare of the citizens of the City.
(§ 1, Ord. 1630, eff. June 16, 1966, as amended by § 1, Ord. 1769, eff.
December 16, 1971)
Sec. 7-4.02. Required improvements.
   Any owner, lessee, or agent constructing, altering, or enlarging a building
or dwelling, or arranging for such construction, alteration, or enlargement, or
engaging in any lawful agricultural, commercial, or industrial land use shall
provide for the construction or installation of full frontage improvements
along all the streets adjoining the lot or parcel of land on which the building
or dwelling is to be constructed, altered, or enlarged or on which the
agricultural, commercial, or industrial land use is conducted; such
improvements to include, but not be limited to, sidewalk, curb, gutter, street
paving, street lights, parkway trees, and appurtenances of appurtenant work,
including relocations and reconstructions necessary to construct or install and
maintain such improvements in accordance with the plans therefor, Standard
Specifications, Master Plan of Street Trees, and the Master Plan of Streets and
Highways, all as approved and adopted by the City, unless existing improvements
have previously been constructed and/or paid for by a property owner.
(§ 2, Ord. 1630, eff. June 16, 1966, as amended by § 1, Ord. 1769, eff.
December 16, 1971)
Sec. 7-4.03. Improvement security.
   The Building Official shall deny the issuance of a building permit, or deny
final approval of occupancy, or deny final public utility connections for any
building or dwelling, or any agricultural, commercial, or industrial land use,
until the improvements required by §
7-4.02 of this Code are constructed or their construction is guaranteed by
security furnished to the City. Such security shall be of a type and in a form
as provided in Cal. Gov't Code §§ 66499 et seq.
(§ 3, Ord. 1630, eff. June 16, 1966, as amended by § 1, Ord. 1769, eff.
December 16, 1971 and § 1, Ord. 2162, eff. March 4, 1982)
Sec. 7-4.04. Exceptions.
   (a)   Such improvements shall not be required for any accessory buildings
which do not exceed 1,000 square feet of floor area; nor for any alteration,
enlargement, or addition which does not exceed fifty (50%) percent of the area
of an existing building, dwelling, or land use; provided, however, such
alteration, enlargement, or addition may in no case exceed 2,000 square feet of
area.
   (b)   In areas not subdivided or parceled into one- half (½) acre or smaller
lots, such improvements need not be installed for a greater distance than the
minimum lot width required by the zoning regulations for the zone in which such
area is located or the street frontage coinciding with the agricultural,
commercial, or industrial land use, or coinciding with the buildings,
dwellings, accessory land uses, and the required yards, whichever is the
greater. For corner parcels in such unsubdivided areas, the side frontage shall
be determined by the minimum area requirements or the side street frontage
coinciding with the buildings, dwellings, accessory land uses, and the required
yards, whichever is the greater.
   (c)   Such improvements shall not be required for any future street which is
not contiguous with an existing paved street, nor in excess of the improvements
as provided in subsection (b) of this section.
   (d)   Such improvements shall not be required with or for the installation
or construction of walls, fences, signs, or billboards.
   (e)   Such improvements shall not be required for temporary land uses not
exceeding thirty (30) days' duration.
   (f)   Such improvements shall not be required for open agricultural land
uses as permitted in
Article 13 of Chapter 1 of Title 9 of this Code, nor for any agricultural
accessory building which does not exceed one thousand (1,000) square feet of
floor area.
   (g)   In any Industrial (M) Zone where the strict compliance with the
requirements set forth in this chapter for sidewalks would cause practical
difficulties, unnecessary hardships, or results inconsistent with the general
purpose of this chapter, the Council may determine for specific properties or
areas that part or all of such sidewalk improvements will not be needed within
the foreseeable future and may grant relief upon such terms and conditions as
it deems necessary.
(§ 4, Ord. 1630, eff. June 16, 1966, as amended by § 1, Ord. 1769, eff.
December 16, 1971)
Sec. 7-4.05. Exceptions: Determination by resolution.
   Such determination for relief, as provided in §
7-4.04(g) of this chapter, shall be by Council resolution, and the resolution
shall specify the terms and conditions upon which such relief is predicated.
(§ 4, Ord. 1630, eff. June 16, 1966, as amended by § 1, Ord. 1769, eff.
December 16, 1971)
Sec. 7-4.06. Reimbursement agreement fee.
   If a frontage improvement was constructed under or pursuant to a
reimbursement agreement between the City and another person along a street
adjoining a lot or parcel of land on which a building, or other structure
requiring a building permit, is to be constructed, altered or enlarged, then:
   (a)   The applicant for the building permit shall pay to the City, at the
time the application is submitted, all sums necessary to pay the reimbursement
sum apportioned to such lot or parcel by the terms of the reimbursement
agreement; and
   (b)   No building permit shall be issued until the sums required to be paid
by subsection (a) of this section are paid.
(§ 1, Ord. 2154, eff. December 31, 1981)
CHAPTER 5: UNDERGROUND PUBLIC UTILITY DISTRICTS *
* The title of Chapter 5, “Underground Public Utility Facilities,” amended by §
1, Ord. 1737, eff. October 1, 1970.
   
7-5.01   Definitions
   
7-5.02   Municipal Utility Undergrounding Committee
   
7-5.03   Establishment of districts
   
7-5.04   Unlawful acts
   
7-5.05   Exclusions: Exceptions
   
7-5.06   Responsibility of utilities
   
7-5.07   Responsibility of property owners
   
7-5.08   Responsibility of City
   
7-5.09   Extension of time
Sec. 7-5.01. Definitions.
   For the purposes of this chapter, unless otherwise apparent from the
context, certain words and phrase used in this chapter are defined as follows:
   (a)   “Aerial plant,” shall mean poles, towers, supports, wires, conductors,
guys, stubs, platforms, crossarms, braces, transformers, insulators, cutouts,
switches, communication circuits, appliances, attachments, and appurtenances
located aboveground within a district and used or useful in supplying electric
power, communications, or similar or associated services.
   (b)   “Assessment roll,” “Assessor,” and “Tax Collector” shall mean the tax
assessment and collection organization of the County acting for the City.
   (c)   “Commission” shall mean the Public Utilities Commission of the State.
   (d)   “District” shall mean a utility undergrounding district which is an
area within the City within which an aerial plant is prohibited and subject to
replacement by an equivalent underground plant pursuant to the provisions of
this chapter. Each district shall be given a name and number by the resolution
which establishes such district.
   (e)   “Service connection” shall mean the physical link between the utility
distribution system and the point on the user's premises at which the service
is metered or connected to the facilities installed in or on such premises.
   (f)   “Underground plant” shall mean any and all components of any permanent
system existing or proposed to serve the same functions as an aerial plant, but
located below the surface of the ground, including equipment located in
subterranean vaults or, when specifically authorized for a specific district,
equipment located on or in surface-mounted structures.
   (g)   “Utility” shall mean any person, firm, or corporation subject to
regulation by the Commission or any person, firm, or corporation holding any
franchise to provide any form of conductor-borne electrical energy or signal.
   (h)   “Working day” shall mean any calendar day except Saturday, Sunday, or
any legal holiday.
(§ 1, Ord. 1687, eff. June 20, 1968)
Sec. 7-5.02. Municipal Utility Undergrounding Committee.
   To assist in the implementation of the provisions of this chapter, a
Municipal Utility Undergrounding Committee, headed by the City Engineer and
composed of the City Building Official and a representative of each utility
operating within the City, is hereby established. The Committee shall be
advisory to the Council in the location, extent, scope, and term of districts
proposed pursuant to the provisions of this chapter and shall serve to
coordinate the technical aspects of accomplishing the objectives of districts
established.
(§ 2, Ord. 1687, eff. June 20, 1968)
Sec. 7-5.03. Establishment of districts.
   (a)   Hearings: Notices. The Council may from time to time call public
hearings to determine whether the public necessity, health, safety, or welfare
requires the replacement of an existing aerial plant by an underground plant
within designated areas of the City. The City Clerk shall notify all owners of
property within such areas, as shown on the last equalized assessment roll, and
all utilities concerned by mail, stating the purpose, time, and location of
each hearing, not less than ten (10) days prior thereto. Public hearings may be
continued from time to time, and all interested parties shall be given an
opportunity to be heard. The decision of the Council shall be final and
conclusive.
   (b)   Establishment. If, after any such public hearing, the Council finds
that the public necessity, health, safety, or welfare requires the replacement
of an existing aerial plant by an underground plant within a designated area,
the Council shall, by resolution, declare the designated area to be an
underground utility district, order the accomplishment of such replacement, and
set a period of time therefor.
   (c)   Establishment: Notices. Within ten (10) days after the establishment
of a district by Council action, the City Clerk shall give notice thereof to
all serving utilities and to all owners of real property within the district.
Notice shall also be given to all occupants of properties within the district
at the location of occupancy.
   Such notice shall include the name and number of the district, the
description of the district boundaries, a copy of the establishing resolution,
and a copy of the provisions of this chapter.
   The City Clerk shall mail, postage prepaid, such notice to the serving
utilities at the address of the business office thereof; to owners at the
addresses shown on the last equalized assessment roll; and to occupants at each
street address shown to be in use by records of the building and water offices
of the City.
(§§ 3.1 through 3.3, Ord. 1687, eff. June 20, 1968)
Sec. 7-5.04. Unlawful acts.
   Upon the establishment of a district pursuant to the provisions of this
chapter, it shall thereafter be unlawful for any person or utility to
construct, maintain, operate, or permit the continued existence of any
permanent aerial plant within such district after the end of the established
replacement period.
(§ 4, Ord. 1687, eff. June 20, 1968)
Sec. 7-5.05. Exclusions: Exceptions.
   For the purposes of this chapter, an aerial plant shall not include:
   (a)   Primary electrical energy transmission facilities operated at nominal
voltages in excess of 34,500 volts:
   (b)   Street lighting and traffic control facilities exclusive of permanent
power supply and control circuits which shall be underground;
   (c)   Facilities necessary to the transmission or reception of radiated
wireless communication media;
   (d)   Electrical power or communication distribution circuits on the
exterior, or between the exteriors, of structures on any parcel or contiguous
parcels of land held by one owner or lessee as a unit when such circuits are
determined not to be in conflict with the findings of public necessity, health,
safety, or welfare relative to the district as a whole;
   (e)   Temporary facilities to supply electrical power or communication
services during construction activities. When service is to continue after the
completion of construction, permanent underground service connections shall be
provided;
   (f)   Temporary facilities to restore electrical power or communication
services damaged or destroyed by any cause other than by willful damage or
destruction caused by the user of such service; and
   (g)   Any proposed or continued use of an aerial plant determined by the
Council not to be in conflict with the findings of public necessity, health,
safety, or welfare relative to the district as a whole.
(§ 5, Ord. 1687, eff. June 20, 1968)
Sec. 7-5.06. Responsibility of utilities.
   Each serving utility shall install such underground plant within each
district as is determined by the utility to be necessary to its function in
accordance with the rules, regulations, and tariffs on file with the Commission
and/or in accordance with the provisions of its franchise.
(§ 6, Ord. 1687, eff. June 20, 1968)
Sec. 7-5.07. Responsibility of property owners.
   Each owner of property within each district being served or desiring to be
served by any utility shall, at his expense, provide the underground service
connection required by each serving utility, or that portion thereof required
to be provided by the rules, regulations, and tariffs of such utility on file
with the Commission and/or in accordance with the provisions of its franchise.
   The service connection shall be completed and ready for service in
accordance with the construction schedule supplied by the City Engineer. Prior
to the start of construction, the City Engineer shall mail, postage prepaid, to
the owners and occupants, in the manner provided in §
7-5.03(c) of this chapter, a construction notice specifying the service
connection work to be done and the date on or before which such service
connection shall be completed and ready for use. Such notice shall also advise
the addressee that, in the event any required service connection has not been
completed to meet the construction program of the utility concerned, or the
date stipulated in such notice, whichever is later, the City Engineer shall
thereupon undertake to provide the required service connection by force account
or by contract; provided, however, if there is no occupant and no utility
service is being furnished, the City Engineer shall have the option to order
the removal of any existing aerial service facilities without replacement
thereof.
   Upon completion of the work by the City Engineer, he shall file a written
report with the Council setting forth the facts that the required underground
facilities have been provided and/or that the aerial facilities have been
removed and the cost thereof, together with the legal description and
Assessor's parcel number of each such parcel of property against which such
cost is to be assessed.
   The Council shall then set a time and place, not less than ten (10) days
thereafter, for hearing protests against such assessments and authorize the
City Clerk to give notice thereof to each such owner and/or occupant in the
manner provided in §
7-5.03(c) of this chapter. The notice shall include the name and address of the
owner, a description of the work done and the cost thereof, and the time and
place set for the hearing of protests.
   At the time and place set for such hearing, the Council shall hear and
consider the protests and the report of the City Engineer and, upon the
conclusion of such consideration, shall affirm, modify, or reject each proposed
assessment. The Council shall then direct the City Clerk to give notice to the
owner of each property so assessed in the manner provided in §
7-5.03(c) of this chapter, stating the amount of the affirmed assessment and
that the same is to be paid within five (5) days after the receipt of such
notice. Any such assessment remaining unpaid thereafter shall become a lien
against the property and shall be forwarded by the City Clerk to the Assessor
to be included in the next regular property tax bill levied against the
premises, such assessment to be due and payable with the tax. Any such
assessment shall bear interest from one month after the affirmation thereof at
the maximum legal rate then in effect.
(§ 7, Ord. 1687, eff. June 20, 1968)
Sec. 7-5.08. Responsibility of City.
   The City shall remove at its expense all City- owned equipment from all
poles required to be removed within any district in accordance with the
construction schedule for the district. Any day during which such City-owned
equipment causes substantial hindrance to the progress of the work within any
district shall not be counted as a project work day.
(§ 8, Ord. 1687, eff. June 20, 1968)
Sec. 7-5.09. Extension of time.
   When the progress toward the completion of any district is impeded by any
circumstance beyond the control of the City, any utility, or any owner, then
each and every day such delaying circumstance continues to exist shall not be
counted as a project work day. Such nonchargeable days shall constitute an
automatic extension of the project time period.
   Specific extensions of time may be requested for good cause submitted in
writing to the Council by any agency, utility, or owner participating in any
district.
(§ 9, Ord. 1687, eff. June 20, 1968)
CHAPTER 6: UNDERGROUND UTILITY SERVICE CONNECTIONS
   
7-6.01   Purpose and intent
   
7-6.02   Requirements
   
7-6.03   Application
   
7-6.04   Exclusions
   
7-6.05   Exceptions
Sec. 7-6.01. Purpose and intent.
   The Council hereby finds and determines that the public interest and welfare
require that all utility lines and related facilities, including, but not
limited to, wires for supplying and distributing electrical energy and
services, including street lighting, telephone, telegraph, and cable television
service, to be constructed within the City upon property which is yet
undeveloped shall be placed underground as provided in this chapter.
(§ 2, Ord. 1737, eff. October 1, 1970)
Sec. 7-6.02. Requirements.
   All electrical, telephone, C.A.T.V., and similar service wires or cables
which provide direct service to the property being developed shall, within the
exterior boundary lines of such property, be installed underground. Risers on
poles and buildings shall be permitted and shall be provided by the developer
or owner onto the pole which provides service to such property. Utility service
poles may be placed on the rear of the property to be developed only for the
purpose of terminating underground facilities. The developer or owner shall be
responsible for complying with the requirements of this section, and he shall
make the necessary arrangements with the utility companies for the installation
of such facilities.
   For the purposes of this section, appurtenances and associated equipment,
such as, but not limited to, surface-mounted transformers, pedestal-mounted
terminal boxes and meter cabinets, and concealed ducts in an underground
system, may be placed aboveground.
(§ 2, Ord. 1737, eff. October 1, 1970)
Sec. 7-6.03. Application.
   The provisions of this chapter shall only apply to new residential,
commercial, industrial, and trailer park (mobile home park) developments.
(§ 2, Ord. 1737, eff. October 1, 1970)
Sec. 7-6.04. Exclusions.
   The provisions of this chapter shall not include or apply to the following:
   (a)   Primary electrical energy transmission facilities operated at nominal
voltages in excess of 34,500 volts;
   (b)   Street lighting and traffic control facilities, exclusive of permanent
power supply and control circuits which shall be underground;
   (c)   Facilities necessary to the transmission or reception of radiated
wireless communication media;
   (d)   Temporary facilities to supply electrical power or communication
services during construction activities or to restore services interrupted by
damage to or destruction of existing underground facilities;
   (e)   Utility lines which do not provide service to the area being
subdivided; and
   (f)   Any single lot zoned for one-family dwellings and surrounded by
improved and developed property which has existing aerial utilities.
(§ 2, Ord. 1737, eff. October 1, 1970)
Sec. 7-6.05. Exceptions.
   Where the enforcement of the provisions of this chapter would result in
undue hardship, property owners may make applications for exceptions from the
provisions of this chapter in the following manner:
   (a)   Written applications shall be filed with the Secretary of the Planning
Commission.
   (b)   Such applications shall include all the information necessary to
properly apprise the Commission of the circumstances existing which require
such an exception. A copy of the application shall be forwarded to the City
Engineer for his report and recommendations.
   (c)   Within not less than ten (10) days nor more than thirty (30) days
after the filing of such application, the Commission shall consider such
application and shall make its recommendations to the Council.
   (d)   Within thirty (30) days after the receipt of the recommendations of
the Commission, the Council shall consider such recommendation and may grant or
deny the application.
   (e)   The filing fees for applications for such exceptions shall be Fifty
Dollars ($50.00) or such fees as the Council from time to time shall establish
by resolution. Such fees shall be paid to the City at the time of filing. No
application shall be considered filed until the established fees have been paid
to the City.
(§ 2, Ord. 1737, eff. October 1, 1970)
CHAPTER 7: UNDERGROUNDING OF OVERHEAD UTILITIES
Article 1: Purpose and Objectives; Definitions
   
7-7.101   Purpose and objectives
   
7-7.102   Definitions
Article 2: Requirements, Application, Utility Devices Assessment Form and
Procedure for Permits
   
7-7.201   Requirements
   
7-7.202   Application
   
7-7.203   Utility devices assessment form
   
7-7.204   Procedure for permits
Article 3: Exclusions and Exemptions
   
7-7.301   Exclusions
   
7-7.302   Exemptions
   
Exhibit A
   
Exhibit C
Article 1: Purpose and Objectives; Definitions
Sec. 7-7.101. Purpose and objectives.
   The purpose of this chapter is to serve the public health, safety and
welfare by requiring the undergrounding of overhead utilities and to
specifically achieve the following objectives:
   (a)   Eliminate potential hazards to life and property in the event of
emergencies or disasters such as earthquakes, fires, floods, hazardous or toxic
waste releases, rains, and riots;
   (b)   Facilitate the delivery of emergency services to persons and property
located adjacent to the public right-of-way;
   (c)   Improve or increase the utility of the public right-of-way for such
public uses as pedestrian travel, ease of deliveries to adjacent property, and
landscaping treatments; and
   (d)   Improve or increase the visibility of persons operating motor vehicles
on public and private streets and thereby promote the safety of the pedestrian
and vehicle operators.
(§ 1, Ord. 2804, eff. October 21, 2004)
Sec. 7-7.102. Definitions.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   (a)   "Arterial street." This term has the meaning given to "street,
arterial" in
Chapter 1 of Title 9 of this Code.
   (b)   "Collector street." This term has the meaning given to "street,
collector" in
Chapter 1 of Title 9 of this Code.
   (c)   "Development." Any construction, erection or installation of any
facility or structure on any property.
   (d)   "Improvement." Any addition or modification to any existing facility
or structure on any property.
   (e)   "Local street." This term has the meaning given to "street, local" in
Chapter 1 of Title 9 of this Code.
   (f)   "New Model Colony." That portion of the City identified as the New
Model Colony on the map attached hereto and incorporated herein as Exhibit "A."
With respect to territory that may be annexed to the City subsequent to the
effective date of this section, territory located south of Riverside Drive
shall be considered part of the New Model Colony.
   (g)   "Old Model Colony." That portion of the City identified as the Old
Model Colony on the map attached hereto and incorporated herein as Exhibit "A."
With respect to territory that may be annexed to the City subsequent to the
effective date of this section, territory located north of Riverside Drive
shall be considered part of the Old Model Colony.
   (h)   "Permit." Any permit required to be issued by the City, or any of its
officials, as a prerequisite to the development or improvement of any property
within the City including, but not limited to, any building permit, conditional
use permit, occupancy permit, site development approval or subdivision
approval.
   (i)   "Utility device." Any device necessary, convenient or required for the
transmission of energy or any communication signal to or from any property
within the City.
(§ 1, Ord. 2804, eff. October 21, 2004, § 1, Ord. 2892, eff. July 3, 2008)
Article 2: Requirements, Application, Utility Devices Assessment Form and
Procedure for Permits
Sec. 7-7.201. Requirements.
   (a)   All proposed new development within those areas of the city described
in §
7-7.202 of this Code shall be required, as a condition of development and
subject to the exemptions and exclusions set forth in this chapter, to place
underground all new and existing overhead cable television, electrical,
telephone and other devices for the transmission and/or distribution or energy
or communications, including but not limited to lines, poles, transformers, and
related devices. The requirement to underground utility devices shall be
imposed on each and every permit issued by the City for the development or
improvement of any property to which this subsection applies.
   (b)   The undergrounding of all such utility devices shall be performed by
the owner or developer of the property seeking its development or improvement,
or any construction thereon, at the owner's or developer's sole expense. The
owner or developer shall arrange for the placement of said utility devices
underground with the appropriate utility or communication company including the
processing of any application, payment of any fees or expenses, the submission
and approval of any plans and the coordination of said undergrounding with the
City Engineer. This requirement to underground shall not abrogate any rights
offsets, or claims which the owner or developer may have as to any utility or
communication company.
   (c)   No certificate of occupancy shall be issued for any property whose
development or improvement requires the undergrounding of utility devices
unless and until compliance with this chapter shall have been accomplished to
the satisfaction of the City Engineer. Where an owner or developer has entered
into a written agreement with each applicable utility company to underground
utilities and paid the required costs, a certificate of occupancy may be issued
upon proof thereof.
(§ 1, Ord. 2804, eff. October 21, 2004, § 2, Ord. 2892, eff. July 3, 2008)
Sec. 7-7.202. Application.
   The requirement to underground utility devices created and imposed by this
chapter shall apply, subject to the exclusions and exemptions provided in this
chapter, to each and every property within the New Model Colony and along
arterial and collector streets within the Old Model Colony, in any case in
which the owner or developer of real property requires any permit from the City
for its development or improvement, including any improvement to any existing
facility or structure where the improvement exceeds one thousand (1,000) square
feet or fifty percent (50%), whichever is smaller, of the area of the existing
facility or structure.
(§ 1, Ord. 2804, eff. October 21, 2004, § 3, Ord. 2892, eff. July 3, 2008)
Sec. 7-7.203. Utility devices assessment form.
   (a)   Upon an application for any permit from the City to develop or improve
any property, the owner or developer shall submit a utility devices assessment
form without which the permit application shall be incomplete and ineligible
for action by the City. The utility devices assessment form shall require the
following information:
      (1)   The name, address and telephone number of the developer and owner;
      (2)   The location of the property and its legal description;
      (3)   The nature of the proposed development or improvement;
      (4)   A statement from each utility or communication company serving the
property containing a general description of the utility devices capable of
being undergrounded and the cost thereof; and
      (5)   Any other information required by the City Engineer to implement
the purposes and requirements of this chapter.
   (b)   The City Engineer shall review the utility devices assessment form in
order to identify which utility devices described in the assessment form shall
be required for placement underground and which utility devices may be
exempted. The City Engineer may require the owner to amplify or revise the
utility devices assessment form to assist in making this determination. Upon
review, the City Engineer shall determine which utility devices identified
shall be placed underground for each development or improvement and which
utility devices may be exempted. However, no utility device may be exempted
unless it has been identified on the utility devices assessment form.
   (c)   The approval or issuance of any permit to develop or improve any
property shall be conditioned by the requirement to underground each utility
device required to be placed underground by the City Engineer.
   (d)   In the exercise of the discretion granted to the City Engineer, or his
or her designee herein, he or she shall determine which utility devices shall
be placed underground and require the owner or developer to place said utility
devices underground on the property subject to the development or improvement
as follows:
      (1)   Except as otherwise provided in this subsection, the required
utility devices shall be placed underground along the entire frontage of the
subject property from boundary line to boundary line as depicted in Diagram C-
1,
Exhibit “C” of this chapter.
      (2)   Whenever a utility pole is located on the frontage of the subject
property and within five (5) feet of its boundary line, the required utility
devices shall be placed underground along the frontage of the property from
boundary line to the pole except for that distance of five (5) feet or less
between the pole and the other boundary line as depicted in Diagram C-2,
Exhibit “C”; and the utility pole may remain in place and utilized as a riser.
      (3)   Whenever a utility pole is located within one hundred fifty (150)
feet of a boundary line of the subject property, the required utility devices
shall be placed underground along the entire frontage of the subject property
from boundary line to boundary line and from one of the boundary lines to said
existing utility pole as depicted in Diagram C-3,
Exhibit “C”. Whenever a utility pole is located more than one hundred fifty
(150) feet from a boundary line of the subject property, a new utility pole
shall be installed at one boundary line of the subject property and the
required utility devices shall be placed underground along the entire frontage
of the subject property from one boundary line to the newly installed utility
pole as depicted in Diagram C-3,
Exhibit “C”.
      (4)   In the event that the subject property is located on a corner where
two streets intersect, the required undergrounding shall extend across one or
both of the streets to the next existing pole provided that the pole is within
one hundred fifty (150) feet of one of the boundary lines of the subject
property as depicted in Diagram C-4,
Exhibit “C”.
(§ 1, Ord. 2804, eff. October 21, 2004)
Sec. 7-7.204. Procedure for permits.
   Where the City Engineer has authority to issue a permit for the development
or improvement of any property within the City, said official shall condition
the permit upon the placement of specified utility devices underground. For
other development approvals, said official shall recommend to the Planning
Commission or the City Council which utility devices shall be placed
underground and which utility devices, developments or improvements are exempt
from this chapter. Thereafter, the Development Advisory Board, the Planning
Commission or the City Council shall determine which utility devices shall be
placed underground or exempted for each development or improvement and which
developments or improvements are exempt pursuant to this chapter.
(§ 1, Ord. 2804, eff. October 21, 2004)
Article 3: Exclusions and Exemptions
Sec. 7-7.301. Exclusions.
   The following utility devices shall be exempted from underground placement:
   (a)   To the extent a utility company requires to perform maintenance,
upgrade or redesign under the provisions of their tariff schedule or franchise
agreement;
   (b)   Street lights and traffic signals;
   (c)   Utility devices operated at voltages in excess of thirty-four thousand
five hundred (34,500) volts;
   (d)   Overhead utility devices located or to be located in local streets,
alleys, trails, and/or utility easements in the Old Model Colony;
   (e)   Overhead utility lines to serve residential structures may be left or
placed above ground where utility poles presently exist along or near rear
property lot lines; and
   (f)   Appurtenances and associated equipment including, but not limited to,
surface-mounted transformers and switches, pedestal-mounted terminal boxes and
meter cabinets which may be left or placed above ground on the condition that
can be screened from public view.
(§ 1, Ord. 2804, eff. October 21, 2004, § 4, Ord. 2892, eff. July 3, 2008)
Sec. 7-7.302. Exemptions.
   The City Engineer shall exempt the following developments or improvements of
any property outside of the New Model Colony whenever the City Engineer, in his
or her discretion, that the proposed developments or improvements fit any one
of the following criteria:
   (a)   Interior tenant improvements and special conditional use permits for
which construction is not required;
   (b)   Exterior upgrading or repair of existing improvements, including but
not limited to re-proofing, additions of awnings, landscaping, equipment
screening, repainting and application of other exterior finishes;
   (c)   Additions of functional equipment to any existing improvements,
including but not limited to air conditioners, antennae, block walls and
fences, cooling towers, enclosure of outdoor storage areas, loading docks,
satellite dishes, silos and water tanks;
   (d)   The development of a new single family residence on a property where
the adjacent properties are serviced by overhead utility devices provided that
the utility devices to connect the proposed single family residence shall be
placed underground from said proposed residence to the previously existing
utility devices; or
   (e)   Whenever the owner or developer of a subject property is required to
underground utility devices under this chapter but the distance over which the
utility devices is less than six hundred fifty (650) feet, the City Engineer
may allow the owner or developer to pay a fee to the City that is equal to the
unit cost of placing said utility devices underground multiplied by the
distance over which the undergrounding is required, not to exceed six hundred
fifty (650) feet, in lieu of such undergrounding. The unit price for
undergrounding any utility devices shall be based upon the most recent unit
price for undergrounding utility devices over a distance of greater than
thirteen hundred (1,300) feet as established by the utility company that would
otherwise be responsible for undergrounding said utility devices. The owner or
developer shall obtain a written statement of the unit price for undergrounding
the required utility devices from the utility serving the subject property and
submit it to the City Engineer for determination of the amount of the in lieu
fee.
   (f)   Whenever existing overhead utility lines or related devices are
located in, on or between poles serving both electrical transmission lines
(i.e. those carrying at least sixty-six (66) kV of energy) and electrical
distribution lines (i.e. those carrying less than thirty-four and one-half
(34.5) kV of energy) in the Old Model Colony, said lines required to be placed
underground per this chapter may be left intact above ground on those poles
provided that the owner or developer pay an in-lieu fee for undergrounding said
utility devices as required by the City Engineer. The amount of the in-lieu fee
shall be determined as provided for in §
7-7.302 (e).
(§ 1, Ord. 2804, eff. October 21, 2004, § 5, Ord. 2892, eff. July 3, 2008)
Exhibit A.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/c56901bb46348e8a42ec85392209a953c828cba6/
IMAGES/0-0-0-27711.jpg]
 
Exhibit C.  
   Utility undergrounding requirements in the OMC for development projects
having street frontage in excess of 650 feet.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/c56901bb46348e8a42ec85392209a953c828cba6/
IMAGES/0-0-0-27714.jpg]
VOLUME II
TITLE 8. BUILDING REGULATIONS
      Chapter
         
1.   ADMINISTRATIVE AND BUILDING CODE
         
2.   MECHANICAL CODE
         
3.   HOUSING CODE
         
4.   ELECTRICAL CODE
         
5.   RESIDENTIAL CODE
         
6.   GENERAL PROVISIONS
         
7.   PLUMBING CODE
         
8.   SMALL RESIDENTIAL ROOFTOP SOLAR ENERGY SYSTEMS
         
9.   ELECTRIC VEHICLE CHARGING STATIONS
         
10.   ENERGY CODE
         
11.   INTERNATIONAL PROPERTY MAINTENANCE CODE
         
12.   CALIFORNIA GREEN BUILDING STANDARDS CODE
         
13.   FLOOD DAMAGE PREVENTION PROGRAM
         
14.   HISTORIC BUILDING CODE, EXISTING BUILDING CODE AND REFERENCED STANDARDS
         
15.   SOUND TRANSMISSION CONTROL IN HIGH NOISE IMPACT AREAS
         
16.   STRUCTURED WIRING DESIGN AND CONSTRUCTION STANDARDS GOVERNING NEW
CONSTRUCTION WITHIN THE CITY OF ONTARIO
         
17.   SYSTEMATIC HEALTH AND SAFETY INSPECTION PROGRAM
CHAPTER 1: ADMINISTRATIVE AND BUILDING CODE *
* Sections 8-1.01 through 8-1.23, codified from Ord. 1673, eff. December 7,
1967, repealed by Ord. 1755, eff. May 20, 1971. Sections 8-1.01 through 8-1.10,
as added by said Ord. 1755, repealed by Ord. 1832, eff. May 16, 1974. Sections
8-1.01 through 8-1.15, as added by said Ord. 1832, repealed by Ord. 2111, eff.
December 18, 1980. Sections 8-1.01 through 8-1.11, as added by said Ord. 2111,
repealed by Ord. 2335, eff. February 6, 1986. Sections 8-1.01 through 8-1.13,
as added by said Ord. 2335, repealed by Ord. 2416, eff. April 14, 1988, as
added by said Ord. 2416, repealed by Ord. 2481, eff. September 20, 1990, as
amended by § 2, Ord. 2769, eff. January 16, 2003.
   
8-1.01   Adoption of the Administrative Code
   
8-1.02   Adoption of the Building Code
   
8-1.03   Amendment: Section 113.4
   
8-1.04   Amendment: Part 2, Volume 1, Section 105.2
   
8-1.05   Amendment: Part 2, Volume 2, Section 1609A
   
8-1.06   Amendment: Part 2, Volume 2, Section 1613A
Sec. 8-1.01. Adoption of the Administrative Code.
   The 2022 Edition of the California Administrative Code, as adopted by the
California Building Standards Commission in California Code of Regulations
Title 24, Part 1, is hereby adopted by reference and made a part of this
chapter as if fully set forth at length herein. One (1) copy of said code is on
file in the office of the City Clerk for public review.
(§ 2, Ord. 3227, eff. January 5, 2023)
Sec. 8-1.02. Adoption of the Building Code.
   The 2022 Edition of the California Building Code, as adopted by the
California Building Standards Commission in California Code of Regulations
Title 24, Part 2, Volumes 1 and 2, subject to the amendments set forth in this
chapter, is hereby adopted by reference and made a part of this chapter as if
fully set forth at length herein. One (1) copy of said code is on file in the
office of the City Clerk for public review.
(§ 1, Ord. 2481, eff. September 20, 1990, as amended by § 1, Ord. 2535, eff.
December 31, 1992, § 1, Ord. 2617, eff. July 4, 1996, § 1, Ord. 2691, eff. July
1, 1999, § 2, Ord. 2769, eff. January 16, 2003, § 2, Ord. 2882, eff. January 3,
2008, § 2, Ord. 2928, eff. January 7, 2011, § 2, Ord. 3063, eff. December 15,
2016, § 2, Ord. 3148, eff. December 19, 2019, § 2, Ord. 3227, eff. January 5,
2023)
Sec. 8-1.03. Amendment: Section 113.4.
   Section 113.4 is added to the California Building Code to read as follows:
   113.4 Ontario Building Appeals Board. The City Manager shall recommend to
the City Council five (5) individuals desirous to serve on the Building Appeals
Board who are qualified by experience and training to pass on matters
pertaining to building construction and are not employees of the City. Each
Board Member’s term on the Building Appeals Board shall remain indefinite
unless the Board Member resigns, or the City Council wishes to designate a new
Board Member in its discretion. Should any Board Member be unable to continue
serving on the Building Appeals Board, he or she shall submit a written
resignation to the City Manager as soon as possible. The City Manager shall in
turn present a recommended replacement to the City Council for appointment.
( § 2, Ord. 3063, eff. December 15, 2016, as amended by § 2, Ord. 3148, eff.
December 19, 2019, § 2, Ord. 3227, eff. January 5, 2023)
Sec. 8-1.04. Amendment: Part 2, Volume 1, Section 105.2.
   Section 105.2 is amended as follows - All walls over 3 ft (36 inches)
require a building permit and all retaining walls over 2 ft (24 inches) require
a building permit.
(§ 2, Ord. 3227, eff. January 5, 2023)
Sec. 8-1.05. Amendment: Part 2, Volume 2, Section 1609A.
   Section 1609A is amended as follows - The City of Ontario design criteria
for all structures built within the City is 110 MPH winds, Exposure C, Seismic
Zone D
(§ 2, Ord. 3227, eff. January 5, 2023)
Sec. 8-1.06. Amendment: Part 2, Volume 2, Section 1613A.
   Section 1613A is amended as follows -
   1)   The City of Ontario design criteria for all structures built within the
City is 110 MPH winds, Exposure C, Seismic Zone D; and
   2)   Because of the City's proximity to the San Andreas fault, all
underground pipe, conduit, and lines will be shaded with cleaned dirt void of
any rocks or clean sand, six inches below and twelve inches above said pipe,
conduit, or line. All electrical metal conduit will need a ground conductor,
the metal conduit will not act as the ground conductor.
(§ 2, Ord. 3227, eff. January 5, 2023)
CHAPTER 2: MECHANICAL CODE *
* Chapter 2, consisting of §§ 8-2.01 through 8-2.03, codified from Ord. 1673,
eff. December 7, 1967, repealed by Ord. 1755, eff. May 20, 1971. Chapter 2
entitled “Building Code: Mechanical,” consisting of §§ 8-2.01 and 8-2.02, as
added by said Ord. 1755, repealed by Ord. 1832, eff. May 16, 1974. Sections 8-
2.01 and 8-2.02, as added by said Ord. 1832, repealed by Ord. 2111, eff.
December 18, 1980. Sections 8-2.01 and 8-2.02, as added by said Ord. 2111,
repealed by Ord. 2335, eff. February 6, 1986. Sections 8-2.01 and 8-2.02, as
added by said Ord. 2335, repealed by Ord. 2416, eff. April 14, 1988, as added
by said Ord. 2416, repealed by Ord. 2481, eff. September 20, 1990, as amended
by § 3, Ord. 2769, eff. January 16, 2003.
   
8-2.01   Adoption of the Mechanical Code
Sec. 8-2.01. Adoption of the Mechanical Code.
   The 2022 Edition of the California Mechanical Code, as adopted by the
California Building Standards Commission in California Code of Regulations
Title 24, Part 4, is hereby adopted by reference and made a part of this
chapter as if fully set forth at length herein. One (1) copy of said code is on
file in the office of the City Clerk for public review.
(§ 2, Ord. 2481, eff. September 20, 1990, as amended by § 2, Ord. 2535, eff.
December 31, 1992, § 2, Ord. 2617, eff. July 4, 1996, § 2, Ord. 2691, eff. July
1, 1999, § 3, Ord. 2769, eff. January 16, 2003, § 3, Ord. 2882, eff. January 3,
2008, § 3, Ord. 2928, eff. January 7, 2011, § 3, Ord. 3063, eff. December 15,
2016, § 3, Ord. 3148, eff. December 19, 2019, § 3, Ord. 3227, eff. January 5,
2023).
CHAPTER 3: HOUSING CODE *
* Chapter 3, consisting of §§ 8-3.01 through 8-3.07, codified from Ord. 1673,
eff. December 7, 1967, repealed by Ord. 1755, eff. May 20, 1971. Chapter 3
entitled “Building Code Housing,” consisting of §§ 8-3.01 through 8-3.07, as
added by said Ord. 1755, repealed by Ord. 1832, eff. May 16, 1974. Sections 8-
3.01 through 8-3.06, as added by said Ord. 1832, repealed by Ord. 2111, eff.
December 18, 1980. Sections 8-3.01 through 8-3.05, as added by said Ord. 2111,
repealed by Ord. 2335, eff. February 6, 1986. Sections 8-3.01 through 8-3.04,
as added by said Ord. 2335, repealed by Ord. 2416, eff. April 14, 1988, as
added by said Ord. 2416, repealed by Ord. 2481, eff. September 20, 1990, as
amended by § 4, Ord. 2769, eff. January 16, 2003.
   
8-3.01   Adoption of Housing Code
Sec. 8-3.01. Adoption of Housing Code.
   The 1997 edition of the Uniform Housing Code, as published by the
International Conference of Building Officials, one (1) copy of which is on
file for public review in the office of the City Clerk, is hereby adopted and
made a part of this chapter as if fully set forth at length herein.
(§ 3, Ord. 2481, eff. September 20, 1990, as amended by § 3, Ord. 2535, eff.
December 31, 1992, § 3, Ord. 2617, eff. July 4, 1996, § 3, Ord. 2691, eff. July
1, 1999, § 4, Ord. 2769, eff. January 16, 2003, § 4, Ord. 2882, eff. January 3,
2008, and § 5, Ord. 2920, eff. May 20, 2010, § 4, Ord. 2928, eff. January 7,
2011, § 4, Ord. 3063, eff. December 15, 2016, § 4, Ord. 3148, eff. December 19,
2019, § 4, Ord. 3227, eff. January 5, 2023)
CHAPTER 4: ELECTRICAL CODE *
* Sections 8-4.01 through 8-4.04, codified from Ord. 1552, eff. May 7, 1964,
Ord. 1644, eff. March 9, 1967 and Ord. 1660, eff. September 14, 1967, repealed
by Ord. 1755, eff. May 20, 1971. Sections 8-4.01 through 8-4.09, as added by
said Ord. 1755, repealed by Ord. 1832, eff. May 16, 1974. Sections 8-4.01
through 8-4.12, as added by said Ord. 1832, repealed by Ord. 2111, eff.
December 18, 1980. Sections 8-4.01 and 8-4.02, as added by said Ord. 2111,
repealed by Ord. 2335, eff. February 6, 1986. Sections 8-4.01 and 8-4.02, as
added by said Ord. 2335, repealed by Ord. 2416, eff. April 14, 1988, as added
by said Ord. 2416, repealed by Ord. 2481, eff. September 20, 1990, as amended
by § 5, Ord. 2769, eff. January 16, 2003.
   
8-4.01   Adoption of the Electrical Code
Sec. 8-4.01. Adoption of the Electrical Code.
   The 2022 Edition of the California Electrical Code, as adopted by the
California Building Standards Commission in California Code of Regulations
Title 24, Part 3, is hereby adopted by reference and made a part of this
chapter as if fully set forth at length herein. One (1) copy of said code is on
file in the office of the City Clerk for public review.
(§ 4, Ord. 2481, eff. September 20, 1990, as amended by § 4, Ord. 2535, eff.
December 31, 1992, § 4, Ord. 2617, eff. July 4, 1996, § 4, Ord. 2691, eff. July
1, 1999, § 5, Ord. 2769, eff. January 16, 2003, § 5, Ord. 2882, eff. January 3,
2008, § 5, Ord. 2928, eff. January 7, 2011, § 5, Ord. 3063, eff. December 15,
2016, § 5, Ord. 3148, eff. December 19, 2019, § 5, Ord. 3227, eff. January 5,
2023)
CHAPTER 5: RESIDENTIAL CODE
   
8-5.01   Adoption of the Residential Code
   
8-5.02   Amendment: Section R310.5
Sec. 8-5.01 Adoption of the Residential Code.
   The 2022 Edition of the California Residential Code, as adopted by the
California Building Standards Commission in California Code of Regulations
Title 24, Part 2.5, is hereby adopted by reference and made a part of this
chapter as if fully set forth at length herein. One (1) copy of said code is on
file in the office of the City Clerk for public review.
(§ 6, Ord. 3063, eff. December 15, 2016, as amended by § 6, Ord. 3148, eff.
December 19, 2019, § 6, Ord. 3227, eff. January 5, 2023)
Sec. 8-5.02. Amendment: Section R310.5.
   Section R310.5 is amended as follows - Retro-fit windows require a building
permit and shall conform to the 2022 standards for emergency egress.
(§ 6, Ord. 3148, eff. December 19, 2019, § 6, Ord. 3227, eff. January 5, 2023)
CHAPTER 6: GENERAL PROVISIONS
   
8-6.01   Fees
   
8-6.02   Violations
Sec. 8-6.01 Fees.
   Fees for any permit, license or other approval issued pursuant to any of the
codes adopted by this title shall be as set forth by resolution of the City
Council.
(§ 7, Ord. 3063, eff. December 15, 2016, § 7, Ord. 3148, eff. December 19,
2019, § 7, Ord. 3227, eff. January 5, 2023)
Sec. 8-6.02 Violations.
   Violations of any provision of any of the codes adopted by this title shall
subject the violator to any or all of the penalties provided in this code or
applicable law.
(§ 7, Ord. 3063, eff. December 15, 2016, § 7, Ord. 3148, eff. December 19,
2019, § 7, Ord. 3227, eff. January 5, 2023)
CHAPTER 7: PLUMBING CODE *
* Sections 8-7.01 through 8-7.14 and 8-7.16 through 8-7.20, codified from Ord.
1676, eff. January 4, 1968, repealed by Ord. 1755, eff. May 20, 1971: Section
8-7.15, codified from Ord. 1676, repealed by Ord. 1722, eff. February 5, 1970.
Sections 8-7.01 through 8-7.09, as added by said Ord. 1755, repealed by Ord.
1832, eff. May 16, 1974. Sections 8-7.01 through 8-7.16, as added by said Ord.
1832, repealed by Ord. 2111, eff. December 18, 1980. Section 8-7.01, as added
by said Ord. 2111, repealed by Ord. 2335, eff. February 6, 1986. Section 8-
7.01, as added by said Ord. 2335, repealed by Ord. 2416, eff. April 14, 1988,
as added by Ord. 2416, repealed by Ord. 2481, eff. September 20, 1990, as
amended by § 7, Ord. 2769, eff. January 16, 2003.
   
8-7.01   Adoption of the Plumbing Code
Sec. 8-7.01. Adoption of the Plumbing Code.
   The 2022 Edition of the California Plumbing Code, as adopted by the
California Building Standards Commission in California Code of Regulations
Title 24, Part 5, is hereby adopted by reference and made a part of this
chapter as if fully set forth at length herein. One (1) copy of said code is on
file in the office of the City Clerk for public review.
(§ 7, Ord. 2481, eff. September 20, 1990, as amended by § 7, Ord. 2535, eff.
December 31, 1992, § 7, Ord. 2617, eff. July 4, 1996, § 7, Ord. 2691, eff. July
1, 1999, § 7, Ord. 2769, eff. January 16, 2003, § 6, Ord. 2882, eff. January 3,
2008; § 8, Ord. 2928, eff. January 7, 2011, § 8, Ord. 3063, eff. December 15,
2016, § 8, Ord. 3148, eff. December 19, 2019, § 8, Ord. 3227, eff. January 5,
2023)
CHAPTER 8: SMALL RESIDENTIAL ROOFTOP SOLAR ENERGY SYSTEMS
   
8-8.01   Applicability and purpose
   
8-8.02   Small residential rooftop solar energy system requirements
   
8-8.03   Duties of the Building Department and Building Official
   
8-8.04   Expedited permit review and inspection requirements
Sec. 8-8.01.   Applicability and purpose.
   This chapter applies to the permitting of all small residential rooftop
solar energy systems in the City. Small residential rooftop solar energy
systems legally established or permitted prior to the effective date of this
chapter are not subject to the requirements of this chapter unless physical
modifications or alterations are undertaken that materially change the size,
type, or components of a small rooftop energy system in such a way as to
require new permitting. Routine operation and maintenance or like-kind
replacements shall not require a permit.
(§ 2, Ord. 3026, eff. October 1, 2015)
Sec. 8-8.02.   Small residential rooftop solar energy system requirements.
   (a)   “Small residential rooftop solar energy system” means solar energy
system which meets all of the following:
      (1)   Is no larger than ten (10) kilowatts alternating current nameplate
rating or thirty (30) kilowatts thermal;
      (2)   Conforms to all applicable state fire, structural, electrical, and
other building codes as adopted or amended by the City, and all state and City
health and safety standards;
      (3)   Conforms to all applicable safety and performance standards
established by the California Electrical Code, the Institute of Electrical and
Electronics Engineers, and accredited testing laboratories such as Underwriters
Laboratories and,
where applicable, rules of the Public Utilities Commission regarding safety and
reliability;
      (4)   Is installed on a single or duplex family dwelling;
      (5)   The panel or module array does not exceed the maximum legal
building height as defined by the City.
         (a)   Solar energy systems for heating water in single-family
residences or for heating water in commercial or swimming pool applications
shall be certified by an accredited listing agency as defined by the California
Plumbing and Mechanical Codes.
         (b)   Solar energy systems for producing electricity shall meet all
applicable safety and performance standards established by the California
Electrical Code, the Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers, and
accredited testing laboratories such as Underwriters Laboratories and, where
applicable, rules of the Public Utilities Commission regarding safety and
reliability.
(§ 2, Ord. 3026, eff. October 1, 2015)
Sec. 8-8.03.   Duties of Building Department and Building Official.
   (a)   A checklist of all requirements with which small residential rooftop
solar energy systems shall comply to be eligible for expedited review and all
documents required for the submission of an expedited small residential rooftop
solar energy system shall be made available on the City’s publicly accessible
website.
   (b)   Electronic submittal of the required permit application and documents
via email, or facsimile shall be made available to all small residential
rooftop solar energy system permit applicants. Website applications may be
allowed at such time in the future that the technology is made available by the
City.
   (c)   An applicant’s electronic signature shall be accepted on all forms,
applications, and other documents in lieu of a wet signature.
   (d)   The Building Department shall adopt a standard plan and checklist of
all requirements with which small residential rooftop solar energy systems
shall comply to be eligible for expedited review.
   (e)   The small residential rooftop solar energy system permit process,
standard plans, and checklist shall substantially conform to the
recommendations for expedited permitting, including the checklist and standard
contained in the most current version of the California Solar Permitting
Guidebook adopted by the Governor’s Office of Planning and Research.
(§ 2, Ord. 3026, eff. October 1, 2015)
Sec. 8-8.04.   Expedited permit review and inspection requirements.
   (a)   The Building Department shall adopt an administrative,
nondiscretionary review process to expedite the approval of small residential
rooftop solar energy system applications within thirty (30) days of the
adoption of this chapter.
   (b)   An application for a small residential rooftop solar energy system
that meets the requirements of the approved checklist and standard plan shall
be deemed complete, and the Building Department shall issue a building permit
or other non-discretionary permit within three (3) business days.
   (c)   Review of the application shall be limited to the Building Official’s
review of whether the applicant meets local, state and federal health and
safety requirements.
   (d)   If an application for a small residential rooftop solar energy system
is deemed incomplete, a written correction notice detailing all deficiencies in
the application and any additional information or documentation required to be
eligible for expedited permitting shall be sent to the applicant for
resubmission.
   (e)   Only one inspection shall be required and performed by the Building
Department for small residential rooftop solar energy systems eligible for
expedited review.
   (f)   The inspection shall be done in a timely manner and should include
consolidated inspections.
   (g)   If a small residential rooftop solar energy system fails inspection, a
subsequent inspection is authorized but need not conform to the requirements of
this chapter.
(§ 2, Ord. 3026, eff. October 1, 2015)
CHAPTER 9: ELECTRIC VEHICLE CHARGING STATIONS
   
8-9.01   Applicability and purpose
   
8-9.02   Electric vehicle charging stations requirements
   
8-9.03   Duties of the Building Department
   
8-9.04   Expedited permit review and inspection requirements
Sec. 8-9.01. Applicability and purpose.
   This chapter applies to the permitting of all electric vehicle charging
stations in the City. Electric vehicle charging stations legally established or
permitted prior to the effective date of this chapter are not subject to the
requirements of this chapter unless physical modifications or alterations are
undertaken that materially change the size, type, or components of the electric
vehicle charging station in such a way as to require new permitting. Routine
operation and maintenance or like-kind replacements shall not require a permit.
(§ 2, Ord. 3061, eff. December 1, 2016)
Sec. 8-9.02. Electric vehicle charging stations requirements.
   (a)   “Electric vehicle charging station” or “charging station” means all of
the following:
      (1)   Any level of electric vehicle supply equipment station;
      (2)   Is designed and built in compliance with Article 625 of the
California Electrical Code;
      (3)   Delivers electricity from a source outside an electric vehicle into
a plug-in electric vehicle;
      (4)   Conforms to all applicable state fire, structural, electrical, and
other building codes as adopted or amended by the City, and all state and City
health and safety standards;
   (b)   An electric vehicle charging station shall meet all applicable safety
and performance standards established by the California Electrical Code, the
Society of Automotive Engineers, the National Electrical Manufacturers
Association, and accredited testing laboratories such as Underwriters
Laboratories and, where applicable, rules of the Public Utilities Commission
regarding safety and reliability.
(§ 2, Ord. 3061, eff. December 1, 2016)
Sec. 8-9.03. Duties of the Building Department.
   (a)   A checklist and required permitting documentation of all requirements
with which electric vehicle charging stations shall comply to be eligible for
expedited review and all documents required for the submission of an expedited
electric vehicle charging stations shall be published on the City’s publicly
accessible Internet Web site.
   (b)   Electronic submittal of the required permit application and documents
via email, or facsimile shall be made available to all electric vehicle
charging stations permit applicants. Web site applications may be allowed at
such time in the future that the technology is made available by the City.
   (c)   An applicant’s electronic signature shall be accepted on all forms,
applications, and other documents in lieu of a wet signature.
   (d)   The Building Department shall adopt a checklist and required
permitting documentation of all requirements with which electric vehicle
charging stations shall comply to be eligible for expedited review.
   (e)   The checklist and required permitting documentation of all
requirements with which electric vehicle charging stations may refer to the
recommendations contained in the most current version of the “Plug-In Electric
Vehicle Infrastructure Permitting Checklist” of the “Zero-Emission Vehicles in
California: Community Readiness Guidebook” published by the Governor’s Office
of Planning and Research.
(§ 2, Ord. 3061, eff. December 1, 2016)
Sec. 8-9.04. Expedited permit review and inspection requirements.
   (a)   The Building Department shall adopt an administrative,
nondiscretionary review process to expedite the approval of electric vehicle
charging stations applications within 30 days of the adoption of this chapter.
   (b)   An application for electric vehicle charging stations that meets the
requirements of the checklist and required permitting documentation of all
requirements shall be deemed complete, and the Building Department shall issue
a building permit or other non-discretionary permit at expedited rate.
   (c)   Review of the application shall be limited to the Building
Department’s review of whether the applicant meets local, state and federal
health and safety requirements.
   (d)   If an application for electric vehicle charging station is deemed
incomplete, a written correction notice detailing all deficiencies in the
application and any additional information or documentation required to be
eligible for expedited permitting shall be provided to the applicant for
resubmission.
   (e)   Inspections shall be required and performed by the Building Department
for electric vehicle charging stations.
   (f)   The inspection shall be done in an efficient inspection process, in a
timely manner, and should include consolidated inspections; inspection measures
taken should be consistent with safety requirements to ensure that the electric
vehicle charging stations are properly installed.
   (g)   If electric vehicle charging station fails inspection, a subsequent
inspection is authorized but need not conform to the requirements of this
chapter.
(§ 2, Ord. 3061, eff. December 1, 2016)
CHAPTER 10: ENERGY CODE
   
8-10.01   Adoption of the Energy Code
Sec. 8-10.01. Adoption of the Energy Code.
   The 2022 Edition of the California Energy Code, as adopted by the California
Building Standards Commission in California Code of Regulations Title 24, Part
6, is hereby adopted by reference and made a part of this chapter as if fully
set forth at length herein. One (1) copy of said code is on file in the office
of the City Clerk for public review.
(§ 9, Ord. 3227, eff. January 5, 2023)
CHAPTER 11: INTERNATIONAL PROPERTY MAINTENANCE CODE *
* Sections 8-11.01 through 8-11.03, as added by Ord. 1832, eff. May 16, 1974,
repealed by Ord. 2111, eff. December 18, 1980. Sections 8-11.01 through 8-
11.03, as added by said Ord. 2111, repealed by Ord. 2335, eff. February 6,
1986. Sections 8-11.01 through 8-11.03, as added by said Ord. 2335, repealed by
Ord. 2416, eff. April 14, 1988, as added by said Ord. 2416, repealed by Ord.
2481, eff. September 20, 1990, as amended by § 8, Ord. 2769, eff. January 16,
2003.
   
8-11.01   Adoption of the International Property Maintenance Code
Sec. 8-11.01. Adoption of the International Property Maintenance Code.
   The 2021 Edition of the International Property Maintenance Code, including
the administration chapter, one (1) copy of which is on file for public review
in the office of the City Clerk, is hereby adopted by reference and made a part
of this chapter as if fully set forth at length herein.
(§ 8, Ord. 2481, eff. September 20, 1990, as amended by § 8, Ord. 2535, eff.
December 31, 1992, § 8, Ord. 2617, eff. July 4, 1996, § 8, Ord. 2691, eff. July
1, 1999, § 8, Ord. 2769, eff. January 16, 2003, § 7, Ord. 2882, eff. January 3,
2008, and § 5, Ord. 2920, eff. May 20, 2010, § 9, Ord. 2928, eff. January 7,
2011, § 9, Ord. 3063, eff. December 15, 2016, § 9, eff. December 19, 2019, §
10, Ord. 3227, eff. January 5, 2023)
CHAPTER 12: CALIFORNIA GREEN BUILDING STANDARDS CODE
   
8-12.01   Adoption of the California Green Building Standards Code
Sec. 8-12.01. Adoption of the California Green Building Standards Code.
   The 2022 edition of the California Green Building Standards Code, as adopted
by the California Building Standards Commission in California Code of
Regulations Title 24, Part 11, is hereby adopted by reference and made a part
of this chapter as if fully set forth at length herein. One (1) copy of said
code is on file in the office of the City Clerk for public review.
(§ 10, Ord. 3063, eff. December 15, 2016, § 10, Ord. 3148, eff. December 19,
2019, § 11, Ord. 3227, eff. January 5, 2023)
CHAPTER 13: FLOOD DAMAGE PREVENTION PROGRAM *
* Chapter 13, consisting of §§ 8-13.01 through 8-13.13, codified from Ord.
2109, eff. November 19, 1980, was amended by Ord. 2409, eff. February 4, 1988.
Article 1. Purpose and Methods
   
8-13.101   Findings of fact
   
8-13.102   Statement of purpose
   
8-13.103   Methods of reducing flood losses
Article 2. Definitions
   
8-13.201   Definitions
Article 3. General Provisions
   
8-13.301   Lands to which this chapter applies
   
8-13.302   Base for establishing the areas of special flood hazard
   
8-13.303   Compliance
   
8-13.304   Abrogation and greater restrictions
   
8-13.305   Interpretation
   
8-13.306   Warning and disclaimer of liability
   
8-13.307   Severability
Article 4. Administration
   
8-13.401   Establishment of development permit
   
8-13.402   Designation of the Floodplain Administrator
   
8-13.403   Duties and responsibilities of the Floodplain Administrator
Article 5. Provisions for Flood Hazard Reduction
   
8-13.501   Standards of construction
   
8-13.502   Standards for utilities
   
8-13.503   Standards for subdivisions
   
8-13.504   Standards for manufactured homes
   
8-13.505   Floodways
   
8-13.506   Mudslide- (i.e., mudflow-) prone areas
   
8-13.507   Flood-related erosion-prone areas
   
8-13.508   Standards for recreational vehicles
Article 6. Variance Procedure
   
8-13.601   Appeal board
   
8-13.602   Conditions for variances
Article 1. Purpose and Methods
Sec. 8-13.101. Findings of fact.
   (a)   The flood hazard areas of Ontario, California are subject to periodic
inundation which may result in loss of life and property, health and safety
hazards, disruption of commerce and governmental services, extraordinary public
expenditures for flood protection and relief, and impairment of the tax base,
all of which adversely affect the public health, safety and general welfare.
   (b)   These flood losses are caused by the cumulative effect of obstructions
in areas of special flood hazards which increase flood heights and velocities,
and when inadequately anchored, damage uses in other areas. Uses that are
inadequately floodproofed, elevated or otherwise protected from flood damage
also contribute to the flood loss.
(§ 1, Ord. 2409, eff. February 4, 1988)
Sec. 8-13.102. Statement of purpose.
   It is the purpose of this chapter to promote the public health, safety, and
general welfare and to minimize public and private losses due to flood
conditions in specific areas by provisions designed:
   (a)   To protect human life and health;
   (b)   To minimize the expenditure of public money for costly flood control
projects;
   (c)   To minimize the need for rescue and relief efforts associated with
flooding and generally undertaken at the expense of the general public;
   (d)   To minimize prolonged business interruptions;
   (e)   To minimize damages to public facilities and utilities, such as water
and gas mains, electric, telephone and sewer lines, streets and bridges located
in areas of special flood hazard;
   (f)   To help maintain a stable tax base by providing for the second use and
development of areas of special flood hazard so as to minimize future flood
blight areas;
   (g)   To insure that potential buyers are notified that property is in an
area of special flood hazard; and
   (h)   To insure that those who occupy the areas of special flood hazard
assume responsibility for their actions.
(§ 1, Ord. 2409, eff. February 4, 1988)
Sec. 8-13.103. Methods of reducing flood losses.
   In order to accomplish its purposes, this chapter includes methods and
provisions for:
   (a)   Restricting or prohibiting uses which are dangerous to health, safety,
and property due to water or erosion hazards, or which result in damaging
increase in erosion or flood heights or velocities;
   (b)   Requiring that uses vulnerable to floods, including facilities which
serve such uses be protected against flood damage at the time of initial
construction;
   (c)   Controlling the alteration of natural floodplains, stream channels,
and natural protective barriers which help accommodate or channel flood waters;
   (d)   Controlling filling, grading, dredging, and other development which
may increase flood damage; and
   (e)   Preventing or regulating the construction of flood barriers which will
unnaturally divert flood waters or which may increase flood hazards in other
areas.
(§ 1, Ord. 2409, eff. February 4, 1988)
Article 2. Definitions
Sec. 8-13.201. Definitions.
   Unless specifically defined below, words or phrases used in this chapter
shall be interpreted so as to give them the meaning they have in common usage
and to give this chapter its most reasonable application.
   (a)   “Appeal” means a request for a review of the Floodplain
Administrator’s interpretation of any provision of this chapter or a request
for a variance.
    (b)   “Area of shallow flooding” means a designated AO or AH Zone on the
Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM). The base flood depths range from one (1) foot
to three (3) feet; a clearly defined channel does not exist; the path of
flooding is unpredictable and indeterminate; and velocity flow may be evident.
   (c)   “Area of special flood-related erosion hazard” means the area subject
to severe flood-related erosion losses. The area is designated Zone E on the
Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM).
   (d)   “Area of special flood hazard.” See “Special flood hazard area.”
   (e)   “Area of special mudslide (i.e., mudflow) hazard” means the area
subject to severe mudslides (i.e., mudflows). The area is designated as Zone M
on the flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM).
   (f)   “Base flood” means the flood having a one percent chance of being
equaled or exceeded in any given year (also called the “100-year flood”).
   (g)   "Base flood elevation" means the elevation of the base flood,
including wave height, relative to the National Geodetic Vertical Datum (NGVD),
North American Vertical Datum (NAVD) or other datum specified on the Flood
Insurance Rate Map (FIRM).
   (h)   "Basement" means any area of the building having its floor subgrade
(below ground level) on all sides.
   (i)    "Breakaway walls" means any type of walls, whether solid or lattice,
and whether constructed of concrete, masonry, wood, metal, plastic or any other
suitable building material which is not part of the structural support of the
building and which is designed to break away under abnormally high tides or
wave action without causing any damage to the structural integrity of the
building on which they are used or any buildings to which they might be carried
by flood waters. A breakaway wall shall have a safe design loading resistance
of not less than ten (10) and no more than twenty (20) pounds per square foot.
Use of breakaway walls must be certified by a registered engineer or architect
and shall meet the following conditions:
      (1)   Breakaway wall collapse shall result from a water load less than
that which would occur during the base flood; and
      (2)   The elevated portion of the building shall not incur any structural
damage due to the effects of wind and water loads acting simultaneously in the
event of the base flood.
   (j)   "Development" means any man-made change to improved or unimproved real
estate, including but not limited to buildings or other structures, mining,
dredging, filling, grading, paving, excavation or drilling operations.
   (k)   "Flood" or "flooding" means a general and temporary condition of
partial or complete inundation of normally dry land areas from (1) the overflow
of flood waters; (2) the unusual and rapid accumulation of runoff of surface
waters from any source; and/or (3) the collapse or subsidence of land along the
shore of a lake or other body of water as a result of erosion or undermining
caused by waves or currents of water exceeding anticipated cyclical levels or
suddenly caused by an unusually high water level in a natural body of water,
accompanied by a severe storm, or by an unanticipated force of nature, such as
flash flood or an abnormal tidal surge, or by some similarly unusual and
unforeseeable event which results in flooding as defined in this definition.
   (l)   "Flood Boundary and Floodway Map" means the official map on which the
Federal Emergency Management Agency or Federal Insurance Administration has
delineated both the areas of flood hazard and the floodway.
   (m)   "Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM)" means the official map on which the
Federal Emergency Management Agency or Federal Insurance Administration has
delineated both the areas of special flood hazards and the risk premium zones
applicable to the community.
   (n)   "Flood Insurance Study" means the official report provided by the
Federal Insurance Administration that includes flood profiles, the FIRM, the
Flood Boundary and Floodway Map, and the water surface elevation of the base
flood.
   (o)   "Floodplain" or "flood-prone area" means any land area susceptible to
being inundated by water from any source (see definition of "flooding").
   (p)   "Floodplain management" means the operation of an overall program of
corrective and preventive measures for reducing flood damage including but not
limited to emergency preparedness plans, flood control works and floodplain
management regulations.
   (q)   "Floodplain management regulations" means zoning ordinances,
subdivision regulations, building codes, health regulations, special purpose
ordinances (such as floodplain ordinance, grading ordinance and erosion control
ordinance) and other applications of police power. The term describes such
state and local regulations in any combination thereof, which provide standards
for the purpose of flood damage prevention and reduction.
   (r)   "Floodproofing" means any combination of structural and nonstructural
additions, changes, or adjustments to structures which reduce or eliminate
flood damage to real estate or improved real property, water and sanitary
facilities, structures and their contents.
   (s)   "Floodway" means the channel of a river or other watercourse and the
adjacent land areas that must be reserved in order to discharge the base flood
without cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation more than one foot.
Also referred to as "regulatory floodway."
   (t)   "Functionally dependent use" means a use which cannot perform its
intended purpose unless it is located or carried out in close proximity to
water. The term includes only docking facilities, port facilities that are
necessary for the loading and unloading of cargo or passengers, and ship
building and ship repair facilities, but does not include long- term storage or
related manufacturing facilities.
   (u)   "Highest adjacent grade" means the highest natural elevation of the
ground surface prior to construction next to the proposed walls of a structure.
   (v)   "Lowest floor" means the lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area
(including basement). An unfinished or flood resistant enclosure, usable solely
for parking of vehicles, building access or storage in an area other than a
basement area is not considered a building's lowest floor; provided, that such
enclosure is not built so as to render the structure in violation of the
applicable non-elevation design requirements of this chapter.
   (w)   "Manufactured home" means a structure, transportable in one or more
sections, which is built on a permanent chassis and is designed for use with or
without a permanent foundation when connected to the required utilities. For
floodplain management purposes, the term "manufactured home" also includes park
trailers, travel trailers and other similar vehicles placed on a site for
greater than one hundred eighty (180) consecutive days. "Manufactured home"
does not include a "recreational vehicle."
   (x)   "Manufactured home park or subdivision" means a parcel (or contiguous
parcels) of land divided into two or more manufactured home lots for sale or
rent.
   (y)   "Mean sea level" means, for purposes of the National Flood Insurance
Program, the National Geodetic Vertical Datum (NGVD) of 1929 or other datum, to
which base flood elevations shown on a community's Flood Insurance Rate Map are
referenced.
   (z)   "New construction" means, for floodplain management purposes,
structures for which the "start of construction" commenced on after the
effective date of a floodplain management regulation adopted by this community.
   (aa)   "One hundred year flood" or "100-year flood" means a flood which has
a one percent (1%) annual probability of being equaled or exceeded. It is
identical to the "base flood," which will be the term used throughout this
chapter.
   (bb)   "Person" means an individual or his agent, firm, partnership,
association or corporation, or agent of the aforementioned groups, or this
state or its agencies or political subdivisions.
   (cc)   "Recreational vehicle" means a vehicle which is all of the following:
      (1)   Built on a single chassis;
      (2)   Four hundred (400) square feet or less when measured at the largest
horizontal projection;
      (3)   Designed to be self-propelled or permanently towable by a light-
duty truck; and
      (4)   Designed primarily not for use as a permanent dwelling but as
temporary living quarters for recreational, camping, travel, or seasonal use.
   (dd)   "Remedy a violation" means to bring the structure or other
development into compliance with state or local floodplain management
regulations, or, if this is not possible, to reduce the impacts of its
noncompliance. Ways that impacts may be reduced include protecting the
structure or other affected development from flood damages, implementing the
enforcement provisions of this chapter or otherwise determining future similar
violations, or reducing federal financial exposure with regard to the structure
or other development.
   (ee)   "Riverine" means relating to, formed by, or resembling a river
(including tributaries), stream, brook, and the like.
   (ff)   "Special flood hazard area (SFHA)" means an area having special flood
or flood-related erosion hazards, and shown on an FHBM or FIRM as Zone A, AO,
A1-30, AE, A99, or AH.
   (gg)   "Start of construction" includes substantial improvement, and means
the date the building permit was issued, provided the actual start of
construction, repair, reconstruction, placement, or other improvement was
within one hundred eighty (180) days of the permit date. The actual start means
either the first placement of permanent construction of a structure on a site,
such as the pouring of slab or footings, the installation of piles, the
construction of columns, or any work beyond the stage of excavation; or the
placement of a manufactured home on a foundation. Permanent construction does
not include land preparation, such as clearing, grading, and filling; nor does
it include the installation of streets and/or walkways; nor does it include
excavation for a basement, footings, piers or foundations or the erection of
temporary forms; nor does it include the installation on the property of
accessory buildings, such as garages or sheds not occupied as dwelling units or
not part of the main structure.
   (hh)   "Structure" means a walled and roofed building, including a gas or
liquid storage tank, that is principally above ground, as well as a
manufactured home.
   (ii)   "Substantial damage" means damage of any origin sustained by a
structure whereby the cost of restoring the structure to its before-damaged
condition would equal or exceed fifty percent (50%) of the market value of the
structure before the damage occurred.
   (jj)   (1)   "Substantial improvement" means any repair, reconstruction, or
improvement of a structure, the cost of which equals or exceeds fifty percent
(50%) of the market value of the structure either:
         (i)   Before the improvement or repair is started; or
         (ii)   If the structure has been damaged and is being restored, before
the damage occurred.
      (2)   For the purposes of this definition, "substantial improvement" is
considered to occur when the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor, or
other structural part of the building commences, whether or not that alteration
affects the external dimensions of the structure. The term does not, however,
include either:
         (i)   Any project for improvement of a structure to comply with
existing state or local health, sanitary, or safety code specifications which
are solely necessary to assure safe living conditions; or
         (ii)   Any alteration of a structure listed on the National Register
of Historic Places or a State Inventory of Historic Places.
   (kk)   "Variation" means a grant of relief from the requirements of this
chapter, which permits construction in a manner which would otherwise be
prohibited by this chapter.
   (ll)   "Variance" means a grant of relief from the requirements of this
chapter, which permits construction in a manner which would otherwise be
prohibited by this chapter."
   (mm)   "Violation" means the failure of a structure or other development to
be fully compliant with the community's floodplain management regulations. A
structure or other development without the elevation certificate, other
certifications, or other evidence of compliance required in this chapter is
presumed to be in violation until such time as that documentation is provided.
(§ 1, Ord. 2409, eff. February 4, 1988, as amended by § 1, Ord. 2991, eff. July
17, 2014, § 2, Ord. 3271, eff. April 4, 2024)
Article 3. General Provisions
Sec. 8-13.301. Lands to which this chapter applies.
   This chapter shall apply to all areas of special flood hazards, areas of
flood-related erosion hazards and areas of mudslide (i.e., mudflow) hazards
within the jurisdiction of the City.
(§ 1, Ord. 2409, eff. February 4, 1988)
Sec. 8-13.302. Base for establishing the areas of special flood hazard.
   The areas of special flood hazard, areas of flood- related erosion hazards
and areas of mudslide (i.e., mudflow) hazards identified by the Federal
Emergency Management Agency or the Federal Insurance Administration in a
scientific and engineering report entitled "Flood Insurance Study for Ontario,
California, dated December 2, 1980," with an accompanying Flood Insurance Rate
Map, and all later revisions thereof, is hereby adopted by reference and
declared to be a part of this chapter. The Flood Insurance Study is on file in
the office of the City Engineer, City Hall, 303 East “B” Street, Ontario,
California. This Flood Insurance Study is the minimum area of applicability of
this chapter and may be supplemented by studies or other areas which allow
implementation of this chapter and which are recommended to the City Council by
the Floodplain Administrator.
(§ 1, Ord. 2409, eff. February 4, 1988)
Sec. 8-13.303. Compliance.
   No structure or land shall hereafter be constructed, located, extended,
converts or altered without full compliance with the terms of this chapter and
other applicable regulations. Violations of the provisions of this chapter by
failure to comply with any of its requirements (including violations of
conditions and safeguards established in connection with conditions) shall
constitute a misdemeanor. Nothing herein shall prevent the City Council from
taking such lawful action as is necessary to prevent or remedy any violation.
(§ 1, Ord. 2409, eff. February 4, 1988)
Sec. 8-13.304. Abrogation and greater restrictions.
   This chapter is not intended to repeal, abrogate, or impair any existing
easements, covenants, or deed restrictions. However, where this chapter and
another ordinance, easement, covenant, or deed restriction conflict or overlap,
whichever imposes the more stringent restrictions shall prevail.
(§ 1, Ord. 2409, eff. February 4, 1988)
Sec. 8-13.305. Interpretation.
   In the interpretation and application of this chapter, all provisions shall
be:
   (a)   Considered as minimum requirements;
   (b)   Liberally construed in favor of the governing body; and
   (c)   Deemed neither to limit nor repeal any other powers granted under
state statutes.
(§ 1, Ord. 2409, eff. February 4, 1988)
Sec. 8-13.306. Warning and disclaimer of liability.
   The degree of flood protection required by this chapter is considered
reasonable for regulatory purposes and is based on scientific and engineering
considerations. Larger floods can and will occur on rare occasions. Flood
heights may be increased by man-made or natural causes. This chapter does not
imply that land outside the areas of special flood hazards and areas of
mudslide (i.e., mudflow) hazards or uses permitted within such areas will be
free from flooding or flood damage. This chapter shall not create liability on
the part of the City, any officer or employee thereof, or the Federal Insurance
Administration for any flood damages that result from reliance on this chapter
or any administrative decision lawfully made thereunder.
(§ 1, Ord. 2409, eff. February 4, 1988)
Sec. 8-13.307. Severability.
   This chapter and the various parts thereof are declared to be severable.
Should any section of this chapter be declared by the courts to be
unconstitutional or invalid, such decision shall not affect the validity of the
chapter as a whole, or any portion thereof other than the section so declared
to be unconstitutional or invalid.
(§ 1, Ord. 2409, eff. February 4, 1988)
Article 4. Administration
Sec. 8-13.401. Establishment of development permit.
   A development permit shall be obtained before construction or development
begins within any area of special flood hazards, areas of flood-related erosion
hazards or areas of mudslide (i.e. mudflow) established in §
8-13.302. Application for a development permit shall be made on forms furnished
by the Floodplain Administrator and may include, but not be limited to: plans
in duplicate drawn to scale showing the nature, location, dimensions, and
elevation of the area in question, existing or proposed structures, fill,
storage of materials, drainage facilities; and the location of the foregoing.
Specifically, the following information is required:
   (a)   Proposed elevation, in relation to the mean sea level, of the lowest
habitable floor (including the basement) of all structures; in Zone AO,
elevation of highest adjacent grade and proposed elevation of lowest floor of
all structures;
   (b)   Proposed elevation, in relation to mean sea level, to which any
structure will be floodproofed;
   (c)   All appropriate certifications listed in §
8-13.403(d) of this chapter; and
   (d)   Description of the extent to which any watercourse will be altered or
relocated as a result of proposed development.
(§ 1, Ord. 2409, eff. February 4, 1988)
Sec. 8-13.402. Designation of the Floodplain Administrator.
   The Development Director is hereby appointed to administer and implement
this chapter by granting or denying development permits in accordance with its
provisions.
(§ 1, Ord. 2409, eff. February 4, 1988)
Sec. 8-13.403. Duties and responsibilities of the Floodplain Administrator.
   The duties and responsibilities of the Floodplain Administrator shall
include, but not be limited to:
   (a)   Permit review.
      (1)   Review all development permits to determine that the permit
requirements of this chapter have been satisfied;
      (2)   All other required state and federal permits have been obtained;
      (3)   The site is reasonably safe from flooding;
      (4)   The proposed development does not adversely affect the carrying
capacity of the floodway. For purposes of this chapter, “adversely affects”
means that the cumulative effect of the proposed development, when combined
with all other existing and anticipated development, will not increase the
water surface elevation of the base flood more than one foot at any point;
      (5)   Require applicants who submit hydrologic and hydraulic engineering
analyses to support permit applications to submit to FEMA the data and
information necessary to maintain the Flood Insurance Rate Maps when the
analyses indicate changes in base flood elevations, flood hazard area
boundaries, or floodway designations; such submissions shall be made within six
(6) months of such data becoming available.
   (b)   Use of other base flood data, when base flood elevation data has not
been provided in accordance with §
8-13.302, the Floodplain Administrator shall obtain, review, and reasonably
utilize any base flood elevation and floodway data available from a federal,
state, or other source in order to administer
Article 5. Any such information shall be submitted to the City Council for
adoption.
   (c)   Whenever a watercourse is to be altered or relocated:
      (1)   Notify adjacent communities and the California Department of Water
Resources prior to such alteration or relocation of a watercourse, and submit
evidence of such notification to the Federal Insurance Administration;
      (2)   Require that the flood carrying capacity of the altered or
relocated portion of said watercourse is maintained.
   (d)   Obtain and maintain for public inspection and make available as
needed:
      (1)   The certification required in §
8-13.501 (c)(1) (floor elevations);
      (2)   The certification required by §
8-13.501 (c)(2) (elevations in areas of shallow flooding);
      (3)   The certification required in §
8-13.501 (c)(3)(iii) (elevation or floodproofing of non- residential
structures);
      (4)   The certification required in §
8-13.501 (c)(4)(i) or (ii) (wet floodproofing standards);
      (5)   The certified elevation required in §
8-13.503(b) (subdivision standards);
      (6)   The certification required in §
8-13.505(a) (floodway encroachments); and
      (7)   The reports required in §
8-13.506(d) (mudflow standards).
   (e)   Make interpretations where needed, as to the exact location of the
boundaries of the areas of special flood hazards, areas of flood related
erosion hazards or areas of mudslide (i.e., mudflow) (for example, where there
appears to be a conflict between a mapped boundary and actual field
conditions). The person contesting the location of the boundary shall be given
a reasonable opportunity to appeal the interpretation as provided in
Article 6.
   (f)   Substantial improvement and substantial damage determinations. For
applications for building permits to improve buildings and structures,
including alterations, movement, enlargement, replacement, repair, additions,
rehabilitations, renovations, substantial improvements, repairs of substantial
damage, and any other improvement of or work on such buildings and structures,
the Building Official, in coordination with the Floodplain Administrator,
shall:
      (1)   Require the applicant to obtain an appraisal of the market value
prepared by a qualified independent appraiser, of the building or structure
before the start of construction of the proposed work to the satisfaction of
the Building Official; in the case of repair, the market value of the building
or structure shall be the market value before the damage occurred and before
any repairs are made.
      (2)   Compare the cost to perform the improvement, the cost to repair the
damaged building to its pre-damaged condition, or the combined costs of
improvements and repairs, when applicable, to the market value of the building
or structure.
      (3)   Determine and document whether the proposed work constitutes
substantial improvement or repair of substantial damage.
      (4)   Notify the applicant when it is determined that the work
constitutes substantial improvement or repair of substantial damage and that
compliance with the flood resistant construction requirements of the building
code is required and notify the applicant when it is determined that work does
not constitute substantial improvement or repair of substantial damage.
   (g)   Take action to remedy violations of this chapter as specified in §
8-13.303 of this chapter.
(§ 1, Ord. 2409, eff. February 4, 1988, §§ 3, 4, Ord. 3271, eff. April 4, 2024)
Article 5. Provisions for Flood Hazard Reduction
Sec. 8-13.501. Standards of construction.
   In all areas of special flood hazards, the following standards are required:
   (a)   Anchoring.
      (1)   All new construction and substantial improvements shall be anchored
to prevent flotation, collapse, or lateral movement of the structure resulting
from hydrodynamic and hydrostatic loads, including the effects of buoyancy.
      (2)   All manufactured homes shall meet the anchoring standards of §
8-13.504.
   (b)   Construction materials and methods.
      (1)   All new construction and substantial improvements shall be
constructed with materials and utility equipment resistant to flood damage.
      (2)   All new construction and substantial improvements shall be
constructed using methods and practices that minimize flood damage.
      (3)   All new construction and substantial improvements shall be
constructed with electrical, heating, ventilation, plumbing and air
conditioning equipment and other service facilities that are designed and/or
located so as to prevent water from entering or accumulating within the
components during conditions of flooding.
      (4)   Require within Zones AH or AO adequate drainage paths around
structures on slopes to guide flood waters around and away from proposed
structures.
   (c)   Elevation and floodproofing.
      (1)   New construction and substantial improvements of any structure
shall have the lowest habitable floor, including basement, elevated to at least
one (1) foot above the base flood elevation. Nonresidential structures may meet
the standards in §
8-13.501(c)(3). Upon the completion of the structure, the elevation of the
lowest floor, including basement, shall be certified by a registered
professional engineer or surveyor, or verified by the community building
inspector to be properly elevated. Such certification or verification shall be
provided to the Building Official.
      (2)   New construction and substantial improvement of any structure in
Zone AH or AO shall have the lowest floor, including basement, elevated above
the highest adjacent grade at least one (1) foot higher than the depth number
specified in feet on the FIRM, or at least two (2) feet if no depth number is
specified. Nonresidential structures may meet the standards in §
8-13.501(c)(3). Upon the completion of the structure, the elevation of the
lowest floor, including basement, shall be certified by a registered
professional engineer or surveyor, or verified by the community building
inspector to be properly elevated. Such certification or verification shall be
provided to the Building Official.
      (3)   Nonresidential construction shall either be elevated in conformance
with §
8-13.501(c)(1) or (2) or, together with attendant utility and sanitary
facilities:
         (i)   Be floodproofed so that the structure is watertight with walls
substantially impermeable to the passage of water to a minimum of one (1) foot
above the base flood elevation;
         (ii)   Have structural components capable of resisting hydrostatic and
hydrodynamic loads and effects of buoyancy;
         (iii)   Be certified by a registered professional engineer or
architect that the standards of this subsection are satisfied. Such
certification shall be provided to the Floodplain Administrator.
      (4)   Require, for all new construction and substantial improvements,
that fully enclosed areas below the lowest floor that are subject to flooding
shall be designed to automatically equalize hydrostatic flood forces on
exterior walls by allowing for the entry and exit of floodwaters. Designs for
meeting this requirement must either be certified by a registered professional
engineer or architect or meet or exceed the following minimum criteria:
         (i)   Either a minimum of two openings having a total net area of not
less than one square inch for every square foot of enclosed area subject to
flooding shall be provided. The bottom of all openings shall be no higher than
one foot above grade. Openings may be equipped with screens, louvers, valves or
other coverings or devices provided that they permit the automatic entry and
exit of floodwaters; or
         (ii)   Be certified to comply with a local floodproofing standard
approved by the Federal Insurance Administration.
      (5)   Manufactured homes shall also meet the standards in §
8-13.504.
(§ 1, Ord. 2409, eff. February 4, 1988, § 5, Ord. 3271, eff. April 4, 2024)
Sec. 8-13.502. Standards for utilities.
   (a)   All new and replacement water supply and sanitary sewage systems shall
be designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of flood waters into the
system and discharge from systems into flood waters.
   (b)   On-site waste disposal systems shall be located to avoid impairment to
them or contamination from them during flooding.
(§ 1, Ord. 2409, eff. February 4, 1988)
Sec. 8-13.503. Standards for subdivisions.
   (a)   All preliminary subdivision proposals shall identify the flood hazard
area and the elevation of the base flood.
   (b)   All final subdivision plans shall provide the elevation of proposed
structure(s) and pads. If the site is filled above the base flood, the final
pad elevation shall be certified by a registered professional engineer or
surveyor and provided to the Floodplain Administrator.
   (c)   All subdivision proposals shall be consistent with the need to
minimize flood damage.
   (d)   All subdivision proposals shall have public utilities and facilities,
such as sewer, gas, electrical, and water systems, located and constructed to
minimize flood damage.
   (e)   All subdivisions shall provide adequate drainage to reduce exposure to
flood hazards.
(§ 1, Ord. 2409, eff. February 4, 1988)
Sec. 8-13.504. Standards for manufactured homes.
   All new and replacement manufactured homes and additions to manufactured
homes shall:
   (a)   Be elevated so that the lowest floor is a minimum of one (1) foot
above the base flood elevation; and
   (b)   Be securely anchored to a permanent foundation system to resist
flotation, collapse or lateral movement.
(§ 1, Ord. 2409, eff. February 4, 1988, § 7, Ord. 3271, eff. April 4, 2024)
Sec. 8-13.505. Floodways.
   Located within areas of special flood hazard established in §
8-13.302 are areas designated as floodways. Since the floodway is an extremely
hazardous area due to the velocity of flood waters which carry debris,
potential projectiles, and erosion potential, the following provisions apply:
   (a)   Prohibit encroachments, including fill, new construction, substantial
improvements, and other development unless certification by a registered
professional engineer or architect is provided demonstrating that encroachments
shall not result in any increase in flood levels during the occurrence of the
base flood discharge.
   (b)   If subsection (a) of this section is satisfied, all new construction
and substantial improvements shall comply with all other applicable flood
hazard reduction provisions of
Article 5.
(§ 1, Ord. 2409, eff. February 4, 1988)
Sec. 8-13.506. Mudslide- (i.e., mudflow-) prone areas.
   (a)   The Floodplain Administrator shall review permits for proposed
construction or other development to determine if it is proposed within a
mudslide area.
   (b)   Permits shall be reviewed to determine that the proposed development
is reasonably safe from mudslide hazards. Factors to be considered in making
this determination include but are not limited to:
      (1)   The type and quality of soils;
      (2)   Evidence of ground water or surface water problems;
      (3)   The depth and quality of any fill;
      (4)   The overall slope of the site; and
      (5)   The weight that any proposed development will impose on the slope.
   (c)   Within areas which have mudslide hazards, the following requirements
apply:
      (1)   A site investigation and further review shall be made by persons
qualified in geology and soils engineering;
      (2)   The proposed grading, excavation, new construction and substantial
improvements shall be adequately designed and protected against mudslide
damages;
      (3)   The proposed grading, excavations, new construction and substantial
improvements do not aggravate the existing hazard creating either on-site or
off-site disturbances; and
      (4)   Drainage, planting, watering and maintenance shall not endanger
slope stability.
   (d)   Prior to the issuance of building permits, all properties within any
Flood Zones inundated by the 100 year flood as designated on the latest edition
of the Flood Insurance Rate Map shall demonstrate to the Flood Plain
Administrator that any and all structures are adequately protected consistent
with the most current provisions of the grading requirements set forth in the
agencies latest edition of the adopted Building Codes. These requirements shall
also include the following elements:
      (1)   The location of foundation and utility systems of new construction
and substantial improvements;
      (2)   The location, drainage and maintenance of all excavations, cuts and
fills and planted slopes;
      (3)   Protective measures, including but not limited to retaining walls,
buttress fills, subdrains, diverter terraces, benchings, and the like; and
      (4)   Engineering drawings and specifications to be submitted for all
corrective measures, accompanied by supporting soils engineering and geology
reports.
(§ 1, Ord. 2409, eff. February 4, 1988)
Sec. 8-13.507. Flood-related erosion-prone areas.
   (a)   The Floodplain Administrator shall require permits for proposed
construction and other development within all flood-related erosion-prone areas
as known to the community.
   (b)   Such permits shall be reviewed to determine whether the proposed site
alterations and improvements will be reasonably safe from flood- related
erosion and will not cause flood-related erosion hazards or otherwise aggravate
the existing hazard.
   (c)   If a proposed improvement is found to be in the path of flood-related
erosion or would increase the erosion hazard, such improvement shall be
relocated or adequate protective measures shall be taken to avoid aggravating
the existing erosion hazard.
(§ 1, Ord. 2409, eff. February 4, 1988)
Sec. 8-13.508. Standards for recreational vehicles.
   (a)   All recreational vehicles placed in SFHA Zones A1-30, AH or AE must
either:
      (1)   Be on the site for fewer than 180 consecutive days;
      (2)   Be fully licensed and ready for highway use; or
      (3)   Meet the permit requirements of Section
8-13.401 and the elevation and anchoring requirements for manufactured homes in
Section
8-13.504.
   (b)   For purposes of this section, a recreational vehicle is ready for
highway use if it is on its wheels or jacking system, is attached to the site
only by quick disconnect type utilities and security devices, and has no
permanently attached additions.
(§ 2, Ord. 2991, eff. July 17, 2014)
Article 6. Variance Procedure
Sec. 8-13.601. Appeal board.
   (a)   The City Council shall hear and decide appeals and requests for
variance from the requirements of this chapter.
   (b)   The City Council shall hear and decide appeals when it is alleged
there is an error in any requirement, decision, or determination made by the
Floodplain Administrator in the enforcement or administration of this chapter.
   (c)   In passing upon such applications, the City Council shall consider all
technical evaluations, all relevant factors, standards specified in other
sections of this chapter; and:
      (1)   The danger that materials may be swept onto other lands to the
injury of others;
      (2)   The danger to life and property due to flooding or erosion damage;
      (3)   The susceptibility of the proposed facility and its contents to
flood damage and the effect of such damage on the individual owner;
      (4)   The importance of the services provided by the proposed facility to
the community;
      (5)   The necessity to the facility of a waterfront location, where
applicable;
      (6)   The availability of alternative locations for the proposed use
which are not subject to flooding or erosion damage;
      (7)   The compatibility of the proposed use with existing and anticipated
development;
      (8)   The relationship of the proposed use to the comprehensive plan and
floodplain management program for that area;
      (9)   The safety of access to the property in time of flood for ordinary
and emergency vehicles;
      (10)   The expected heights, velocity, duration, rate of rise, and
sediment transport of the flood waters expected at the site; and
      (11)   The costs of providing governmental services during and after
flood conditions, including maintenance and repair of public utilities and
facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical and water systems, and streets and
bridges.
   (d)   Upon consideration of the factors of subsection (c) of this section
and the purposes of this chapter, the City Council may attach such conditions
to the granting of variances as it deems necessary to further the purposes of
this chapter.
   (e)   The Floodplain Administrator shall maintain the records of all appeal
actions and report any variances to the Federal Insurance Administration upon
request.
(§ 1, Ord. 2409, eff. February 4, 1988, § 6, Ord. 3271, eff. April 4, 2024)
Sec. 8-13.602. Conditions for variances.
   (a)   A variance is authorized to be issued for the repair, improvement, or
rehabilitation of a historic structure upon a determination that the proposed
repair, improvement, or rehabilitation will not preclude the structure's
continued designation as a historic structure, and the variance is the minimum
necessary to preserve the historic character and design of the structure. When
the proposed work precludes the structure's continued designation as a historic
structure, a variance shall not be granted and the structure and any repair,
improvement, and rehabilitation shall be subject to the requirements of the
building code in conjunction with the provisions of this article.
   (b)   Variances shall not be issued within any designated floodway if any
increase in flood levels during the base flood discharge would result.
   (c)   Variances shall only be issued upon a determination that the variance
is the minimum necessary, considering the flood hazard, to afford relief.
   (d)   Variances shall only be issued upon:
      (1)   A showing of good and sufficient cause;
      (2)   A determination that failure to grant the variance would result in
exceptional hardship to the applicant; and
      (3)   A determination that the granting of a variance will not result in
increased flood heights, additional threats to public safety, or extraordinary
public expense, create nuisances, cause fraud on or the victimization of the
public, or conflict with existing local laws or ordinances.
   (e)   Variances may be issued for new construction and substantial
improvements and for other development necessary for the conduct of a
functionally dependent use, provided that the provisions of subsections (a)
through (d) of this section are satisfied and that the structure or other
development is protected by methods that minimize flood damages during the base
flood and create no additional threats to public safety.
   (f)   Any applicant to whom a variance is granted shall be given written
notice that the structure will be permitted to be built with a lowest floor
elevation below the regulatory flood elevation and that the cost of flood
insurance will be commensurate with the increased risk resulting from the
reduced lowest floor elevation. A copy of the notice shall be recorded by the
Floodplain Board in the office of the San Bernardino County Recorder and shall
be recorded in a manner so that it appears in the chain of title of the
affected parcel of land.
(§ 1, Ord. 2409, eff. February 4, 1988, § 8, Ord. 3271, eff. April 4, 2024)
CHAPTER 14: HISTORIC BUILDING CODE, EXISTING BUILDING CODE AND
REFERENCED STANDARDS*
* Sections 8-14.01 through 8-14.16, Historic Preservation, codified from Ord.
2509, eff. August 1, 1991, repealed by § 4, Ord. 2707, eff. December 16, 1999.
Sections 8-14.01 through 8-14.03, Historic Building Code, Existing Building
Code and Referenced Standards, codified from Ord. 3227, eff. January 5, 2023.
   
8-14.01   Adoption of California Historic Building Code
   
8-14.02   Adoption of California Existing Building Code
   
8-14.03   Adoption of California Referenced Standards
   
8-14.04   Alternative building standards for reuse projects
Sec. 8-14.01. Adoption of California Historic Building Code.
   The 2022 Edition of the California Historic Building Code, as adopted by the
California Building Standards Commission in California Code of Regulations
Title 24, Part 8, is hereby adopted by reference and made a part of this
chapter as if fully set forth at length herein. One (1) copy of said code is on
file in the office of the City Clerk for public review.
(§ 12, Ord. 3227, eff. January 5, 2023)
Sec. 8-14.02. Adoption of California Existing Building Code.
   The 2022 Edition of the California Existing Building Code, as adopted by the
California Building Standards Commission in California Code of Regulations
Title 24, Part 10, is hereby adopted by reference and made a part of this
chapter as if fully set forth at length herein. One (1) copy of said code is on
file in the office of the City Clerk for public review.
(§ 12, Ord. 3227, eff. January 5, 2023)
Sec. 8-14.03. Adoption of California Referenced Standards.
   The 2022 Edition of the California Referenced Standards, as adopted by the
California Building Standards Commission in California Code of Regulations
Title 24, Part 12, is hereby adopted by reference and made a part of this
chapter as if fully set forth at length herein. One (1) copy of said code is on
file in the office of the City Clerk for public review.
(§ 12, Ord. 3227, eff. January 5, 2023)
Sec. 8-14.04. Alternative building standards for adaptive reuse projects.
   (a)   Purpose. The Historic Preservation-Adaptive Reuse Plan in Title 9
Development Code expanded the scope of eligible and underutilized buildings or
structures that have great potential to be converted into new uses or occupancy
that can benefit from relief of parking standards, setbacks and zoning height
limitations. However, key to the success of the Adaptive Reuse Plan relies on
the ability of the Building Official and Fire Marshal to effectively use their
authority to grant code modification or alternative materials, design and
methods of construction and equipment to address practical difficulties
involved in complying with the strict provisions of the code or consider
alternative design or methods not specifically prescribed in the code. Other
statutory regulations such as the California Historic Building Code adopted in
§
8-14.01 and the California Existing Building Code adopted in §
8-14.02, including Cal. Gov’t Code §§ 17958.11 and Cal. Health and Safety Code
§ 19957, provides the Building Official and Fire Marshal with the ability to
consider other alternative building standards. Therefore, the purpose of this
chapter is to amend, expand, establish and clarify alternative building
standards for the conversion of existing buildings or structures to accommodate
new uses or occupancy for other purposes than what it was originally designed
for and still provide reasonable use and safety to the building occupants.
   (b)   Applicability. Projects that meet the definition and applicable
requirements of an adaptive reuse project pursuant to Title 9 Development Code
may be permitted to use the alternative building standards of this chapter.
   (c)   Adaptive Reuse Technical Manual.
      (1)   Although other chapters or sections of the Ontario Municipal Code
and the most recently adopted edition of the California Building Standards Code
are applicable to new construction or a change of use or occupancy, the use of
the Adaptive Reuse Technical Manual, which includes Alternative Building
Materials and Methods, may be permitted to provide alternative regulations for
adaptive reuse projects that meet the applicability requirement of subsection
(b).
      (2)   The Building Official and Fire Marshal shall prepare, maintain, and
update, as deemed necessary and appropriate, the Adaptive Reuse Technical
Manual and shall include technical information and implementation parameters,
alternative compliance for technical infeasibility, as well as other rules,
requirements and procedures as the City deems necessary, for implementing the
provisions of this chapter.
      (3)   The Building Official and Fire Marshal shall develop, as deemed
necessary and appropriate, in cooperation with other City departments and
stakeholders, informational bulletins, training manuals and educational
materials to assist in the implementation of this chapter.
(§ 2, Ord. 3292, eff. December 17, 2024)
CHAPTER 15: SOUND TRANSMISSION CONTROL IN HIGH NOISE IMPACT AREAS *
* Sections 8-15.101 though 8-15.701, codified from Ord. 2569, eff. June 16,
1994, repealed by Ord. 2616, eff. June 20, 1996.
Article 1. General
   
8-15.101   Definitions
   
8-15.102   Purpose
   
8-15.103   Scope
   
8-15.104   Standards and certifications
   
8-15.105   Application to existing buildings
   
8-15.106   Nonresidential buildings
Article 2. Building Requirements for New Residential Construction in the 70
CNEL to 75 CNEL Noise Zone
   
8-15.201   Exterior walls
   
8-15.202   Exterior windows
   
8-15.203   Exterior doors
   
8-15.204   Roof/ceiling construction
   
8-15.205   Floors
   
8-15.206   Ventilation
   
8-15.207   Fireplaces
Article 3. Building Requirements for New Residential Construction in the 65
CNEL to 70 CNEL Noise Zone
   
8-15.301   Exterior walls
   
8-15.302   Exterior windows
   
8-15.303   Exterior doors
   
8-15.304   Roof/ceiling construction
   
8-15.305   Floors
   
8-15.306   Ventilation
   
8-15.307   Fireplaces
   
8-15.308   Wall and ceiling openings
Article 4. Building Requirements for New Residential Construction in the 60
CNEL to 65 CNEL Noise Zone
   
8-15.401   Requirements - Outlined
Article 5. Modification Requirements for Existing Residential Buildings in the
70 CNEL to 75 CNEL Noise Zone
   
8-15.501   Exterior walls
   
8-15.502   Exterior windows
   
8-15.503   Exterior doors
   
8-15.504   Roofs
   
8-15.505   Floors
   
8-15.506   Ventilation
   
8-15.507   Fireplaces
   
8-15.508   Wall and ceiling openings
Article 6. Modification Requirements for Existing Residential Buildings in the
65 CNEL to 70 CNEL Noise Zone
   
8-15.601   Exterior walls
   
8-15.602   Exterior windows
   
8-15.603   Exterior doors
   
8-15.604   Roofs
   
8-15.605   Floors
   
8-15.606   Ventilation
   
8-15.607   Fireplaces
   
8-15.608   Wall and ceiling openings
Article 7. Modification Requirements for Existing Residential Buildings in the
60 CNEL to 65 CNEL Noise Zone
   
8-15.701   Modification requirements - Outlined
Article 1. General
Sec. 8-15.101. Definitions.
   (a)   “CNEL” means community noise equivalent level.
   (b)   “dB” means decibel.
   (c)   “dB(A)” means (A) weighted decibel.
   (d)   “STC” means sound transmission class.
   (e)   “Group R” means any residential land use, plus any other use generally
considered incompatible with airport operations, such as churches, schools and
hospitals.
(§ 2, Ord. 2616, eff. June 20, 1996)
Sec. 8-15.102. Purpose.
   (a)   The purpose of these sections is to safeguard life, health, property
and public welfare by establishing minimum requirements regulating the design,
construction and modification of buildings in the vicinity of Ontario
International Airport. These sections are not intended to abridge any safety or
health requirements required under any other applicable codes or ordinances.
   (b)   These sections define the procedures for implementing the sound
insulation requirements set forth in the State Division of Aeronautics Noise
Standards (California Code of Regulations, Title 21, Subchapter 6) and the
State Building Code (California Code of Regulations, Title 24, § 3501). Based
on these documents, acoustic insulation shall be provided within specified
community noise equivalent level (CNEL) contours to ensure an interior CNEL
(due to exterior noise) of forty-five (45) dB or less in all habitable rooms in
both single and multifamily residential dwellings and in specified noise-
sensitive nonresidential buildings.
(§ 2, Ord. 2616, eff. June 20, 1996)
Sec. 8-15.103. Scope.
   The provisions of this chapter shall apply to all Group R buildings (single
and multifamily residential dwellings), as defined by the Uniform Building
Code, within the most recent fourth quarter sixty (60) CNEL noise contour map
of Ontario International Airport published by the City of Los Angeles
Department of Airports and to specified nonresidential buildings within the
sixty-five (65) CNEL of the airport. Group R buildings are not allowed to be
constructed in the seventy-five (75) CNEL or greater noise contour on the
latest annual map. This chapter is intended to supplement the provisions of the
Uniform Building Code and in the case of conflict between this chapter and any
other applicable codes, the more restrictive requirements shall be met.
(§ 2, Ord. 2616, eff. June 20, 1996)
Sec. 8-15.104. Standards and certifications.
   (a)   Prescriptive design/construction standards are provided for the sound
insulation of new construction or modification of Group R buildings located
within the most recent fourth quarter sixty-five (65) annual CNEL contour.
Within the most recent fourth quarter sixty (60) CNEL to the sixty-five (65)
CNEL zone, Group R buildings that are proposed for construction or modification
are not required to comply with the prescriptive sound insulation standards;
however, a certified acoustical engineer must provide certification that
planned building modification and construction will achieve at least the forty-
five (45) CNEL standard for all habitable rooms.
   (b)   Prescriptive design/construction standards are not provided for noise-
sensitive nonresidential buildings (schools, churches and hospitals) that
constitute incompatible land use within the sixty-five (65) CNEL contour;
however, a certified acoustical engineer must provide certification that the
planned construction or modifications will achieve the required noise
environment.
   (c)   Deviations from the specified building requirements (i.e., standards,
materials and construction assemblies) provided in the building requirements
herein are permissible only if all deviations are certified to comply with and
achieve the forty-five (45) CNEL standard for every habitable room constructed
or modified. All deviations require approval by the Building Official and
certification by a certified acoustical engineer. Acoustic measurements will be
conducted by a certified acoustical engineer to verify that the forty-five (45)
CNEL standard is not exceeded for all habitable rooms incorporating deviations
from the building requirements.
   (d)   All new and modified residential construction within the sixty-five
(65) CNEL contour is subject to post-construction/pre-occupancy acoustic
measurement at the discretion of the Building Official. Occupation of all
habitable rooms not achieving the required CNEL rating may be precluded until
such time as acoustic modification of that room achieves at least the forty-
five (45) CNEL standard.
(§ 2, Ord. 2616, eff. June 20, 1996)
Sec. 8-15.105. Application to existing buildings.
   Addition or alteration of floor area may be made to existing Group R
buildings within the sixty (60) CNEL noise contour but outside the seventy-five
(75) CNEL contour without making the entire building comply with all the
requirements of this chapter for new construction unless the cost of
improvements is seventy-five (75) percent or more of the total assessed value
of the structure, in which case the entire building shall be made to comply. No
addition of habitable space shall be made to existing Group R buildings inside
the seventy-five (75) CNEL contour unless the entire building is made to
comply. All additions of separable habitable rooms, and all separable habitable
rooms or areas that result from an expansion of the building, including both
the newly expanded area and the pre-existing room or area, shall fully comply
with the design and construction procedures and standards set forth in this
Code.
(§ 2, Ord. 2616, eff. June 20, 1996)
Sec. 8-15.106. Nonresidential buildings.
   (a)    Nonresidential noise-sensitive buildings within the most recent
fourth quarter sixty-five (65) CNEL contour that are incompatible land uses
under the State Noise Standards and described as schools, hospitals, and
convalescent homes, churches, synagogues, temples, and other places of worship,
and are proposed to be constructed or modified, shall be designed to provide an
interior CNEL due to aircraft noise of forty-five (45) dB or less.
   (b)   Additions to the buildings described in subsection (a) of this section
shall comply with the requirements of §
8-15.105.
(§ 2, Ord. 2616, eff. June 20, 1996)
Article 2. Building Requirements for New Residential Construction in the 70
CNEL to 75 CNEL Noise Zone
Sec. 8-15.201. Exterior walls.
   (a)   New walls that form the exterior portion of habitable rooms shall be
constructed as follows:
      (1)   Studs shall be at least four (4) inches in nominal depth;
      (2)   Exterior finish shall be stucco, minimum seven-eighths () inch
thickness, brick veneer, masonry, or any siding material allowed by this Code.
Wood or metal siding shall be installed over one-half (½) inch solid sheathing;
      (3)   Masonry walls with a surface weight of less than forty (40) pounds
per square foot will require an interior supporting studwall that is finished
as required by subsection (a)(6) of this section;
      (4)   Wall insulation shall be at least R-11 glass fiber or mineral wool
and shall be installed continuously throughout the stud space;
      (5)   Exterior solid sheathing shall be covered with overlapping asphalt
felt;
      (6)   Interior wall finish shall be at least five- eighths ( 5/8 ) inch
thick gypsum wallboard or plaster.
(§ 2, Ord. 2616, eff. June 20, 1996)
Sec. 8-15.202. Exterior windows.
   (a)    Openable windows. An openable windows in the exterior walls of
habitable rooms shall have a laboratory sound transmission class rating of at
least STC forty (40) dB and shall have an air infiltration rate of no more than
5 cubic feet per minute when tested according to ASTM E-283.
   (b)   Fixed windows. All fixed windows in the exterior walls of habitable
rooms shall:
      (1)   Have a sound transmission class rating of at least STC forty (40)
dB; or
      (2)   Shall be five-eighths ( 5/8 ) inch laminated glass with an STC
rating of forty (40) dB and shall be set in nonhardening glazing materials.
      (3)   Shall be glass block at least three and one-half (3½) inches thick.
   (c)   The total areas of glazing in rooms used for sleeping shall not exceed
twenty (20) percent of the floor area.
(§ 2, Ord. 2616, eff. June 20, 1996)
Sec. 8-15.203. Exterior doors.
   (a)   Exterior hinged doors to habitable rooms that are directly exposed to
aircraft noise and are facing the source of the noise shall be a door and edge
seal assembly that has a laboratory sound transmission class of at least STC
forty (40) dB.
   (b)   Exterior hinged doors to habitable rooms that are not directly exposed
to aircraft noise and do not face the source of the noise shall have a minimum
STC rating of thirty-five (35) dB.
   (c)   Sliding glass doors at habitable rooms shall not be allowed in walls
that are directly exposed to aircraft noise. Sliding glass doors in walls that
are not directly exposed shall have an STC rating of at least forty (40) dB.
   (d)   Access doors from a garage to a habitable room shall have an STC
rating of at least thirty (30) dB.
(§ 2, Ord. 2616, eff. June 20, 1996)
Sec. 8-15.204. Roof/ceiling construction.
   (a)   Roof rafters shall have a minimum slope of 4:12 and shall be covered
on their top surface with one-half (½) inch solid sheathing and any roof
covering allowed by this Code.
   (b)   Attic insulation shall be batt or blown-in glass fiber or mineral wool
with a minimum R-30 rating applied between the ceiling joists.
   (c)   Attic ventilation shall be:
      (1)   Gable vents or vents that penetrate the roof surface that are
fitted with transfer ducts at least six (6) feet in length that are insulating
flexible ducting or metal ducts containing internal one (1) inch thick coated
fiberglass sound-absorbing duct liner. Each duct shall have a lined ninety (90)
degree bend in the duct so that there is no direct line-of-sight from the
exterior through the duct into the attic; or
      (2)   Noise control louver vents; or
      (3)   Eave vents that are located under the cave overhang.
   (d)   Ceilings shall be finished with gypsum board or plaster that is at
least five-eighths ( 5/8 ) inch thick. Ceiling materials shall be mounted on
resilient channels.
   (e)   Skylights shall penetrate the ceiling by means of a completely
enclosed light well that extends from the roof opening to the ceiling opening.
A secondary openable glazing panel shall be mounted at the ceiling line or at a
point that provides at least a four (4) inch space between the skylight glazing
and the secondary glazing and shall be glazed with at least three-sixteenths
(3/16) inch plastic or laminated glass. The weather-side skylight shall be any
type that is permitted by the Building Code. The size of skylights shall be no
more than twenty (20) percent of the roof area of the room.
(§ 2, Ord. 2616, eff. June 20, 1996)
Sec. 8-15.205. Floors.
   The floor of the lowest habitable rooms shall be concrete slab on grade.
Wood framed floors for habitable rooms will be allowed when they are directly
above another habitable room, a basement, garage, workshop, utility room or
other nonhabitable rooms that are completely enclosed with wall materials
allowed by this Code.
(§ 2, Ord. 2616, eff. June 20, 1996)
Sec. 8-15.206. Ventilation.
   (a)   A ventilation system shall be provided that will provide at least the
minimum air circulation and fresh air supply requirements of this Code in each
habitable room without opening any window, door or other opening to the
exterior. All concealed ductwork shall be insulated flexible glass fiber
ducting that is at least ten (10) feet long between any two points of
connection.
   (b)   Kitchen cooktop vent hoods shall be the nonducted recirculating type
with no ducted connection to the exterior.
(§ 2, Ord. 2616, eff. June 20, 1996)
Sec. 8-15.207. Fireplaces.
   Each fireplace shall be fitted with a damper at the top of the chimney that
is operated from the firebox and shall have glass doors across the front of the
firebox.
(§ 2, Ord. 2616, eff. June 20, 1996)
Sec 8-15.208. Wall and ceiling openings.
   Openings in the shell of the residence which degrade its ability to achieve
an interior CNEL rating of forty-five (45) dB or less when all doors and
windows are closed are prohibited unless access panels, pet doors, mail
delivery drops, air- conditioning, or other openings are designed to maintain
the forty-five (45) CNEL (or less) standard in the room to which they provide
access.
(§ 2, Ord. 2616, eff. June 20, 1996)
Article 3. Building Requirements for New Residential Construction in the 65
CNEL to 70 CNEL Noise Zone
Sec. 8-15.301. Exterior walls.
   (a)   New walls that form the exterior portion of habitable rooms shall be
constructed as follows:
      (1)   Studs shall be at least four (4) inches in nominal depth.
      (2)   Exterior finish shall be stucco, minimum seven-eighths () inch
thickness, brick veneer, masonry, or any siding material allowed by this Code.
Wood or metal siding shall be installed over one-half (½) inch solid sheathing.
      (3)   Masonry walls with a surface weight of less than forty (40) pounds
per square foot will require an interior supporting studwall that is finished
as required by subsection (a)(6) of this section.
      (4)   Wall insulation shall be at least R-11 glass fiber or mineral wool
and shall be installed continuously throughout the stud space.
      (5)   Exterior solid sheathing shall be covered with overlapping asphalt
felt.
      (6)   Interior wall finish shall be at least five- eighths ( 5/8 ) inch
thick gypsum wallboard or plaster.
(§ 2, Ord. 2616, eff. June 20, 1996)
Sec. 8-15.302. Exterior windows.
   (a)   Openable windows. All openable windows in the exterior walls of
habitable rooms shall have a laboratory sound transmission class rating of at
least STC thirty-five (35) dB and shall have an air infiltration rate of no
more than .5 cubic feet per minute when tested according to ASTM E-283.
   (b)   Fixed windows. All fixed windows in the exterior walls of habitable
rooms shall be at least one- fourth (¼) inch thick and shall be set in
nonhardening glazing materials.
   (c)   The total area of glazing in rooms used for sleeping shall not exceed
twenty (20) percent of the floor area.
(§ 2, Ord. 2616, eff. June 20, 1996)
Sec. 8-15.303. Exterior doors.
   (a)   Exterior hinged doors to habitable rooms that are directly exposed to
aircraft noise and are facing the source of the noise shall be a door and edge
seal assembly that has a laboratory sound transmission class of at least STC
thirty-five (35) dB.
   (b)   Exterior hinged doors to habitable rooms that are not directly exposed
to aircraft noise and do not face the source of the noise shall have a minimum
STC rating of thirty (30) dB.
   (c)   Sliding glass doors at habitable rooms shall have glass that is one-
fourth (¼) inch thick.
   (d)   Access doors from a garage to a habitable room shall have an STC
rating of at least thirty (30) dB.
(§ 2, Ord. 2616, eff. June 20, 1996)
Sec. 8-15.304. Roof/ceiling construction.
   (a)   Roof rafters shall have a minimum slope of 4:12 and shall be covered
on their top surface with one-half (½) inch solid sheathing and any roof
covering allowed by this Code.
   (b)   Attic insulation shall be batt or blown-in glass fiber or mineral wool
with a minimum R-30 rating applied between the ceiling joists.
   (c)   Attic ventilation shall be:
      (1)   Gable vents or vents that penetrate the roof surface that are
fitted with transfer ducts at least six (6) feet in length that are insulating
flexible ducting or metal ducts containing internal one (1) inch thick coated
fiberglass sound absorbing duct liner. Each duct shall have a lined ninety (90)
degree bend in the duct so that there is no direct line-of-sight from the
exterior through the duct into the attic; or
      (2)   Noise control louver vents; or
      (3)   Eave vents that are located under the eave overhang.
   (d)   Ceilings shall be finished with gypsum board or plaster that is at
least five-eighths ( 5/8 ) inch thick.
   (e)   Skylights shall penetrate the ceiling by means of a completely
enclosed light well that extends from the roof opening to the ceiling opening.
A secondary openable glazing panel shall be mounted at the ceiling line and
shall be glazed with at least three-sixteenths (3/16) inch plastic, tempered or
laminated glass.
(§ 2, Ord. 2616, eff. June 20, 1996)
Sec. 8-15.305. Floors.
   The floor of the lowest habitable rooms shall be concrete slab on grade or
wood framed floors.
(§ 2, Ord. 2616, eff. June 20, 1996)
Sec. 8-15.306. Ventilation.
   (a)   A ventilation system shall be provided that will provide at least the
minimum air circulation and fresh air supply requirements of this Code in each
habitable room without opening any window, door or other opening to the
exterior. All concealed ductwork shall be insulated flexible glass fiber
ducting that is at least ten (10) feet long between any two points of
connection.
   (b)   Kitchen cooktop vent hoods shall be the nonducted recirculating type
with no ducted connection to the exterior.
(§ 2, Ord. 2616, eff. June 20, 1996)
Sec. 8-15.307. Fireplaces.
   Each fireplace shall be fitted with a damper at the top of the chimney that
is operated from the firebox and shall have glass doors across the front of the
firebox.
(§ 2, Ord. 2616, eff. June 20, 1996)
Sec. 8-15.308. Wall and ceiling openings.
   Openings in the shell of the residence which degrade its ability to achieve
an interior CNEL rating of forty-five (45) dB or less when all doors and
windows are closed are prohibited. Any access panels, pet doors, mail delivery
drops, air- conditioning, or other openings must be designed to maintain the
forty-five (45) CNEL or less standard in the room to which they provide access.
(§ 2, Ord. 2616, eff. June 20, 1996)
Article 4. Building Requirements for New Residential Construction in the 60
CNEL to 65 CNEL Noise Zone
Sec. 8-15.401. Requirements - Outlined.
   (a)   All new Group R buildings in this noise zone shall be constructed with
sound insulation or other means to achieve an interior CNEL level in all
habitable rooms of no more than forty-five (45) dB. Reconstructed, remodeled or
altered structures where the total cost of improvements is seventy-five (75)
percent or more of the total assessed value of the structure must also meet
this standard in the entire structure.
   (b)   An engineer whose primary occupation is acoustical engineering (i.e.,
a certified acoustical engineer) shall certify in writing that the proposed new
construction will comply with subsection (a) of this section prior to the
issuance of a building permit.
(§ 2, Ord. 2616, eff. June 20, 1996)
Article 5. Modification Requirements for Existing Residential Buildings in the
70 CNEL to 75 CNEL Noise Zone
Sec. 8-15.501. Exterior walls.
   (a)   Exterior walls of habitable rooms that are directly exposed to
aircraft noise shall be modified as follows:
      (1)   Wood frame walls with exterior wood siding or other lightweight
exterior finish shall be provided with a secondary interior stud wall that is
supported at the ceiling and the floor and is separated from the surface of the
interior wall by at least one-half (½) inch. The exposed surface of the
secondary wall shall be finished with five-eighths ( 5/8 ) inch gypsum
wallboard or plaster.
      (2)   Wood frame walls with an exterior finish of stucco, brick veneer or
other similar materials and with an interior finish that is less than one-half
(½) inch thick shall be provided with an additional interior layer of five-
eighths ( 5/8 ) inch gypsum wallboard.
      (3)   Wood frame walls with an exterior finish of stucco, brick veneer or
other similar heavy materials and with interior finish that is at least one-
half (½) inch thick do not require modification.
      (4)   Walls that are not directly exposed to aircraft noise or that are
constructed principally of load bearing masonry will not require modifications.
(§ 2, Ord. 2616, eff. June 20, 1996)
Sec. 8-15.502. Exterior windows.
   (a)   Openable windows in habitable rooms shall be replaced with an openable
window that has a laboratory sound transmission class rating of at least STC
forty (40) dB and shall have an air infiltration rate of no more than .5 cubic
feet per minute when tested according to ASTM E-283.
   (b)   Fixed windows in habitable rooms shall be modified by one (1) of the
following methods:
      (1)   Replace the existing window with a window that has an acoustic
rating of at least STC forty (40) dB; or
      (2)   Replace the existing window with five- eighths ( 5/8 ) inch
laminated glass that has an acoustic rating of STC forty (40) dB;
      (3)   Add secondary removable glazing at the interior or exterior of the
existing window. The secondary glazing shall be at least one-fourth (¼) inch
float glass or laminated glass. The space between the two panes of glass shall
be at least two (2) inches.
   (c)   Fixed windows in habitable rooms that do not face the source of
aircraft noise shall be replaced with three-eighths () inch laminated glass
that has an acoustic rating of at least STC thirty-six (36) dB.
   (d)   The joint between the wall opening and the new windows required in
subsections (a) and (b)(1) of this section shall be continuously filled with
glass fiber insulation and the exterior cover trim shall be continuously
caulked to seal the joint.
   (e)   Fixed glass shall be set in nonhardening glazing materials.
(§ 2, Ord. 2616, eff. June 20, 1996)
Sec. 8-15.503. Exterior doors.
   (a)   Exterior hinged doors to habitable rooms that are directly exposed to
aircraft noise shall be replaced with a door and seals that have a laboratory
sound transmission class rating of at least STC forty (40) dB. A new rabetted
frame shall be provided for each new door to replace the existing frame.
   (b)   Exterior hinged doors to habitable rooms that are not directly exposed
to aircraft noise shall be replaced with a door and seals that have a
laboratory sound transmission class rating of at least STC thirty-five (35) dB.
   (c)   Access doors from a garage to a habitable room shall be replaced with
a door and seals that have an STC rating of at least thirty (30) dB.
   (d)   Sliding glass doors in habitable rooms shall be fitted with a
secondary sliding glass door installed on the exterior of the existing door and
trimmed on all exposed sides with wood trim that is at least two (2) inches
thick (nominal). Joints between the new door and the wall shall be continuously
caulked.
   (e)   The joint between the wall opening and the new door frame required in
subsections (a) and (b) of this section shall be continuously filled with glass
fiber insulation and the exterior cover trim shall be continuously caulked to
seal the joint.
(§ 2, Ord. 2616, eff. June 20, 1996)
Sec. 8-15.504. Roofs.
   (a)   Accessible attics shall be insulated to achieve a minimum R-30
insulation value.
   (b)   Attic vents shall be modified as follows:
      (1)   Gable vents or vents that penetrate the roof surface shall be
provided with noise control louver vents that meet the noise reduction levels
shown in Table 15-A or transfer ducts that are at least six (6) feet in length.
The ducts shall be of flexible insulated ducting with a bend so that there is
no direct line-of-sight from the exterior through the duct into the attic.
      (2)   Eave vents do not require modification.
   (c)   Roofs with a slope of 2:12 or less and open beam ceilings shall be
modified only if bearing walls are adequate to support the additional load
stresses:
      (1)   Existing roof covering shall be removed to expose sheathing.
      (2)   Two (2) foot by six (6) foot rafters at twenty-four (24) inches on
center shall be installed directly above the existing roof construction and
supported by existing bearing walls, shall be insulated with R-19 fiberglass
batts, and shall be covered with one-half (½) inch plywood sheathing.
      (3)   New roofing shall be installed on the new construction that can be
adequately supported by the new framing and existing bearing walls.
(§ 2, Ord. 2616, eff. June 20, 1996)
Sec. 8-15.505. Floors.
   (a)   Vent openings to underfloor areas of wood framed floors shall be
provided with acoustic vent baffles that meet noise reduction levels shown in
Table 15-A. Vent baffles shall be fitted with one-fourth (¼) inch mesh screen.
Table 15-A
Octave Band Center Frequency, Hz Sound Transmission Loss, dB
Table 15-A
Octave Band Center Frequency, Hz Sound Transmission Loss, dB
125                              4
250                              5
500                              6
1,000                            9
2,000                            10
4,000                            12
 
   (b)   Underfloor access doors shall be nonvented plywood or other
weatherproof material.
(§ 2, Ord. 2616, eff. June 20, 1996)
Sec. 8-15.506. Ventilation.
   (a)   A ventilation system shall be provided that will provide at least the
minimum air circulation and fresh air supply requirements of this Code in each
habitable room without opening any window, door or other opening to the
exterior. All concealed ductwork shall be insulated flexible glass fiber
ducting that is at least ten (10) feet long between any two points of
connection. Exposed ductwork may be sheet metal with one (1) inch fiberglass
duct liner and shall have a bend in the duct to avoid direct line-of-sight
through the duct.
   (b)   Kitchen cooktop vent hoods shall be replaced with nonducted
recirculating vent hoods with no ducted connection to the exterior.
(§ 2, Ord. 2616, eff. June 20, 1996)
Sec. 8-15.507. Fireplaces.
   Each fireplace shall be fitted with a damper at the top of the chimney that
is operated from the firebox and shall have glass doors across the front of the
firebox.
(§ 2, Ord. 2616, eff. June 20, 1996)
Sec. 8-15.508. Wall and ceiling openings.
   Openings in the shell of the residence which degrade its ability to achieve
an interior CNEL rating of forty-five (45) dB or less when all doors and
windows are closed are prohibited. Any access panels, pet doors, mail delivery
drops, air- conditioning, or other openings must be designed to maintain the
forty-five (45) CNEL or less standard in the room to which they provide access.
(§ 2, Ord. 2616, eff. June 20, 1996)
Article 6. Modification Requirements for Existing Residential Buildings in the
65 CNEL to 70 CNEL Noise Zone
Sec. 8-15.601. Exterior walls.
   Exterior walls in this noise zone do not require modification.
(§ 2, Ord. 2616, eff. June 20, 1996)
Sec. 8-15.602. Exterior windows.
   (a)   Openable wood frame windows in habitable rooms facing aircraft noise
shall be replaced with new openable windows that have a minimum laboratory
sound transmission class of at least STC thirty-five (35) dB if the existing
window has:
      (1)   Missing or insecure glazing putty or other glazing materials; or
      (2)   Broken or cracked glass; or
      (3)   Operating sash that is not securely supported in its frame or does
not close tightly against the frame.
   (b)   Openable wood frame windows that do not require replacement by
subsection (a) of this section and that face aircraft noise shall be fitted
with a secondary window that has an STC rating of at least twenty-five (25) dB.
The secondary window may be mounted at the exterior or interior of the existing
window and shall be completely trimmed and caulked in place.
   (c)   Openable metal frame windows in habitable rooms facing aircraft noise
shall be replaced with new openable windows that have a minimum laboratory
sound transmission class of at least STC thirty-five (35) dB if the existing
window has:
      (1)   Jalousie louvered glass sash; or
      (2)   Missing or insecure glazing putty or other glazing materials; or
      (3)   Broken or cracked glass; or
      (4)   Operating sash that is not securely supported in its frame or does
not close tightly against the frame.
   (d)   Openable metal frame windows in habitable rooms facing aircraft noise
that do not require replacement by subsection (c) of this section shall be
fitted with a secondary window that has an STC rating of at least twenty-five
(25) dB with a spice of at least two (2) inches between the glass surfaces of
the two windows. The secondary window may be mounted at the exterior or
interior of the existing window and shall be completely trimmed and caulked in
place.
   (e)   Fixed windows in habitable rooms facing aircraft noise shall be glazed
with one-fourth (¼) inch glass unless they are part of an acoustic window
assembly.
   (f)   Openable windows in habitable rooms that do not face aircraft noise
shall be modified as follows:
      (1)   Jalousie louvered glass windows shall be replaced with windows that
have a laboratory sound transmission class of at least STC thirty-five (35) dB.
      (2)   Windows that are not jalousie shall be fitted with a secondary
window that has an STC rating of at least twenty-five (25) dB.
   (g)   Fixed glass windows in habitable rooms that do not face aircraft noise
shall be glazed with one-fourth (¼) inch glass.
(§ 2, Ord. 2616, eff. June 20, 1996)
Sec. 8-15.603. Exterior doors.
   (a)   Exterior doors in habitable rooms that are directly exposed to
aircraft noise shall be modified as follows:
      (1)   Hollow core or lightweight doors and doors with glazed openings
shall be replaced with doors that have a minimum laboratory sound transmission
class of at least STC thirty-five (35) dB.
      (2)   Solid core or heavy panel doors shall be fitted with a drop seal at
the sill and vinyl bulb seals at the jambs and head.
   (b)   Exterior doors in habitable rooms that are not directly exposed to
aircraft noise shall be modified as follows:
      (1)   Hollow core or lightweight doors and doors with glazed openings
shall be replaced with doors that have a minimum laboratory sound transmission
class of at least STC thirty (30) dB.
      (2)   Solid core or heavy panel doors shall be provided with weather-
stripping at the sill, head and jambs.
   (c)   Access doors from a garage to a habitable room shall be replaced with
a door and seals that have an STC rating of at least thirty (30) dB.
   (d)   Sliding glass doors in this noise zone shall be glazed with one-fourth
(¼) inch safety glazing.
(§ 2, Ord. 2616, eff. June 20, 1996)
Sec. 8-15.604. Roofs.
   (a)   Accessible attics shall be insulated to achieve a minimum R-30
insulation value.
   (b)   Attic vents shall be modified as follows:
      (1)   Gable vents or vents that penetrate the roof surface shall be
provided with noise control louver vents that meet the noise reduction levels
shown in Table 15-A or transfer ducts that are at least six (6) feet in length.
The ducts shall be of flexible insulated ducting with a bend so that there is
no direct line-of-sight from the exterior through the duct into the attic.
      (2)   Eave vents do not require modification.
   (c)   Roofs with a slope of 2:12 or less and open beam ceilings shall be
modified only if bearing walls are adequate to support the additional load
stresses:
      (1)   Existing roof covering shall be removed to expose sheathing.
      (2)   Two (2) foot by six (6) foot rafters at twenty-four (24) inches on
center shall be installed directly above the existing roof construction and
supported by existing bearing walls, shall be insulated with R-19 fiberglass
batts, and shall be covered with one-half (½) inch plywood sheathing.
      (3)   New roofing shall be installed on the new construction that can be
adequately supported by the new framing and existing bearing walls.
(§ 2, Ord. 2616, eff. June 20, 1996)
Sec. 8-15.605. Floors.
   Floors in this noise zone do not require modification.
(§ 2, Ord. 2616, eff. June 20, 1996)
Sec. 8-15.606. Ventilation.
   (a)   A ventilation system shall be provided that will provide at least the
minimum air circulation and fresh air supply requirements of this Code in each
habitable room without opening any window, door or other opening to the
exterior. All concealed ductwork shall be insulated flexible glass fiber
ducting that is at least ten (10) feet long between any two points of
connection. Exposed ductwork may be sheet metal with one (1) inch fiberglass
duct liner and shall have a bend in the duct to avoid direct line-of-sight
through the duct.
   (b)   Kitchen cooktop vent hoods shall be replaced with nonducted
recirculating vent hoods with no ducted connection to the exterior.
(§ 2, Ord. 2616, eff. June 20, 1996)
Sec. 8-15.607. Fireplaces.
   Each fireplace shall be fitted with a damper at the top of the chimney that
is operated from the firebox and shall have glass doors across the front of the
firebox.
(§ 2, Ord. 2616, eff. June 20, 1996)
Sec. 8-15.608. Wall and ceiling openings.
   Openings in the shell of the residence which degrade its ability to achieve
an interior CNEL rating of forty-five (45) dB or less when all doors and
windows are closed are prohibited. Any access panels, pet doors, mail delivery
drops, air- conditioning, or other openings must be designed to maintain the
forty-five (45) CNEL or less standard in the room to which they provide access.
(§ 2, Ord. 2616, eff. June 20, 1996)
Article 7. Modification Requirements for Existing Residential Buildings in the
60 CNEL to 65 CNEL Noise Zone
Sec. 8-15.701. Modification requirements - Outlined.
   (a)   When modified, all Group R buildings in the sixty (60) CNEL to sixty-
five (65) CNEL noise zone shall be constructed to achieve an interior CNEL
level in all habitable rooms of no more than forty-five (45) dB.
   (b)   An engineer whose primary occupation is acoustical engineering (i.e.,
a certified acoustical engineer) shall certify in writing that the existing
building complies with subsection (a) of this section or that proposed
modifications will cause the building to be in compliance. Written
certification shall be submitted before issuance of a building permit for
modifications.
(§ 2, Ord. 2616, eff. June 20, 1996)
CHAPTER 16: STRUCTURED WIRING DESIGN AND CONSTRUCTION STANDARDS GOVERNING NEW
CONSTRUCTION WITHIN THE CITY OF ONTARIO
   
8-16.01   Purpose
   
8-16.02   Scope and applicability
   
8-16.03   Enforcement
   
8-16.04   Alternate materials and methods of construction
   
8-16.05   Residential wiring standards applicable to single-family dwellings
   
8-16.06   Residential wiring standards applicable to multiple dwelling units
   
8-16.07   Commercial wiring standards
Sec. 8-16.01. Purpose.
   The purpose of this chapter is to ensure adequate and uniform connectivity
of all residential and commercial buildings to existing and future phone, cable
and fiber-to-the-premises (FTTP) networks.
(§ 1, Ord. 2883, eff. January 3, 2008)
Sec. 8-16.02. Scope and applicability.
   (a)   The provisions of this chapter shall apply to all new construction
within the City for which a building permit is issued after the date of
adoption.
   (b)   The standards in this chapter are intended to comply with Part 68 of
the Federal Communications Commission Rules and Regulations, the National
Electrical Code, and the National Electrical Safety Code. In the event of a
conflict between such Codes and Regulations and this chapter, the more
restrictive standard shall take precedence.
(§ 1, Ord. 2883, eff. January 3, 2008)
Sec. 8-16.03. Enforcement.
   The City Manager or authorized representatives are hereby empowered and
directed to administer and enforce the provisions of this chapter. No
certificate of occupancy is to be approved unless the applicant has satisfied
the enforcing authority that all provisions of this chapter have been met.
(§ 1, Ord. 2883, eff. January 3, 2008)
Sec. 8-16.04. Alternate materials and methods of construction.
   (a)   The provisions of this chapter are not intended to prevent the use of
any material or method of construction not specifically prescribed by this
chapter; provided, any such alternate has been approved by the enforcing
authority; nor is it the intention of this chapter to exclude any sound method
of structural design or analysis not specifically provided for in this chapter.
Materials, methods of construction, or structural design limitations provided
for in this chapter are to be used unless an exception is granted by the
enforcing authority.
   (b)   The enforcing authority may approve any such alternate; provided, they
find the proposed design, material, and method of work to be for the purpose
intended at least equivalent to that prescribed in this chapter in quality,
effectiveness, durability and safety.
(§ 1, Ord. 2883, eff. January 3, 2008)
Sec. 8-16.05. Residential wiring standards applicable to single-family
dwellings.
   All single-family dwellings shall comply with the City of Ontario, Building
Department, "Structured Wiring Standards – Residential Units" in effect as of
the date of the building permit applicable to the single-family dwelling, which
standards are hereby adopted by reference and made a part of this chapter.
Copies of the "Structured Wiring Standards – Residential Units" shall be made
available at the Building Department.
(§ 1, Ord. 2883, eff. January 3, 2008)
Sec. 8-16.06. Residential wiring standards applicable to multiple dwelling
units.
   All multiple dwelling units shall comply with the City of Ontario, Building
Department, "Structured Wiring Standards – Residential Units" in effect as of
the date of the building permit applicable to the multiple dwelling unit, which
standards are hereby adopted by reference and made a part of this chapter.
Copies of the "Structured Wiring Standards – Residential Units" shall be made
available at the Building Department.
(§ 1, Ord. 2883, eff. January 3, 2008)
Sec. 8-16.07. Commercial wiring standards.
   All commercial units shall comply with the City of Ontario, Building
Department, "Structured Wiring Standards – Commercial Units" in effect as of
the date of the building permit applicable to the commercial unit, which
standards are hereby adopted by reference and made a part of this chapter.
Copies of the "Structured Wiring Standards – Commercial Units" shall be made
available at the Building Department.
(§ 1, Ord. 2883, eff. January 3, 2008)
CHAPTER 17: SYSTEMATIC HEALTH AND SAFETY INSPECTION PROGRAM
Section
8-17.101   Title
8-17.102   Definitions
8-17.103   Scope
8-17.104   Inspection – general
8-17.105   Fees for inspection
8-17.106   Frequency of inspection
8-17.107   Departmental assistance
8-17.108   Regulations
8-17.109   Right of entry
8-17.110   Collection; penalty
8-17.111   Penalties
Sec. 8-17.101 Title.
   This chapter shall be known as the Ontario Health and Safety Systematic
Inspection Program Ordinance, a portion of the Ontario Municipal Code, and
wherever the phrase "this chapter" is used it shall mean the Ontario Health and
Safety Systematic Inspection Program Ordinance. Whenever the phrase "this
title" is used, it shall mean Title 8 of the Ontario Municipal Code.
(§ 1, Ord. 2894, eff. July 17, 2008)
Sec. 8-17.102. Definitions.
   Words and phrases not defined herein shall be construed as defined in this
Code, if defined therein. The following words and phrases, whenever used in
this chapter, shall be construed as defined in this section.
   (a)   "Code" shall mean the City of Ontario Municipal Code, including,
without limitation, the Uniform Codes adopted within this title.
   (b)   "Department" shall mean the particular City Department designated by
the City Manager.
   (c)   "City Manager" shall mean the City Manager, or his or her respective
designee(s).
   (d)   "Property" shall mean those properties, or those properties on which
certain building types, uses, or occupancies exist, or those properties within
those certain districts, all as are identified from time to time by City
Council resolution.
(§ 1, Ord. 2894, eff. July 17, 2008)
Sec. 8-17.103. Scope.
   The provisions of this chapter shall apply to such properties, building
types, uses, occupancies, and districts within the City as may, from time to
time, be subjected to inspection, as set forth by City Council resolution.
(§ 1, Ord. 2894, eff. July 17, 2008)
Sec. 8-17.104. Inspection – general.
   All Properties subject to the provisions of this chapter shall be subject to
routine inspection by the Department. The regularity of such routine
inspections shall be established by City Council resolution. Inspections may
also be complaint-based or as a follow-up to a previous inspection.
(§ 1, Ord. 2894, eff. July 17, 2008)
Sec. 8-17.105. Fees for inspection.
   Owners of all Properties subject to inspection shall pay a service fee for
any inspection of such property. The City Council shall, by resolution,
establish and, from time to time, adjust, the service fee. Liability for
payment of the service fee shall be the joint and several liability of the
several (if any) owners of any property subject to inspection.
(§ 1, Ord. 2894, eff. July 17, 2008)
Sec. 8-17.106. Frequency of inspection.
   Each property shall be inspected in accordance with an inspection schedule
as established from time to time by resolution of the City Council.
(§ 1, Ord. 2894, eff. July 17, 2008)
Sec. 8-17.107. Departmental assistance.
   The City Manager is hereby authorized to call upon the Chief of the Fire
Department, the Chief of Police, and all other City officers, employees and
Departments to aid and assist him or her in the enforcement of this chapter,
and it shall then be their duty to enforce the provisions of this chapter as
may come within their respective jurisdictions.
(§ 1, Ord. 2894, eff. July 17, 2008)
Sec. 8-17.108. Regulations.
   The City Manager shall have the power to render interpretations of this
chapter and to adopt and enforce rules and supplemental regulations to clarify
the application of its provisions. These interpretations, rules and regulations
shall be in conformity with the intent and purpose of this chapter and shall be
based on protection of the health, safety and welfare of the citizens of the
City. Without limiting the nature of the foregoing, such rules and supplemental
regulations may include, without limitation, methods for determining whether
any property is subject to this chapter, including, without limitation, through
City and other public records or the use of written statements, signed by
property owners under penalty of perjury declaring whether or not property
owned by such owner is subject to this chapter. Such rules and regulations may
also include provisions concerning the administration of this chapter's
requirement that owners of property subject to the provisions of this chapter
register such property with the City.
(§ 1, Ord. 2894, eff. July 17, 2008)
Sec. 8-17.109. Right of entry.
   Whenever it is necessary to make an inspection to enforce any of the
provisions of or perform any duty imposed by this Chapter or other applicable
law, or whenever the City Manager has reasonable cause to believe that there
exists in any Property any violation of the provisions of this Chapter or other
applicable law, or any condition that makes the Property hazardous,
substandard, unsafe or dangerous, or a public nuisance, the City Manager is
hereby authorized to enter the Property at any reasonable time and to inspect
it and perform any function authorized by this Chapter or other applicable law,
including any resolution of the City Council.
(§ 1, Ord. 2894, eff. July 17, 2008)
Sec. 8-17.110. Collection; penalty.
   (a)   The Department shall mail to the property owner, as shown on the
latest equalized assessment roll, a "service fee notice", requesting payment
for the applicable service fee.
   (b)   It shall be unlawful for any person to fail to pay the applicable
service fee when due. If the owner fails to pay the service fee, as specified
in this chapter, within forty-five (45) days of mailing the service fee notice,
in addition to any other remedy authorized by law, the amount of the unpaid
service fee, plus any penalties and accrued interest, shall constitute a
personal debt and obligation of such owner and shall be made a proposed lien
against the property that is the subject of the enforcement activity. The
amount of the proposed lien may be collected at the same time and in the same
manner as property taxes are collected. All laws applicable to the levy,
collection, and enforcement of ad valorem taxes shall be applicable to the
proposed lien. If the City chooses to collect the service fee, late fees and
penalties specified in this chapter through a special assessment, the notices
shall be in accordance with §
1-4.05.
   (c)   In addition to the remedies set forth herein or otherwise provided for
by law, the obligation to pay any unpaid service fee, plus any penalties and
accrued interest, shall constitute a personal obligation of any owner of
property subject to this chapter. Such obligation may be recovered against such
property owner through a suit instituted by the City or its authorized
collection agent, or in any other manner provided for by law. In any such
action, the City shall be entitled to recover, in addition to the service fee
and any penalties and interest accruing thereon, costs of suit, including the
City's reasonable attorneys' fees.
(§1, Ord. 2894, eff. July 17, 2008, as amended by § 5, Ord. 2920, eff. May 20,
2010)
Sec. 8-17.111. Penalties.
   (a)   In addition to the remedies provided by this chapter or elsewhere by
law, any condition caused or permitted to exist in violation of any of the
provisions of this chapter or any misrepresentation of any owner signed under
penalty of perjury, or any violation of any rule or regulation adopted by the
City Manager pursuant to this chapter, shall be deemed unlawful and a per se
public nuisance and may be enjoined or abated by the City by means of a civil
action or administrative abatement pursuant to Title 5-22 of this Code, and
each day such condition continues shall be regarded as a new and separate
offense.
   (b)   Except in cases where a different punishment is specifically
prescribed elsewhere in this chapter, every violation of this chapter shall
constitute a misdemeanor offense, punishable in accordance with §
1-2.01(c); provided, that where the City Attorney determines that such action
would be in the interests of justice, the City Attorney may specify in the
accusatory pleading (or the citing officer in a Notice to Appear) that the
offense shall be an infraction, punishable in accordance with §
1-2.01(b).
   (c)   If any property owner fails to pay the service fee, as specified in
this chapter, within forty-five (45) days of mailing such service fee notice, a
penalty shall be assessed equal to two times the required fee, plus accrued
interest on such amount (including any penalty) at a rate of ten percent (10%)
per annum commencing as of the date of the mailing of the service fee notice
until paid.
(§ 1, Ord. 2894, eff. July 17, 2008)
TITLE 9: DEVELOPMENT CODE
      Chapter
         
1.   DEVELOPMENT CODE
CHAPTER 1:  DEVELOPMENT CODE
   
9-1.01   Adoption of the Development Code
Sec. 9-1.01. Adoption of the Development Code.
   The Ontario Development Code, as published by the Planning Department of the
City of Ontario, is hereby adopted by reference and made part of this chapter
as if fully set forth at length herein. One copy of the Ontario Development
Code is on file in the office of the City Clerk for public review.
(§ 10, Ord. 3028, eff. December 31, 2015)
Editor’s notes:
   On December 1, 2015, the Ontario City Council adopted Ordinance No. 3028,
approving a comprehensive update to the City’s Development Code. The new
Development Code was adopted by reference and may be found at https://
www.ontarioca.gov/government/community-development/planning/governing-
documents/development-code.
   Should you have any questions or problems accessing the site, please contact
the Planning Department at (909) 395-2036.
   The former Development Code (repealed by Ordinance No. 3028) was adopted by
Ordinance 2669, effective August 6, 1998, and subsequently amended by Ordinance
2680, effective March 4, 1999; Ordinance 2682, effective March 4, 1999;
Ordinance 2697, effective September 16, 1999; Ordinance 2705, effective
December 2, 1999; Ordinance 2707, effective December 16, 1999; Ordinance 2722,
effective October 5, 2000; Ordinance 2727, effective January 4, 2001; Ordinance
2728, effective January 4, 2001; Ordinance 2758, effective May 16, 2002;
Ordinance 2760, effective August 15, 2002; and Ordinance 2762, effective August
15, 2002; Ordinance 2763, effective October 17, 2002; Ordinance 2777, effective
July 17, 2003; Ordinance 2780, effective July 31, 2003; Ordinance 2789,
effective November 6, 2003; Ordinance 2819, effective December 15, 2005;
Ordinance 2832, effective August 5, 2006; Ordinance 2848, effective January 19,
2007; Ordinance 2858, effective April 20, 2007; Ordinance 2876, effective
December 6, 2007; Ordinance 2879, effective January 4, 2008; Ordinance 2888,
effective March 6, 2008; Ordinance 2897, effective February 19, 2009; Ordinance
2961, effective May 16, 2013; Ordinance 2964, effective September 20, 2013;
Ordinance 2965, effective October 3, 2013; Ordinance 2968, effective October
31, 2013; Ordinance 3017, effective May 7, 2015; Ord. 3150, effective December
17, 2019; Ordinance 3155, effective January 21, 2020; Ordinance 3235, effective
January 19, 2023; Ordinance 3264, effective January 4, 2024; Ordinance 3298,
effective May 1, 2025.
TITLE 10. PARKS AND RECREATION
      Chapter
         
1.   PARKS, PARKWAYS, AND TRAILS
         
2.   PARKWAY TREES
         
3.   PARK AND RECREATION TAXES (REPEALED)
CHAPTER 1: PARKS, PARKWAYS, AND TRAILS *
*Chapter 1 entitled “Parks and Euclid Avenue Parkway,” consisting of §§ 10-1.01
through 10-1.05, codified from Ord. 783, eff. August 21, 1947, as amended by
Ord. 1408, eff. August 18, 1960 and § 10-1.06, as added by Ord. 2062, eff.
November 7, 1979, as amended by Ord. 2080, eff. April 17, 1980, amended in its
entirety by Ord. 2114, eff. January 15, 1981.
   
10-1.01   Definitions
   
10-1.02   Declaration of policy
   
10-1.03   Compliance
   
10-1.04   Exclusive use park permits
   
10-1.05   Exclusive use park permits: Applications
   
10-1.06   Action on exclusive use park permit applications
   
10-1.07   Exclusive use of general park facilities and buildings
   
10-1.08   Park facility and building use permits: Applications
   
10-1.09   Action on park facility and building use permit applications
   
10-1.10   Liability
   
10-1.11   Permit and facility use fees
   
10-1.12   Suspension and revocation of permits
   
10-1.13   Nontransferability
   
10-1.14   Right of aggrieved persons to object to issuance of permits
   
10-1.15   Right to appeal to Recreation Commission and Council: Hearings
   
10-1.16   Violations of permits
   
10-1.17   Interference
   
10-1.18   Commercial activities in parks
   
10-1.19   Amplified sound
   
10-1.20   Bicycles, motorcycles, and other vehicles
   
10-1.21   Model airplanes and midget automobiles
   
10-1.22   Horses
   
10-1.23   Dogs
   
10-1.24   Golf practice
   
10-1.25   Flora
   
10-1.26   Removal of turf or soil
   
10-1.27   Marking, injuring, or disturbing park facilities or structures
   
10-1.28   Fires
   
10-1.29   Closure of City-owned parks between 9:00 p.m. and sunrise: Exceptions
   
10-1.30   Closure or restricted use of City-owned parks, recreation buildings/
facilities, amenities and equipment
   
10-1.31   Prohibition of camping
Sec. 10-1.01. Definitions.
   For the purposes of this chapter, unless otherwise apparent from the
context, certain words and phrases used in this chapter are defined as follows:
   (a)   “Amplified sound” shall mean any sound projected and transmitted by
electronic equipment, including amplifiers, but not including standard battery
operated radios or automobile radios and tape cassettes when used and heard
only by the occupants of the vehicles in which the automobile radio or tape
cassette is installed.
   (b)   “Building” shall mean any structure or building, or any portion
thereof, under the supervision of the Public Works Agency and used for
recreational purposes.
   (c)   “City” shall mean the City of Ontario.
   (d)   “Commission” shall mean the Recreation Commission of the City.
   (e)   “Director” shall mean the Recreation Director or designee.
   (f)   “Park” shall mean and include all parks, median parkways, gardens,
lakes, plazas, tot-lots, trails, and any other property owned by the City,
including any park facilities and structures thereon, and used, operated, or
maintained for recreational purposes, whether active or passive. "Park" shall
include any property owned and maintained as open space, including undeveloped
sites for future parks.
   (g)   “Park facility” shall mean those facilities located in parks and used
for recreational purposes, which facilities shall include, but not be limited
to, athletic fields and courts, baseball and softball diamonds, De Anza Bowl,
picnic pavilions, swimming pools and any other park facility used, operated,
and maintained for recreational purposes.
   (h)   “Person” shall mean any person, firm, partnership, association,
corporation, company, or organization of any kind.
(§ 1, Ord. 2114, eff. January 15, 1981)
Sec. 10-1.02. Declaration of policy.
   City parks are established for the use and enjoyment of all persons in the
pursuit of recreation, whether active or passive. It is the City's
responsibility to promote the health, peace, safety, welfare, and convenience
of all persons in regard to their use and enjoyment of any City-owned park
defined in §
10-1.01(f) of this chapter. The Council finds that to give practical effect to
this policy and to insure that all persons may enjoy such parks, it is
necessary to regulate the use of City-owned parks.
(§ 1, Ord. 2114, eff. January 15, 1981)
Sec. 10-1.03. Compliance.
   No person shall enter, be or remain in any City park unless he complies with
all the regulations and conditions set forth in this chapter.
(§ 1, Ord. 2114, eff. January 15, 1981)
Sec. 10-1.04. Exclusive use park permits.
   Portions of the City's parks may be made available for the exclusive use of
persons and groups for outdoor assembly activity, subject to the issuance of a
permit by the Director or his duly authorized representative and subject to the
payment of fees therefor. No exclusive use of any park for a pre-advertised
outdoor activity consisting of the assembly of twenty five (25) or more persons
may be made without the issuance of an exclusive use park permit therefor, the
purpose of which is to protect the rights of all persons to enjoy and make use
of such parks, to protect the rights of those in surrounding areas, and to
protect the public health, peace, safety, and welfare. All applications for an
exclusive use park permit shall be signed or cosigned by an adult, which adult
shall agree to be responsible for such exclusive use. No exclusive use park
permit will be granted for the time and place specified in the application if,
prior to the time the application was filed, the City has scheduled a City-
sponsored event at the same time and place as the activity proposed in such
application.
   No exclusive use park permit shall be granted for any outdoor assembly or
assembly activity during any of the time between one (1) hour before sunset and
one (1) hour after sunrise, unless the park has the appropriate lighting for
such location or program.
(§ 1, Ord. 2114, eff. January 15, 1981)
Sec. 10-1.05. Exclusive use park permits: Applications.
   Any person applying for an exclusive use park permit shall file an
application in writing for such permit with the Director not less than ten (10)
working days nor more than six (6) weeks prior to the proposed use of the park.
The Director may extend the ten (10) day period if the permit requires approval
by the Council. The Director may waive the ten (10) working day period if the
applicant waives all appeal rights. Such application shall contain the
following:
   (a)   The name of the applicant, the sponsoring organization, and the name
of the person in charge of the proposed activity;
   (b)   The addresses and telephone numbers of those named in subsection (a)
of this section;
   (c)   The park and/or areas of the park being applied for;
   (d)   The starting time of the proposed activity;
   (e)   The finishing time of the proposed activity:
   (f)   The number of persons expected;
   (g)   Any additional City facilities requested, such as personnel, tables,
chairs, and the like;
   (h)   The nature of the proposed activity or activities, including the
equipment and vehicles to be brought into the park, the nature and duration of
the use of such equipment, and the nature and duration of the use of any
amplified sound, whether for speech or music; and
   (i)   The estimated number of parking spaces required.
(§ 1, Ord. 2114, eff. January 15, 1981)
Sec. 10-1.06. Action on exclusive use park permit applications.
   (a)   The Director, in considering requests from applicants for exclusive
use park permits, shall insure that the proposed use will not be detrimental to
the public health, peace, safety, or general welfare. The Director shall grant
or deny such application on or before ten (10) working days after the filing of
the application, unless the time for such granting or denial of the permit has
been waived by the applicant in writing.
   (b)   The Director shall grant the application and upon granting any permit,
may impose reasonable requirements and conditions concerning the use of the
park by the applicant, including time limitations on permit activities and any
other reasonable terms, provisions, and conditions as required by this chapter
and as he deems necessary to protect the property of any person and the public
health, peace, safety, and welfare.
   (c)   The number, location, and type of officers shall be determined and
specified by the Police Chief or his designee to provide for the preservation
of order and the protection of property in and around the place of the event.
Funds to employ the specific number of law enforcement officers at the current
hourly salary rate for the Police Department shall be deposited with the City
at least ten (10) days prior to the specified date the event is to occur. One
(1) law enforcement officer for every five hundred (500) persons expected to be
in attendance shall be required, with a minimum of two (2) officers.
   Where the Police Chief specifies the employment of off-duty peace officers
to meet the requirements of this section, such peace officer shall be under the
complete direction and control of the Police Chief. The Police Chief shall be
satisfied that the requisite number of peace officers will be provided at all
times of operations, plus any specified time prior to and following the event,
before a license is issued. (See §
5-16.08(a))
   (d)   The applicant, or another responsible person named on the application,
shall remain on the premises for which the permit is issued during the entire
duration of the permit; failure to observe this condition shall be grounds for
the immediate cancellation of the permit by the Director.
   (e)   The Director may grant the application for a park other than that
applied for with the consent of the applicant in the event a permit has already
been issued for said park or said park does not meet the needs of the applicant
or is otherwise unsuitable. In the event more than one application is received
for a park for use on the same day, the Director shall act upon the application
first received.
   (f)   The Director shall deny the application if he finds that any of the
following conditions exist:
      (1)   That the application reveals that the City has no park which will
accommodate the activity of the applicant.
      (2)   That the proposed activity or use of the park will unreasonably
interfere with or detract from the general public use and enjoyment of the
proposed park;
      (3)   That the proposed activity will not be in compliance with Federal,
State, and local laws;
      (4)   That the applicant has failed to agree to provide a reasonable
means of informing all of the persons participating in the proposed activity of
the terms and conditions of such permit;
      (5)   That the applicant refuses to agree in writing to comply with all
the conditions in the permit; or
      (6)   That the applicant has failed to file a timely application, unless
waived by the Director and the applicant waives all rights of appeal.
   Such denial shall specify the grounds therefor and provide notification of
the applicant's right of appeal.
(§ 1, Ord. 2114, eff. January 15, 1981)
Sec. 10-1.07. Exclusive use of general park facilities and buildings.
   The City's park facilities and buildings shall be made available for the
exclusive use of individuals or groups, subject to the issuance of a permit by
the Director or his duly authorized representative and subject to the payment
of fees therefor as provided by resolution. Closing times for each park and
building shall be set by the Director and shall be uniformly applied. No
exclusive use permit will be granted if, prior to the time the application was
filed, the City has scheduled a City-sponsored event at the same time and place
as the activity proposed in such application.
(§ 1, Ord. 2114, eff. January 15, 1981)
Sec. 10-1.08. Park facility and building use permits: Applications.
   Any person applying for a permit for the exclusive use of a park facility or
building shall file an application in writing for such exclusive use permit
with the Director not less than ten (10) working days in advance, but not more
than six (6) weeks prior to the proposed use of such park facility or building.
The Director may extend the ten (10) day period if the permit requires approval
by the Council. The Director may waive the filing period if the applicant
waives all rights of appeal. Such application shall contain the following:
   (a)   The name of the applicant, the sponsoring organization, and the name
of the person in charge of the proposed activity;
   (b)   The addresses and telephone numbers of those named in subsection (a)
of this section;
   (c)   The park, park facility, building, or room applied for;
   (d)   The starting time of the proposed activity;
   (e)   The finishing time of the proposed activity;
   (f)   The number of persons expected to attend the activity;
   (g)   Any additional City facilities requested, such as personnel, tables,
chairs, and the like; and
   (h)   The nature of the proposed activity or activities, including the
equipment to be brought into the building, and the nature and duration of the
use of such equipment.
(§ 1, Ord. 2114, eff. January 15, 1981)
Sec. 10-1.09. Action on park facility and building use permit applications.
   (a)   The Director shall grant or deny such application on or before ten
(10) working days after the filing of the application, unless the time for such
granting or denial of the permit has been waived by the applicant in writing.
   (b)   The Director shall grant the application when the application contains
information showing that the number of persons expected at the activity
complies with the occupancy load of the building as determined by the Building
Department in accordance with
Chapter 1 of Title 8 of this Code and, upon granting such permit, may impose
reasonable requirements and conditions concerning the use of such park facility
or building with respect to the time and duration of use, the number of persons
allowed in the building, or any other such reasonable terms, provisions, and
conditions as required by this chapter and as he deems necessary to protect the
public health, peace, safety, and welfare.
   (c)   The Director may grant the application for a park facility or building
other than that applied for with the consent of the applicant in the event a
permit has already been issued for said park facility or building or that the
building does not meet the occupancy load requirements. In the event more than
one application is received for the same park facility or building for use at
the same time, the Director shall first act upon the application first
received.
   (d)   The Director shall deny the application if he finds that any of the
following conditions exist:
      (1)   That no building with the required occupancy load capacity is
available;
      (2)   That the park facility or building is ill-suited to the activity
described in the application;
      (3)   That the applicant refuses to agree in writing to comply with the
conditions in the permit;
      (4)   That the applicant has failed to file a timely application, unless
waived by the Director and the applicant waives all rights of appeal; or
      (5)   That the proposed activity will not be in compliance with Federal,
State, and local laws or would not be in the interests of the public health,
peace, safety, and welfare.
   Such denial shall specify the grounds therefor and provide notification of
the applicant's right of appeal.
(§ 1, Ord. 2114, eff. January 15, 1981)
Sec. 10-1.10. Liability.
   The applicant for any permit hereunder shall indemnify and save harmless the
City, and all officers and employees thereof, from any suits, claims, or
actions brought by any person for or on account of any injuries or damages
sustained because of or arising out of the exclusive use of any park, park
facility, or building granted under an exclusive use park or park facility, and
building use permit. The Director may require an applicant for any permit
issued in accordance with the provisions of this chapter to post a cash deposit
and/or a good and sufficient surety bond, written by a corporate bonding
company authorized to do business in the State by the Department of Insurance
of the State, with the City in a sum designated by the Director, conditioned
that such application will hold and save the City harmless from any and all
costs, damages, or expenses that the City or any of its officers may incur or
be obligated to pay by reason of the granting of such permit, including damages
to park growth, facilities, buildings, and other City-owned property. The
Director may require the applicant to post a like surety bond indemnifying any
property owners adjoining such park site for any costs necessitated for
repairing damages to their property and/or for cleaning up and/or removing
debris, trash, or other waste from, in, and around their premises.
   Such surety bond, if required, shall be placed on file with the City Clerk
prior to the issuance of any permit.
(§ 1, Ord. 2114, eff. January 15, 1981)
Sec. 10-1.11. Permit and facility use fees.
   (a)   Required. A fee shall be charged for any permit issued pursuant to
this chapter, and special fees shall be charged in addition to such permit fee
for the exclusive use of any park, recreational building, and park facility.
The amount of such fees shall be fixed from time to time by the Council by
resolution; provided, however, no change in such amounts shall be effective
less than thirty (30) days after the date of the motion changing the amounts.
   (b)   Collection of charges. The fees for the issuance of a permit and the
exclusive use of parks, recreational buildings, and park facilities shall be
shown on a special billing and shall be paid at the recreation office prior to
the issuance of any permit.
   (c)   Deposit in the General Fund. When such fees are collected, the moneys
shall be deposited in the General Fund of the City.
(§ 1, Ord. 2114, eff. January 15, 1981)
Sec. 10-1.12. Suspension and revocation of permits.
   The Director at any time may suspend or revoke a permit issued pursuant to
this chapter when he has reasonable cause to believe that a permittee has
violated or is causing or permitting a violation of this chapter, including the
conditions set forth by the Director granting such permit, or any pertinent
Federal, State, County, or City law, or when it has been shown to his
satisfaction that the activities so permitted are being conducted in a manner
detrimental to the public health, peace, safety, or welfare of the City. The
Director may also suspend or revoke any such permit if he has probable cause to
believe the permittee has misrepresented, falsified, or concealed any material
fact in the application therefor.
(§ 1, Ord. 2114, eff. January 15, 1981)
Sec. 10-1.13. Nontransferability.
   Permits issued pursuant to this chapter shall be nontransferable.
(§ 1, Ord. 2114, eff. January 15, 1981)
Sec. 10-1.14. Right of aggrieved persons to object to issuance of permits.
   Any person or persons who may consider themselves substantially aggrieved by
the issuance of any permit as provided in this chapter may file written signed
objections with the Director after the issuance of such permit setting forth
the name and address of the party aggrieved and the reasons for the objections.
Upon such objections being filed with the Director, the permit shall be
suspended if, in the Director's determination, such objections are justified in
accordance with the provisions of this chapter; provided, however, if the
Director determines that the objections are not justified in accordance with
this chapter, he shall notify the objectors of such a determination.
(§ 1, Ord. 2114, eff. January 15, 1981)
Sec. 10-1.15. Right to appeal to Recreation Commission and Council: Hearings.
   With respect to any permit issued pursuant to this chapter, any applicant or
objector may appeal the decision of the Director regarding the issuance of any
permit as provided in this chapter to the Recreation Commission. The applicant
or objector shall file such appeal with the Director within five (5) working
days after the Director's mailing of such decision. Upon any such notice of
appeal or objection being received by the Director, the application, together
with such notice of appeal and/or written objections, together with the report
and file relating thereto, shall be forwarded to the Commission as soon as
reasonably practicable. Upon the receipt of such material, the Commission shall
hold a hearing on such application, such hearing to be held within the City at
the earliest reasonable date thereafter, at which time the applicant and/or any
objectors may present any and all evidence, testimony and information relevant
to the application. The applicant, along with any objectors, shall be mailed
postpaid a notice of the hearing thereof to their last known address at least
five (5) days prior to such a hearing. The Commission, within twenty four (24)
hours after such appeal hearing, shall issue a decision either affirming the
denial of the application or advising the Director to issue a permit as applied
for subject to reasonable terms and conditions as set forth in this chapter.
   After an appeal to the Recreation Commission, any applicant or objector who
deems himself aggrieved by any action or determination of any official of the
City as provided in this chapter may appeal to the Council within five (5) days
after such action or determination by filing a written notice of appeal with
the Director. The notice of appeal will be sufficient in form if it contains
the names and addresses of the applicants or objectors and states that the
appeal is from an action of the Director in either granting or denying
application no.          made by (name of the applicant) for an outdoor
assembly or general facility and building use permit.
   The Director shall forthwith send any appeal, together with a copy of the
application and any objections thereto, along with the determination of the
Recreation Commission on such application, to the City Clerk. Upon any such
notice of appeal or objection being received by the City Clerk, the
application, together with such notice of appeal or written objections,
together with the report of the Director, Commission determinations, and file
relating thereto, shall be forwarded to the Council as soon as reasonably
practicable, and the Council shall thereupon determine whether or not such
permit shall be issued after a hearing thereupon. Such hearing shall be held
within the City at the earliest reasonable time thereafter; provided, however,
the applicant and any such objectors shall be mailed postpaid a notice thereof
to their last known address at least five (5) days prior to such hearing.
   All determinations by the Council after any hearing as provided in this
section shall be considered final and conclusive.
(§ 1, Ord. 2114, eff. January 15, 1981)
Sec. 10-1.16. Violations of permits.
   The violation of any of the terms and conditions of a permit issued pursuant
to this chapter by the permittee, or any agent, servant, or employee of the
permittee, is hereby unlawful and shall be grounds for revoking such permit.
(§ 1, Ord. 2114, eff. January 15, 1981)
Sec. 10-1.17. Interference.
   No person within any park or building shall use or attempt to use or
interfere with the use of any park facility or building within such park which
at the time is reserved for any other person or group who has received a permit
from the Director therefor. Unless the actual use of such park facility or
building referred to in any such permit is commenced within one (1) hour after
the period covered by such permit begins, such permit shall thereupon be void,
and all rights under such permit may be cancelled by the Director.
(§ 1, Ord. 2114, eff. January 15, 1981)
Sec. 10-1.18. Commercial activities in parks.
   It shall be unlawful for any person or group to engage in any commercial
activity, including, but not limited to, the selling, offering for sale,
advertising for sale, or solicitation for future delivery or performance of any
goods, wares, merchandise, or services, including magazines, newspapers,
periodicals, pamphlets, food, or beverages, in any park, except pursuant to a
specific concession granted by the City or a permit therefor. No permit shall
be issued authorizing the use of any park, park facility, or building where the
activity proposed is designed to be held purely for private profit.
(§ 1, Ord. 2114, eff. January 15, 1981)
Sec. 10-1.19. Amplified sound.
   It shall be unlawful for any person or group to use any system for
amplifying sound, as defined in §
10-1.01(a) of this chapter, whether for speech or music, in any City-owned park
without first securing an exclusive use permit for such purpose.
(§ 1, Ord. 2114, eff. January 15, 1981)
Sec. 10-1.20. Bicycles, motorcycles, and other vehicles.
   (a)   It shall be unlawful for any person, other than City employees engaged
in official duties, to ride, drive, or otherwise allow any motor-powered
bicycle, motor scooter, motorcycle, automobile, or any other fuel-powered
vehicle upon the grass portions of any City-owned park or parkway, except upon
paved streets within such parks, unless special approval is granted by the
Director as a condition of a permit issued pursuant to this chapter.
   (b)   It shall be unlawful for any person, except City employees engaged in
official duties, to operate any motorized vehicle upon any City-owned trail
system, except to cross a paved trail system when it is a part of the City's
street right-of-way.
   (c)   It shall be unlawful for any person to park any motorized vehicle in
any City-owned park, except in established or designated parking areas, unless
special approval is granted as a condition of a permit issued pursuant to this
chapter.
(§ 1, Ord. 2114, eff. January 15, 1981)
Sec. 10-1.21. Model airplanes and midget automobiles.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to fly any motorized airplane, rocket
projectile, or other similar device or to ride, operate, or drive any midget
automobile in any City-owned park, or allow the same to be operated in any
City-owned park, parkway, or trail, except in such areas as may be specifically
designated for such use by resolution of the Council.
(§ 1, Ord. 2114, eff. January 15, 1981)
Sec. 10-1.22. Horses.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to lead, ride, or drive any horse, mule,
or other hoofed footed animal on the grass portions of any City-owned park,
parkway, or bike trail, except upon the oiled or paved streets within such
parks or on specifically designated equestrian trails. The provisions of this
section shall not apply to horses ridden by on-duty police officers and the
Ontario Mounted Police volunteers.
(§ 1, Ord. 2114, eff. January 15, 1981, as amended by § 1, Ord. 2602, eff.
December 7, 1995)
Sec. 10-1.23. Dogs.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to allow any dog within any City-owned
park, or upon any parkway or trail, unless such dog is maintained upon a leash
not to exceed six (6) feet.
(§ 1, Ord. 2114, eff. January 15, 1981)
Sec. 10-1.24. Golf practice.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to drive, hit, or putt any golf ball or
to use any golf club in any City-owned park or upon any parkway or trail,
except in such areas as may be designated by the City.
(§ 1, Ord. 2114, eff. January 15, 1981)
Sec. 10-1.25. Flora.
   It shall be unlawful for any person, other than a duly authorized City
employee or City contractor in the performance of his duties, to dig, remove,
destroy, injure, mutilate, or cut any tree, plant, shrub, bloom, or flower, or
any portion thereof, growing in any City-owned park, median parkway, or trail,
unless specifically authorized to do so by the Parks Director or by resolution
of the Council.
(§ 1, Ord. 2114, eff. January 15, 1981)
Sec. 10-1.26. Removal of turf or soil.
   It shall be unlawful for any person, other than a duly authorized City
employee or contractor in the performance of his duties, to remove any wood,
turf, grass, soil, rock, sand, or gravel from any City-owned park, median
parkway, or trail, unless specifically authorized to do so by the Parks
Director or by resolution of the Council.
(§ 1, Ord. 2114, eff. January 15, 1981)
Sec. 10-1.27. Marking, injuring, or disturbing park facilities or structures.
   It shall be unlawful for any person, other than a duly authorized City
employee or City contractor in the performance of his duties, to:
   (a)   Cut, break, injure, deface, or disturb any building, rock, monument,
sign, fence, bench, structure, apparatus, equipment, or property in any City-
owned park, parkway, or trail;
   (b)   Mark or place thereon any mark, writing, or printing; or
   (c)   Attach thereto any sign, card, display, or other similar device,
except as specifically authorized by permit.
(§ 1, Ord. 2114, eff. January 15, 1981)
Sec. 10-1.28. Fires.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to light or maintain any fire in any
City-owned park or upon any parkway or trail, unless such fires are lighted and
maintained in “on-site” barbecue apparatus or personal portable barbecue
apparatus within designated picnic areas, and such fires and coals shall be
fully extinguished before persons maintaining such fires leave the picnic area.
(§ 1, Ord. 2114, eff. January 15, 1981)
Sec. 10-1.29. Closure of City-owned parks between 9:00 p.m. and sunrise:
Exceptions.
   (a)   Except as provided in this section, it shall be unlawful and a
misdemeanor for any person to enter upon or remain in any City-owned park from
9:00 p.m. on one day until sunrise on the following day. The City Council may
by resolution declare an earlier hour of closure of a City-owned park in order
to mitigate impacts of activities at said park. It shall be unlawful and a
misdemeanor for any person to enter upon or remain in a City-owned park when
closed pursuant to any such approved resolution, provided the hours are posted
at the park.
   (b)   This section shall not apply to:
      (1)   A public officer or employee acting within the course and scope of
his or her employment;
      (2)   A person attending an organized athletic event or other function
for which written permission or permits have been obtained from the Recreation
Department, while such event or function is taking place and for one (1) hour
thereafter
(§ 1, Ord. 2114, eff. January 15, 1981, as amended by § 5, Ord. 2150, eff.
November 5, 1981, § 1, Ord. 2783, eff. October 2, 2003, and § 3, Ord. 2923,
eff. June 3, 2010)
Sec. 10-1.30. Closure or restricted use of City- owned parks, recreation
buildings/facilities, amenities and equipment.
   Any public parks, recreation buildings/facilities, amenities or equipment
may be closed to the public or have their use restricted upon the order of the
Director, the Police Chief, the Fire Chief or their designees, whenever in his
or her discretion such facility is in need of immediate renovation, or the use
of that facility in any manner presents a hazard to the public welfare or
safety, or otherwise is a public nuisance. Such closure shall last only so long
as the conditions requiring the closure exist. It shall be unlawful and a
misdemeanor for any person, other than a public officer or employee acting
within the course and scope of his or her employment, to remain in such park,
building, or park facility after it has been declared to be closed.
(§ 4, Ord. 2923, eff. June 3, 2010)
Sec. 10-1.31. Prohibition of camping.
   (a)   No person shall camp in a park except in an area that has been
designated for camping by the Director.
   (b)   No person shall camp in a park without first obtaining a permit from
the Director pursuant to §
10-1.04. In addition to any requirement for obtaining a permit pursuant to §
10-1.04, for purposes of this section, the Fire Department shall also review
the permit to assure that adequate access is provided for medical and fire
emergencies, and to ensure compliance with any applicable provisions of the
California Fire Code.
   (c)   For purposes of this section, “camp” shall have the same meaning as
defined in §
5-23.02.
(§ 5, Ord. 2923, eff. June 3, 2010)
CHAPTER 2: PARKWAY TREES
   
10-2.01   Title of provisions
   
10-2.02   Purposes of provisions
   
10-2.03   Definitions
   
10-2.04   Maintenance
   
10-2.05   Injuring
   
10-2.06   Removal: Permits
   
10-2.07   Planting: Permits
   
10-2.08   Official Parkway Tree List
   
10-2.09   Cash-in-lieu deposits
   
10-2.10   Administration of provisions
   
10-2.11   Violations of provisions
   
10-2.12   Solar collector consideration
Sec. 10-2.01. Title of provisions.
   This chapter may be cited as the “Parkway Tree Regulations” of the City.
(§ 1, Ord. 1664, eff. October 5, 1967)
Sec. 10-2.02. Purposes of provisions.
   The purposes of this chapter are to preserve parkway trees, to regulate the
maintenance and removal of such trees, and to establish the varieties, minimum
size, methods, and locations for the planting thereof, and other related
matters.
(§ 3, Ord. 1664, eff. October 5, 1967)
Sec. 10-2.03. Definitions.
   For the purposes of this chapter, unless otherwise apparent from the
context, certain words and phrases used in this chapter are defined as follows:
   (a)   “Block” shall mean any and all real property located between two (2)
public thoroughfares, except alleys.
   (b)   “City” shall mean the City of Ontario, a municipal corporation; the
Council thereof; the Parks Director; or any employee or agent thereof duly
appointed to administer the provisions of this chapter.
   (c)   “Curbline” shall mean the face of existing curbs of the locations at
which the curb face is to be built in conformance with the Master Plan of
Streets and Highways, design standards, or approved improvement plans.
   (d)   “Owner” shall mean any person holding title to real property abutting
upon public rights-of-way, or any lessee, assignee, tenant, or agent thereof.
For the purposes of this chapter, prime responsibility for compliance shall
rest upon whichever of such persons is the occupant or user of the property,
and ultimate responsibility shall rest upon the legal title holder.
   (e)   “Parkway” shall mean that portion of any public street right-of-way
between the right-of-way boundary line and the curb line, and also the area
enclosed within the curblines of a median divider.
   (f)   “Solar collector” shall mean any fixed device, structure, or part of a
device or structure which is used primarily to transform solar energy into
thermal, chemical, or electrical energy. The solar collector shall be used as
part of any system which makes use of solar energy for any or all of the
following purposes:
      (1)   Water heating;
      (2)   Space heating and cooling;
      (3)   Power generation.
   (g)   “Tree” shall mean plant materials having a single upright woody stem
or trunk, maturing at a height in excess of ten (10) feet.
(§ 2, Ord. 1664, eff. October 5, 1967, as amended by § 1, Ord. 2249, eff.
October 20, 1983)
Sec. 10-2.04. Maintenance.
   It shall be the responsibility of the owner to water any tree located in a
parkway abutting his property as necessary to promote healthy growth and
protect the improvements within the parkway and to do such trimming as can be
done from the ground to preserve the neat appearance and obstructed use of the
parkway. The City shall be responsible for all major pruning (except as
provided in §
10-2.12) or other tree surgery and the control and treatment of insect pests
and diseases.
(§ 4, Ord. 1664, eff. October 5, 1967, as amended by § 1, Ord. 2249, eff.
October 20, 1983)
Sec. 10-2.05. Injuring.
   No person shall cut, carve, mutilate, or otherwise do harm to any tree in
any park, parkway, or public place, or prune or top such trees except as
provided in this chapter, or to apply or allow to exist upon any parkway or
tree any substance harmful to such trees.
(§ 4, Ord. 1664, eff. October 5, 1967)
Sec. 10-2.06. Removal: Permits.
   No person shall remove or relocate any parkway tree without prior
authorization from the Public Works Agency of the City. A parkway tree may be
removed by the City for any of the following reasons:
   (a)   Visual hazard. Obstructing sight distance necessary for the safe
operation of vehicles at street intersections, or obscuring in an otherwise
incurable manner any traffic or railroad crossing signal or other safety
device.
   (b)   Safety hazard. Any condition deemed to be an immediate hazard to life
or property which cannot otherwise be corrected.
   (c)   Condition. Dead, decayed, or diseased beyond correction.
   (d)   Unauthorized. Planted without a permit, improper location or variety,
or prohibited type.
   (e)   Where the removal is necessary to reasonably utilize solar collectors,
and:
      (1)   Thirty (30) days prior to installation of the solar collectors, the
City was notified in writing of the intent to install such collectors;
      (2)   The solar collectors, where possible, are located so that no street
tree removal is required; and
      (3)   The removal of such tree or trees will not be detrimental to the
general public.
(§ 5, Ord. 1664, eff. October 5, 1967, as amended by § 2, Ord. 2249, eff.
October 20, 1983)
Sec. 10-2.07. Planting: Permits.
   Whenever feasible, the planting of a replacement parkway tree shall be a
condition included in any permit issued by the City for the removal of any
parkway tree. Trees removed pursuant to the provisions of §
10-2.06(c) of this chapter shall be replaced by the City whenever feasible.
Trees planted within parkway areas shall be in accordance with the following
criteria:
   (a)   Planting stock shall be of normal shape or conformation and not less
than one (1) inch caliper at its base.
   (b)   Container stock shall not be root bound or have serious root
deformations due to confinement in the container.
   (c)   When planted, trees shall be staked in the manner prescribed by the
City.
   (d)   Parkway trees shall be planted at approximately sixty (60) foot
intervals or one (1) per lot frontage. On corner lots, two (2) or more trees
may be required on the side frontage; provided, however, no tree shall be
planted within twenty five (25) feet of any curb return; and provided further,
the owner may plant more of the same tree if the species permits and visual
safety is not impaired.
   (e)   In any commercial or industrial zone, consideration of tree planting
proposals to be incorporated in landscaping of the site may be requested in
writing accompanied by a site plan and/or planting diagram.
   (f)   Trees shall be planted in line with existing trees, or midway between
the back of the curb and the near edge of the standard sidewalk, or on a line
equivalent thereto if a curb and/or sidewalk has not been constructed.
   (g)   The construction of a sidewalk in addition to the standard sidewalk
extending to the curb shall provide openings not less than four (4) feet square
centered around existing trees or located as directed by the City. The
provision of such tree wells shall include the planting of the parkway tree.
Specifications shall be included in the Official Parkway Tree List provided for
in §
10-2.08 of this chapter.
   (h)   No parkway trees shall be planted in a parkway abutting property which
is undeveloped and unoccupied. In any such case where the planting of a parkway
tree is required, the cash-in-lieu deposit, as provided in §
10-2.09 of this chapter, shall be accepted and used by the City for the
purchase and planting of such trees when the property has been occupied.
(§§ 6A through G and J, Ord. 1664, eff. October 5, 1967)
Sec. 10-2.08. Official Parkway Tree List.
   It shall be the duty of the Public Facilities Manager to maintain an
Official Parkway Tree List. The Official Parkway Tree List shall be established
and amended by resolution of the Council and shall designate the variety,
planting stock specifications, and other information regarding trees to be
planting on each block of each public street or highway within the City.
(§ 6H, Ord. 1664, eff. October 5, 1967)
Sec. 10-2.09. Cash-in-lieu deposits.
   It shall be the duty of the Public Facilities Manager to establish from time
to time a fair value for the cash-in-lieu deposit to be accepted by the City as
an alternate to the actual planting of any required parkway tree.
(§ 6I, Ord. 1664, eff. October 5, 1967)
Sec. 10-2.10. Administration of provisions.
   The Council shall designate the officials to administer the provisions of
this chapter.
(§ 7, Ord. 1664, eff. October 5, 1967)
Sec. 10-2.11. Violations of provisions.
   The failure of any person to comply with the provisions of this chapter
within forty eight (48) hours after receiving a notice of the violation thereof
shall be a violation of this chapter, and each day such noncompliance continues
shall constitute a separate offense. The foregoing provision notwithstanding,
when any violation is deemed by the City to constitute an immediate hazard to
health or safety, the City shall eliminate such hazardous violation and
thereafter shall recover the costs incurred from the owner in any lawful
manner.
   Notice of violation shall be given in writing by the City and served upon
the owner in person, if possible. If personal service is not possible, the
notice shall be sent by mail, receipt requested, and a copy of the notice shall
be conspicuously posted at the site of the violation.
   In addition to the penalty provided in
Chapter 2 of Title 1 of this Code for violations, when the owner fails to
respond to such notice, the City may cause the violative condition to be
corrected and costs levied against the property and collected from the owner in
any lawful manner.
(§ 7, Ord. 1664, eff. October 5, 1967)
Sec. 10-2.12. Solar collector consideration.
   In particular, the City encourages the planting and maintenance of drought
tolerant trees and shrubs to create shading, moderate outdoor temperatures, and
provide various economic and aesthetic benefits. However, there are certain
situations in which the need for widespread use of alternative energy devices
such as solar collectors requires specific and limited controls on trees and
shrubs.
   All street trees that require removal or pruning to allow for adequate
operation of solar collectors shall be removed or pruned at owners expense. All
work must be approved by the City and shall meet City specifications. All
street tree removals must meet the requirements of §
10-2.06(e).
(§ 3, Ord. 2249, eff. October 20, 1983)
CHAPTER 3: PARK AND RECREATION TAXES* (REPEALED)
* Chapter 3 of Title 10, incorporating §§ 10-3.01 through 10-3.09, was repealed
in its entirety by § 5, Ord. 2779, eff. July 31, 2003.
Cross-reference:
   Park dedication and impact fees, see §§
9-2.1500 et seq. of this code
APPENDIX TO THE ONTARIO MUNICIPAL CODE
      Table
         
1.   DISPOSITION OF ORDINANCES
         
2.   SPECIAL ORDINANCES NOT CODIFIED BUT TO REMAIN IN EFFECT
         
3.   ORDINANCES AMENDING ZONING MAP
TABLE 1: Disposition of Ordinances
   A list of all ordinances of the City indicating their disposition or status
at the time of the adoption of this Code is on file in the office of the City
Clerk. The City Clerk shall maintain such list and keep the same current as new
ordinances are adopted by the City.
TABLE 2: Special Ordinances Not Codified But to Remain in Effect
   A list of all special ordinances of the City not codified in this Code but
which shall remain in effect until hereafter repealed or superseded is on file
in the office of the City Clerk. Such list is hereby adopted as a part of the
Appendix of this Code by reference as though such list were fully set forth
herein.
TABLE 3: Ordinances Amending Zoning Map
   A list of all ordinances of the City which amend the Zoning Map at the time
of the adoption of this Code is on file in the office of the City Clerk. Such
list is hereby adopted as a part of the Appendix of this Code by reference as
though such list were fully set forth herein.
PENALTY SCHEDULE
SECTION TITLE EFFECTIVE DATE & ORDINANCE DESCRIPTION PENALTY
SECTION TITLE          EFFECTIVE DATE & ORDINANCE                                                    DESCRIPTION    PENALTY
                                                                                                     (b) Any person (1) A fine not exceeding One Hundred Dollars ($100.00) for a first violation;
                                                                                                     convicted of   (2) A fine not exceeding Two Hundred Dollars ($200.00) for a second violation
                                                                                                     an infraction  of the same provision within one (1) year; and
                                                                                                     under the
                       (§ 1, Ord. 2094, eff. August 14, 1980, as amended by § 1, Ord. 2274, eff. Maprovisions of
Sec.    Punishment for 31, 1984, § 1, Ord. 2468, eff. July 5, 1990, § 1, Ord. 2469, eff. July 5,   this Code, or
1-2.01  violation.     1990)                                                                         any Code       (3) A fine not exceeding Five Hundred Dollars ($500.00) for each additional
                                                                                                     adopted by     violation of the same provision within one (1) year.
                                                                                                     reference by
                                                                                                     this Code,
                                                                                                     shall be
                                                                                                     punished by:
                       (§ 1, Ord. 2094, eff. August 14, 1980, as amended by § 1, Ord. 2274, eff. MaAny person     (c) Any person convicted of a misdemeanor shall be punished by a fine of not
Sec.    Punishment for 31, 1984, § 1, Ord. 2468, eff. July 5, 1990, § 1, Ord. 2469, eff. July 5,   convicted of a more than One Thousand Dollars ($1,000.00), or by imprisonment in the County
1-2.01  violation.     1990)                                                                         misdemeanor    jail for a period not exceeding six (6) months, or by both such fine and
                                                                                                                    imprisonment.
                                                                                                     Any person who
                                                                                                     violates any   (g) Any person who violates any provision or fails to comply with any
                                                                                                     provision or   requirement or provision of this Code heretofore or hereafter enacted or any
Sec.    Punishment for (§ 1, Ord. 2094, eff. August 14, 1980, as amended by § 1, Ord. 2274, eff. Mafails to       provision of any Code adopted by reference by this Code shall be liable for a
1-2.01  violation.     31, 1984, § 1, Ord. 2468, eff. July 5, 1990, § 1, Ord. 2469, eff. July 5,   comply with    civil penalty not to exceed One Thousand Dollars ($1,000.00) for each
                       1990)                                                                         any            violation. Where the conduct constituting a violation is of a continuing
                                                                                                     requirement or nature, each day of such conduct is a separate and distinct violation.
                                                                                                     provision of
                                                                                                     this Code
                                                                                                                    (a) Any person obligated to pay a delinquent account receivable to the City
                                                                                                                    shall also pay, as a late charge, a sum equal to ten percent (10%) of the
        Late Charges                                                                                 Late Charges   amount of the delinquent account receivable for the first month delinquent, and
Sec.    On Delinquent  (§ 1, Ord. 2461, eff. January 18, 1990, as amended by § 3, Ord. 2785, eff.  On Delinquent  said late charge may be collected in the manner provided in §
1-2.07  Accounts       November 16, 2003)                                                            Accounts       1-2.06 of the Municipal Code. In addition to the late charge, the City will
        Receivable                                                                                   Receivable     charge a penalty of one-half of one percent (0.5%) per month on all obligations
                                                                                                                    older than thirty (30) days from the past due date. This is in accordance with
                                                                                                                    Cal. Gov't Code § 54348.
                                                                                                                    (b) Any person obligated to pay a delinquent account receivable to the City
                                                                                                     Late Charges   shall also pay, as a late charge, a sum equal to ten percent (10%) of the
        Late Charges                                                                                 On Delinquent  amount of the delinquent account receivable for the first month delinquent, and
Sec.    One Delinquent (§ 1, Ord. 2461, eff. January 18, 1990, as amended by § 3, Ord. 2785, eff.  Utility        said late charge may be collected in the manner provided in §
1-2.07  Accounts       November 16, 2003)                                                            Accounts       1-2.06 of the Municipal Code. In addition to the late charge, the City will
        Receivable                                                                                   Receivable     charge a penalty of one and one-half of one percent (1.5%) per month on all
                                                                                                                    obligations older than thirty (30) days from the past due date. This is in
                                                                                                                    accordance with Cal. Health & Safety Code § 5473.10.
        Late Charges                                                                                 Late Charges   (c) Nothing contained in this section shall limit, restrict or otherwise affect
Sec.    On Delinquent  (§ 1, Ord. 2461, eff. January 18, 1990, as amended by § 3, Ord. 2785, eff.  On Delinquent  the imposition of greater late charges, interest, penalties or other charges
1-2.07  Accounts       November 16, 2003)                                                            Accounts       for late payments as provided for by other sections of the Municipal Code, or
        Receivable                                                                                   Receivable     by the laws of the State of California, it being the purpose of this section to
                                                                                                                    establish a minimum late charge.
        Charges for                                                                                                 (a) Any check presented as payment that is returned unpaid by any financial
Sec.    Checks and     (§ 4, Ord. 2785, eff. November 16, 2003)                                     Checks         institution is subject to a Twenty-Five Dollar ($25.00) service fee for the
1-2.08  Credit Cards                                                                                                first returned check.
        Unpaid
        Charges for                                                                                                 (b) Any credit card payment that is stopped by the card user is subject to a
Sec.    Checks and     (§ 4, Ord. 2785, eff. November 16, 2003)                                     Credit Cards   Twenty-Five Dollar ($25.00) service fee. (§ 4, Ord. 2785, eff. September 16,
1-2.08  Credit Cards                                                                                                2003)
        Unpaid
        Administrative
Sec.    Citations      (Ord. 2628, eff. March 6, 1997, as amended by § 1, Ord. 2942, eff. December  Administrative The amount of fines pursuant to this chapter shall be set forth and amended by
1-5.04  Amount of      1, 2011)                                                                      Citations      resolution of the City Council.
        Fines (Code
        Enforcement)
Sec.    Payment of a                                                                                                (b) A late payment fee of Twenty Dollars ($20.00) shall be charged if the fine
1-5.05  fine           (Ord. 2628, eff. March 6, 1997)                                               Late Fees      is not paid within fifty (50) days from the date of the administrative
                                                                                                                    citation.
        Custody and                                                                                                 Any person who, for malicious or commercial purposes, engages in the
Sec.    Use of                                                                                                      unauthorized use of the Official City Seal or City Insignia, shall be subject
2-4.07  Official City  (§ 2, Ord. 3066, eff. March 9, 2017)                                         City Seal      to a civil administrative fine not to exceed One-Thousand Dollars ($1,000.00)
        Seal and City                                                                                               and shall be guilty of a misdemeanor offense.
        Insignia
                                                                                                     Campaign       Any person violating any of the provisions of this Chapter relating to campaign
Sec.    Elections      (§ 2, Ord. 3170, eff. December 17, 2020)                                     Contribution   contributions and disclosure is guilty of an infraction, punishable in
2-10.08                                                                                              Limits and     accordance with
                                                                                                     Disclosure     Chapter 5 of Title I of this Code.
                                                                                                                    For failure to pay a tax when due, the license collector shall add a penalty of
                                                                                                                    twenty percent (20%) to the amount of such tax on the last calendar day of each
Sec.    Business       (§ 1, Ord. 2526, eff. April 8, 1992, as amended by § 2, Ord. 3144, eff.     Late Payment   following month after the due date thereof. New businesses in the City who fail
3-1.117 Licenses       November 14, 2019)                                                            and Non-       to secure a business license prior to opening for business shall add a penalty
                                                                                                     Payment        to twenty percent (20%) in addition to the amount of the business license tax.
                                                                                                                    In no event shall any penalty imposed hereunder exceed an amount equal to one
                                                                                                                    hundred percent (100%) of such tax.
                                                                                                                    Any operator who shall fail to report and remit any tax imposed by the
Sec.    Transient      (§ 8, Ord. 1569, eff. July 1, 1965, as amended by § 6, Ord. 2925, eff. July Original       provisions of this chapter within the time required shall pay a penalty in the
3-6.11  Occupancy Tax  15, 2010, and § 2, Ord. 3234, eff. January 19, 2023)                         delinquency    amount of one-half of one percent (0.5%) per day of the tax due and owing in
                                                                                                                    addition to the amount of the tax, up to thirty (30) days following the date on
                                                                                                                    which the remittance first became delinquent.
                                                                                                                    Any operator who shall fail to remit any delinquent remittance on or before a
                                                                                                                    period of thirty (30) days following the date on which the remittance first
Sec.    Transient      (§ 8, Ord. 1569, eff. July 1, 1965, as amended by § 6, Ord. 2925, eff. July Continued      became delinquent shall pay a second delinquency penalty in the amount of ten
3-6.11  Occupancy Tax  15, 2010, and § 2, Ord. 3234, eff. January 19, 2023)                         delinquency    percent (10%) of the tax due and owing in addition to the amount of the tax and
                                                                                                                    the one-half of one percent (0.5%) penalty, up to thirty (30) days, first
                                                                                                                    imposed.
                                                                                                                    If the Tax Administrator shall determine that the non-payment of any remittance
Sec.    Transient      (§ 8, Ord. 1569, eff. July 1, 1965, as amended by § 6, Ord. 2925, eff. July                due pursuant to the provisions of this chapter is due to fraud, a penalty in
3-6.11  Occupancy Tax  15, 2010, and § 2, Ord. 3234, eff. January 19, 2023)                         Fraud          the amount of twenty five percent (25%) of the amount of the tax shall be added
                                                                                                                    thereto in addition to the penalties set forth in subsections (a) and (b) of
                                                                                                                    this section.
                                                                                                                    In addition to the penalties imposed, any operator who shall fail to remit any
Sec.    Transient      (§ 8, Ord. 1569, eff. July 1, 1965, as amended by § 6, Ord. 2925, eff. July                tax imposed by the provisions of this chapter shall pay interest at the rate of
3-6.11  Occupancy Tax  15, 2010, and § 2, Ord. 3234, eff. January 19, 2023)                         Interest       one-half of one percent (.5%) per month, or fraction thereof, on the amount of
                                                                                                                    the tax, exclusive of penalties, from the date on which the remittance first
                                                                                                                    became delinquent until paid.
                                                                                                                    Any violation of this chapter, and any failure to pay assessed penalties,
Sec.    Transient      (§ 8, Ord. 1569, eff. July 1, 1965, as amended by § 6, Ord. 2925, eff. July Civil          delinquencies, or interest specified herein may result in alternative remedies,
3-6.11  Occupancy Tax  15, 2010, and § 2, Ord. 3234, eff. January 19, 2023)                         Penalties      such as referral to a collection agency, civil action, or any other legal
                                                                                                                    remedy.
                                                                                                                    In addition to the penalties, delinquencies, interest, or other consequences
                                                                                                                    set forth in subsections (a) through (e) above, any operator who fails or
                                                                                                                    refuses to collect the tax, fails or refuses to make any return, fails or
                                                                                                                    refuses to keep adequate records or open them up for inspection by the city,
Sec.    Transient      (§ 8, Ord. 1569, eff. July 1, 1965, as amended by § 6, Ord. 2925, eff. July Criminal       fails or refuses to furnish other data reasonably requested by the tax
3-6.11  Occupancy Tax  15, 2010, and § 2, Ord. 3234, eff. January 19, 2023)                         Penalties      administrator, or makes a false or fraudulent return with intent to evade the
                                                                                                                    tax, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof, shall be
                                                                                                                    punished pursuant to Ontario Municipal Code Chapter 1-2 (Penalty Provisions).
                                                                                                                    Each and every day during any portion of which any violation is committed,
                                                                                                                    continued, or permitted, shall constitute a separate offense and shall be
                                                                                                                    punished accordingly.
                                                                                                                    Any person who fails to pay any tax to the City or any amount of tax required
                                                                                                                    to be collected and paid to the City, except amounts of determinations made by
                                                                                                                    the Finance Director pursuant hereto within the time required, shall pay a
Sec.    Parking Tax    (§ 1, Ord. 2259, January 5, 1984)                                            Failure to Pay penalty of ten percent (10%) penalty of the tax or amount of the tax in
3-8.15                                                                                               Tax            addition to the tax or amount of tax plus interest at the rate of one percent
                                                                                                                    (1%) per month or fraction thereof from the date on which the tax or the amount
                                                                                                                    of tax required to be collected became due and payable to the City until the
                                                                                                                    date of payment.
                                                                                                     Violation of   (a) Any minor who violates any provision of this chapter shall be reprimanded
                                                                                                     Bicycle Code - by the Police Department by a letter addressed to the parent or guardian of
                                                                                                     Minor -        such minor. Upon any subsequent violation within a period of three (3) years,
Sec.                   (§ 1, Ord. 1878, eff. January 1, 1976, as amended by § 1, Ord. 2724, eff.   Including      the offender shall be summoned to appear at the Police Department with this
4-2.14  Bicycles       November 2, 2000)                                                             Failure to     bicycle and shall be accompanied by a parent or guardian. After a hearing, the
                                                                                                     Register and   Police Department may suspend the offender's privilege to operate and use a
                                                                                                     obtain a       bicycle within the City and/or impound the offender's bicycle for a period of
                                                                                                     license plate  not to exceed thirty (30) days.
                                                                                                     (decal)
                                                                                                     Violation of
                                                                                                     Bicycle Code - (b) Any person, other than a minor, who has been convicted of violating any
                                                                                                     Including      provision of this chapter shall be punished upon a first conviction by a fine
Sec.    Bicycles       (§ 1, Ord. 1878, eff. January 1, 1976, as amended by § 1, Ord. 2724, eff.   Failure to     of not more than Five Dollars ($5.00) and, upon a second or any subsequent
4-2.14                 November 2, 2000)                                                             Register and   conviction within three (3) years of a prior conviction, by a fine of Ten
                                                                                                     obtain a       Dollars ($10.00).
                                                                                                     license plate
                                                                                                     (decal)
                                                                                                     It shall be a
                                                                                                     misdemeanor,
                                                                                                     punishable by
                                                                                                     fine of not to
                                                                                                     exceed five    (a) Willfully obstruct, hinder, or delay any member of the Emergency
                                                                                                     hundred        Organization in the enforcement of any lawful rule or regulation issued
                                                                                                     dollars        pursuant to the provisions of this chapter or in the performance of any duty
                                                                                                     ($500.00), or  imposed upon him by virtue of said provisions; and
                       (§ 1, Ord. 1773, eff. February 17, 1972, as amended by § 1, Ord. 2706, eff. by             (b) Do any act forbidden by any lawful rule or regulation issued pursuant to
Sec.    Emergency      December 2, 1999, § 2, Ord. 2990, eff. July 17, 2014, § 2, Ord. 3293, eff.  imprisonment   the provisions of this chapter if such act is of such a nature as to give, or
4-3.11  Organizations  December 17, 2024)                                                            in the County  be likely to give, assistance to the enemy or imperil the lives or property of
                                                                                                     Jail for a     inhabitants of the City, or to prevent, hinder, or delay the defense or
                                                                                                     period of time protection thereof; or
                                                                                                     not to exceed  (c) Wear, carry, or display, without authority, any means of identification
                                                                                                     six (6)        specified by the emergency agency of the State.
                                                                                                     months, or
                                                                                                     both, for any
                                                                                                     person, during
                                                                                                     an emergency
                                                                                                     to:
                                                                                                                    Subsection (a) of §
                                                                                                                    1-2.01 of this Code shall not apply to parking violations referred to in this
                                                                                                                    article. Any person violating any of the provisions of Articles
Sec.                   (§ 16, Ord. 1651, eff. July 20, 1967, as amended by § 1, Ord. 2030, eff.                   9,
4-      Parking        February 1, 1979, Ord. 2179, eff. August 5, 1982, and § 1, Ord. 2556, eff.   Parking        10,
6.1601  Violations     September 2, 1993)                                                            Violations     11,
                                                                                                                    12,
                                                                                                                    13 and
                                                                                                                    17 of this chapter shall be liable to the City for a civil penalty in the
                                                                                                                    amount set forth in this article.
                                                                                                                    The penalties set forth in the Citywide Fee Schedule shall be paid within
                                                                                                                    thirty (30) days after the writing of the citation by payment to the Ontario
                                                                                                                    Police Department (2500 South Archibald, Ontario, California 91761); or by
Sec.                   (§ 16.3, Ord. 1651, eff. July 20, 1967, as amended by § 1, Ord. 2365, eff.                 mailing the payment postmarked within the thirty (30) day time limit to the
4-      Traffic        October 2, 1986, § 1, Ord. 2903, eff. May 21, 2009, § 2 Ord. 3295, eff. MarcTraffic        Ontario Police Department at the address listed above. Additional fees may be
6.1602  Violations     6, 2025, § 3, Ord. 3311, eff. September 18, 2025)                            Violations     imposed if payment is made after the thirty (30) day time limit noted above.
                                                                                                                    The payment of such penalties shall constitute full satisfaction for the
                                                                                                                    violations referred to therein. If a payment is made by check, it should be
                                                                                                                    addressed to the City of Ontario (303 East B Street, Ontario, California
                                                                                                                    91764).
                                                                                                                    (a) In addition to the penalties set forth in §
                                                                                                                    4-6.1602 of this article, any person violating any of the provisions of
                                                                                                                    Articles
                                                                                                                    9,
                                                                                                                    10,
                                                                                                                    11,
Sec.    Traffic        (§ 1, Ord. 2513, eff. October 31, 1991, as amended by § 3, Ord. 2556, eff.  Traffic        12,
4-      Violations     September 2, 1993)                                                            Violations     13 and
6.1604                                                                                                              17 of this chapter shall pay such additional penalties or surcharges on parking
                                                                                                                    violations as are mandated by state law, including but not limited to those
                                                                                                                    imposed by Chapters 90, 189 and/or 331, Statutes of 1991. Said additional
                                                                                                                    penalties or surcharges shall be paid at the same time and by the same method
                                                                                                                    as set forth in §§
                                                                                                                    4-6.1602 and
                                                                                                                    4-6.1603 of this article.
                                                                                                                    (a) The City has determined that this chapter is necessary to protect health,
                                                                                                                    life, and property of the City and its inhabitants.
                                                                                                                    (b) Any violation of the provisions of this chapter by any person shall be
                                                                                                                    subject to the administrative penalty provisions set forth in Section
                                                                                                                    7-3.20 and the Penalty Schedule contained within this code.
                                                                                                                    (c) It is unlawful and a violation of this chapter for any person to operate,
                                                                                                                    engage in, conduct, manage, or cause to be operated on any public street or
                                                                                                                    right-of-way any valet parking without a valid valet parking permit issued by
                                                                                                                    the City Engineer.
                                                                                                                    (d) This article authorizes any deputy sheriff, or City employee or agent of
                                                                                                                    the City designated by the director of any City department, to administer,
                                                                                                                    implement, and enforce the provisions of this chapter.
                                                                                                                    (e) It is unlawful and a violation of this chapter for a person to falsely
Sec.    Parking                                                                                      Valet Parking  represent themselves as eligible for a valet parking permit or to furnish false
4-      Violations     (§ 2, Ord. 3276, eff. August 15, 2024)                                       Violations     information in an application for a valet parking permit.
6.2213                                                                                                              (f) It is unlawful and a violation of this chapter for a person holding a valet
                                                                                                                    parking permit to permit the use or display of the permit for any purpose other
                                                                                                                    than that for which the permit is issued.
                                                                                                                    (g) It is unlawful and a violation of this chapter for a person to copy,
                                                                                                                    produce or otherwise bring into existence a facsimile or counterfeit valet
                                                                                                                    parking permit without written authorization from the City Manager. It shall
                                                                                                                    further be unlawful and a violation of this chapter for a person to transfer
                                                                                                                    the beneficial ownership of or a continuous right to use a valet parking
                                                                                                                    permit.
                                                                                                                    (h) Any person violating any of the provisions of this article or the
                                                                                                                    regulations hereunder or the terms and conditions of any valet parking permit
                                                                                                                    issued hereunder is deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction
                                                                                                                    thereof, shall be punishable in accordance with
                                                                                                                    Title 1, Chapter 2 of this Code.
                                                                                                                    (a) The Alarm Administrator may assess the alarm user a fine for a false alarm
                                                                                                                    occurring at that alarm user's alarm site. The amount of said fines for the
                                                                                                                    listed categories shall be established by City Council and may be subsequently
                                                                                                                    amended by resolution of the City Council.
                                                                                                                    (1) Burglar false alarm fines.
                                                                                                                    (2) Robbery false alarm fines.
                                                                                                                    (3) Panic false alarm fines.
                                                                                                                    (b) If a false alarm fine is not paid within thirty (30) days after the invoice
                                                                                                                    is mailed, a late charge as established by resolution of the City Council shall
                                                                                                                    be imposed.
                                                                                                                    (c) Fines for false alarms from non-registered alarm systems. For person(s)
                                                                                                                    operating a non-registered alarm system incurring a false alarm, fines shall be
                                                                                                                    imposed as established by resolution of the City Council.
                                                                                                                    (f) The alarm installation company shall be assessed a fine in an amount
                                                                                                                    established by resolution of the City Council if the officer responding to a
                                                                                                                    false alarm determines that an on-site employee of the alarm installation
Sec.                                                                                                                company directly caused the false alarm. Such false alarms are not included in
4-9.110 Alarm Systems  (§ 1, Ord. 3151, eff. February 20, 2020)                                     False Alarms   the total number of false alarms for the alarm user, nor is the alarm user to
                                                                                                                    be held liable for any false alarm fine resulting from such alarm activation.
                                                                                                                    (g) A fine in an amount established by resolution of the City Council shall be
                                                                                                                    imposed against any monitoring company that fails to verify alarm system
                                                                                                                    signals as required in §
                                                                                                                    4-9.090(c)(2) of this chapter.
                                                                                                                    (i) All registration fees, renewal registration fees or fines assessed under
                                                                                                                    this section are due within thirty (30) days of written notice unless otherwise
                                                                                                                    noted. A late charge in an amount established by resolution of the City Council
                                                                                                                    shall be imposed for each individual fee or fine due that is not paid within
                                                                                                                    thirty (30) days.(j) The Alarm Administrator may waive the false alarm fine for
                                                                                                                    the first chargeable false alarm during the alarm user's one-year registration
                                                                                                                    period, pending the successful completion of the online alarm user awareness
                                                                                                                    class available through the Alarm Administrator. In order to have the fine
                                                                                                                    waived, the alarm user must have successfully completed the class within thirty
                                                                                                                    (30) days of the fine notice. Alarm users without online access may request the
                                                                                                                    online school and test be mailed to them. Reasonable additional time to
                                                                                                                    complete the alarm user awareness class shall be allowed for mail delivery.
                                                                                                                    (b) It is a violation of this section for a person to operate a burglar alarm
                                                                                                                    system during the period in which the alarm registration is suspended. It is a
                                                                                                                    violation of this chapter for a monitoring company to make an alarm dispatch
                                                                                                                    request to a burglar alarm site after the monitoring company's Alarm Response
                                                                                                                    Manager (ARM) has been notified by electronic mail by the Alarm Administrator
                                                                                                                    that the registration for that alarm site has been suspended. A grace period of
                                                                                                     Suspended      five (5) business days after the ARM's notification shall be granted for the
4-9.130 Alarm Systems  (§ 1, Ord. 3151, eff. February 20, 2020)                                     Alarms         monitoring company to comply. The alarm monitoring company shall be assessed a
                                                                                                                    fine in an amount established by resolution of the City Council for requesting
                                                                                                                    a burglar alarm dispatch request on a suspended alarm site.
                                                                                                                    (c) False alarm fines under suspension status. In addition to the fines set
                                                                                                                    forth in §
                                                                                                                    4-9.110(a), a supplemental fine is hereby imposed upon any person operating a
                                                                                                                    suspended burglar alarm system. The amount of said fines shall be established
                                                                                                                    by resolution of the City Council.
                                                                                                     It shall be
                                                                                                     unlawful for
                                                                                                     any persons,
                                                                                                     firm or
                                                                                                     corporation to
                                                                                                     erect,
                                                                                                     construct,
                                                                                                     enlarge,
                                                                                                     alter, move,
                                                                                                     improve,
        Security                                                                                     convert, or    Any person, firm, or corporation violating any of the provisions of this
Sec.    Standards for  (§ 1, Ord. 2482, eff. October 4, 1990)                                       equip, use,    chapter is guilty of a misdemeanor and each offense is punishable by a fine of
4-11.03 Buildings                                                                                    occupy or      not more than One Thousand Dollars ($1,000.00), or by confinement in jail for
                                                                                                     maintain any   not more than six (6) months, or by both fine and confinement in jail.
                                                                                                     building or
                                                                                                     structure in
                                                                                                     the City, or
                                                                                                     cause same to
                                                                                                     be done,
                                                                                                     contrary to or
                                                                                                     in violation
                                                                                                     of any of the
                                                                                                     provisions of
                                                                                                     this chapter.
                                                                                                                    (a) Civil penalties shall be assessed against all persons liable for the City’s
                                                                                                                    intervention to abate a gathering constituting a public nuisance as follows:
                                                                                                                       (1) For the second response in any ninety (90)-day period the penalty shall
                                                                                                                    be the total sum of Seven Hundred Fifty Dollars ($750).
                                                                                                                       (2) For the third response in any ninety (90)-day period the penalty shall
                                                                                                                    be the total sum of One Thousand Five Hundred Dollars ($1,500).
                                                                                                                       (3) For any further response in any ninety (90)-day period the penalty shall
                                                                                                                    be the total sum of Two Thousand Five Hundred Dollars ($2,500) for each such
                                                                                                     Penalties for  further response.
        Schedule of                                                                                  cost recovery     (4) The penalties that are provided herein shall be in addition to any other
Sec.    civil and /or  (§ 1, Ord. 2889, eff. March 6, 2008, as amended by § 1, Ord. 2940, eff.     for police     penalties or costs assessments imposed pursuant to provisions of the Ontario
4-12.10 criminal       October 5, 2011)                                                              services at    Municipal Code or other applicable laws, regulations or ordinances for
        penalties                                                                                    large parties  particular violations committed during the course of an event which constitutes
                                                                                                     and gatherings a public nuisance under this ordinance.
                                                                                                                    (b) The City shall bill all persons liable for the penalties by mail by sending
                                                                                                                    a letter in substantially the form attached to Ordinance No. 2889 as Exhibit
                                                                                                                    “B”. Payment of the penalties shall be due within thirty (30) days of the date
                                                                                                                    the bill is deposited in the mail. If full payment is not received within the
                                                                                                                    required time for payment, the bill will be delinquent, and all persons liable
                                                                                                                    for the penalties shall be charged interest at the maximum legal rate from the
                                                                                                                    date the payment period expires and a further civil penalty in the amount of
                                                                                                                    Two Hundred Fifty Dollars ($250).
                                                                                                                    (a) The police services fee shall include:
                                                                                                                    (1) Personnel cost at the rate of Seventy Five Dollars ($75.00) per hour per
                                                                                                                    police officer;
                                                                                                                    (2) Actual cost of any medical treatment required by a police officer for
                                                                                                                    injuries sustained during a special security assignment; and
        Loud or Unruly                                                                               Cost Recovery  (3) The cost of repairing or replacing any City equipment or property damaged
        Parties,                                                                                     for Police     or destroyed during a special security assignment.
Sec.    Gatherings or  (Ord. 2889, eff. March 6, 2008, as amended by § 1, Ord. 2940, eff. October 5,Services at    (b) Except as provided in subsection (c) of this section, the police services
4-12.04 other Similar  2011)                                                                         Large Parties  fee shall not exceed Five Hundred Dollars ($500.00) for any special security
        Events                                                                                       on Private     assignment.
                                                                                                     Property       (c) The City reserves the right to seek a police services fee in excess of Five
                                                                                                                    Hundred Dollars ($500.00) against any responsible person who, by his or her own
                                                                                                                    actions, causes injury to a police officer or damage to or destruction of any
                                                                                                                    City equipment or property. Nothing contained in this Chapter shall in any way
                                                                                                                    preclude the City from seeking damages against any person to the extent
                                                                                                                    otherwise permitted by law.
Sec.    Parking on     (§ 1, Ord. 2552, eff. September 2, 1993, as amended by § 2, Ord. 2942, eff. Parking on     A person or entity violating any provision or failing to comply with any
4-13.04 Unpaved        December 1, 2011)                                                             Unpaved        regulation of this chapter subject to fines and penalties set forth and amended
        Surfaces                                                                                     Surfaces       by resolution of the City Council.
                                                                                                                    Sec.
                                                                                                                    4-14.20. It is unlawful for any person to violate any provision or to fail to
                                                                                                                    comply with any of the requirements of this chapter. Any person violating any
                                                                                                                    of the provisions or failing to comply with any of the mandatory requirements
Sec.                                                                                                                of this chapter is guilty of a misdemeanor. Sec.
4-                                                                                                                  4-14.21. (a) Any person convicted of a misdemeanor under the provisions of this
14.20,  Newsracks      (§ 2, Ord. 2774, eff. June 5, 2003)                                          Violation of   chapter, unless provision is otherwise herein made, shall be punishable by a
Sec.                                                                                                 Newsrack Code  fine of not more than One Thousand Dollars ($1,000.00) or by imprisonment for a
4-14.21                                                                                                             period of not more than six (6) months or by both such fine and imprisonment.
                                                                                                                    (b) Any person found liable for a civil penalty for any violation of this
                                                                                                                    chapter shall be required to pay a civil penalty provided on the schedule of
                                                                                                                    penalties, late payment penalties, administrative fees and other related fees,
                                                                                                                    costs and charges as shall be established by ordinance or resolution of the
                                                                                                                    City Council.
        No                                                                                           No             Violation of §
Sec.    Solicitation   (§ 1, Ord. 2723, eff. October 5, 2000, as amended by § 4, Ord. 2954, eff.   Solicitation   4-15.04 of this chapter is hereby deemed to be a misdemeanor and punishable
4-15.05 of Employment  July 19, 2012)                                                                of Employment  according to the provisions of
        on Public                                                                                    on Public      Chapter 2 of Title 1 of this Municipal Code.
        Rights-of-Way                                                                                Rights-of-Way
                                                                                                                    Any towing carrier, driver or other employee thereof violating the provisions
        Regulation of                                                                                Regulation of  of this chapter shall be guilty of a misdemeanor or an infraction, in the City
Sec.    Towing         (§ 1, Ord. 2803, eff. September 16, 2004, § 2, Ord. 3008, eff. January 1,   Towing         Attorney's discretion. In addition, any towing carrier or towing company
4-19.18 Services       2015)                                                                         Services       violating the provisions of its towing services agreement or this chapter shall
                                                                                                                    be subject to revocation or suspension of its privileges to provide towing
                                                                                                                    services to the City.
                                                                                                                    (a) Violation of this Chapter is either an infraction or misdemeanor in the
        Hosting,                                                                                     Hosting,       discretion of the citing officer, City Prosecutor, or City Attorney's Office,
        Permitting,                                                                                  Permitting,    punishable as set forth in §
        Allowing a                                                                                   Allowing a     1-2.01 of this Code. Violations of this Chapter may be charged as either
        Gathering                                                                                    Gathering      infractions or misdemeanors in the discretion of the citing officer, City
Sec.    where Minors   (§ 2, Ord. 2889, eff. March 6, 2008)                                         where Minors   Prosecutor, or City Attorney's Office.
4-22.05 Consuming                                                                                    Consuming      (b) Civil penalties shall be no less than Two Hundred Fifty ($250.00) for the
        Alcoholic                                                                                    Alcoholic      first violation, Five Hundred Dollars ($500.00) for the second violation and
        Beverages                                                                                    Beverages      One Thousand Dollars ($1,000.00) for each subsequent violation by the same
        Prohibited                                                                                   Prohibited     person occurring within one year of the first violation.
                                                                                                                    (c) Nothing in this Chapter in any way limits any other remedy that may be
                                                                                                                    available to the City, or any penalty that may be imposed by the City."
                                                                                                                    Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall be guilty of a
                                                                                                     Penalty for    misdemeanor, and upon conviction thereof, the penalty shall be a fine of not
Sec.    Penalties      (§ 1, Ord. 2941, eff. November 18, 2011)                                     Registered Sex more than one thousand dollars ($1,000) or imprisonment in the county jail for
4-23.04                                                                                              Offender       a period of not more than six (6) months or by both such fine and imprisonment.
                                                                                                     Prohibitions   Other penalties set forth in the California Penal Code and/or Municipal Code
                                                                                                                    may also be applicable.
                                                                                                                    (a) Each and every violation of this section shall constitute a separate
                                                                                                     Unlawful       violation and shall be subject to all remedies and enforcement measures
Sec.    Violations;                                                                                  possession of  authorized by the Ontario Municipal Code. Each and every catalytic converter
4-24.03 misdemeanor    (§ 3, Ord. 3237, eff. January 19, 2023)                                      a catalytic    unlawfully possessed is a separate violation of this section.
                                                                                                     converter      (b) It is unlawful and a misdemeanor subject to punishment in accordance with
                                                                                                                    Chapter 1-2.01 of Title 1 of this Code, for any person to violate any provision
                                                                                                                    of this section.
Sec.    No Crowd                                                                                     No Crowd       Patrons or performers engaging in such prohibited activities shall be guilty of
5-4.04  Surfing or     (§ 1, Ord. 2703, eff. December 2, 1999)                                      Surfing or     an infraction and subject to the penalty provisions of §
        Stage Diving                                                                                 Stage Diving   1-2.02 of this Code.
Sec.    No Trespassing (§ 1 , Ord. 1678, eff. December 12, 1967, as amended by § 2, Ord. 1941, eff.No Trespassing (d) A violation of any provision of this section is a misdemeanor.
5-9.01                 June 2, 1977)
Sec.    No Public      (§ 2, Ord. 1670, eff. November 22, 1967, as amended by § 4, Ord. 2150, eff. No Public      (g) Any person in violation of this section shall be guilty of an infraction.
5-11.02 Consumption of November 5, 1981, § 1, Ord. 2374, eff. December 18, 1986, § 1, Ord. 2594,   Consumption of Alcoholic beverage licensees in violation of subsection (d)(1) and (d)(2) shall
        Alcohol        eff. September 14, 1995, and § 1, Ord. 2734, eff. April 5, 2001)             Alcohol        also be guilty of an infraction.
                                                                                                                    (a) Any person under the age of eighteen (18) years who enters, visits, or
                                                                                                                    remains in any public billiard parlor or public poolroom without a parent or
                                                                                                                    guardian shall be guilty of an infraction. (b) Every proprietor or any other
                                                                                                                    person having charge or control of any public billiard parlor or public
Sec.    No Minors in   (§ 5, Ord. 1670, eff. November 22, 1967, as amended by § 9, Ord. 2094, eff. No Minors in   poolroom who permits any person under the age of eighteen (18) years to be or
5-11.03 Poolrooms      August 14, 1980)                                                              Poolrooms      remain in, enter, or visit such public billiard parlor or public poolroom
                                                                                                                    without a parent or guardian shall be guilty of an infraction. (c) Any person,
                                                                                                                    as employer or otherwise, who sends any person under the age of eighteen (18)
                                                                                                                    years, or permits, requests, or engages any such minor, to carry any package,
                                                                                                                    letter, note, or telegraph message to or from any public billiard parlor or
                                                                                                                    public poolroom shall be guilty of an infraction.
                                                                                                                    (a) A fine of not more than Fifty Dollars ($50.00) for the first violation of
Sec.    Item Pricing                                                                                 Item Pricing   any provision; (b) A fine of not more than One Hundred Dollars ($100.00) for a
5-19.04 Required With  (§ 1, Ord. 2086, eff. June 19, 1980)                                         Required With  second violation of the same provision within one year; and (c) A fine of not
        Exceptions                                                                                   Exceptions     more than Two Hundred and Fifty Dollars ($250.00) for each additional violation
                                                                                                                    of the same provision within one year.
                                                                                                     No person,
                                                                                                     either as
                                                                                                     owner or
                                                                                                     lessee, or as
                                                                                                     employee,
                                                                                                     agent,
                                                                                                     director, or
                                                                                                     officer of
                                                                                                     owner or
                                                                                                     lessee, shall
                                                                                                     operate or
Sec.    Picture                                                                                      maintain any   Any person violating any of the provisions of §
5-20.03 Arcades        (§ 1, Ord. 2253, eff. December 1, 1983)                                      picture arcade 5-20.02 of this Code shall be guilty of a misdemeanor.
                                                                                                     unless all
                                                                                                     viewing areas
                                                                                                     are visible
                                                                                                     from a
                                                                                                     continuous
                                                                                                     viewing aisle
                                                                                                     and are not
                                                                                                     obscured by
                                                                                                     any curtain,
                                                                                                     door, wall or
                                                                                                     other
                                                                                                     enclosure.
                                                                                                                    (a) The owner, lessee, occupant, or other person having charge of any such
Sec.    Property                                                                                     Property       buildings or premises who maintains any public nuisance, as defined in § 5-
5-22.08 Appearance -   (§ 3, Ord. 3046, eff. April 14, 2016)                                        Appearance -   22.01(a) and (d) of the OMC, or who neglects to comply with the Notice of
        Nuisance                                                                                     Nuisance       Violation pursuant to § 5-22.04 (Notice of Violation) of the OMC, is guilty of
                                                                                                                    an infraction.
Sec.    Property                                                                                     Property       (b) Any occupant or lessee in possession of any such building or structure who
5-22.08 Appearance -   (§ 3, Ord. 3046, eff. April 14, 2016)                                        Appearance -   refuses to vacate the building or structure, in accordance with an order given
        Nuisance                                                                                     Nuisance       as herein provided, is guilty of an infraction.
Sec.    Property                                                                                     Property       (c) Any person who removes any notice or order posted as herein required for
5-22.08 Appearance -   (§ 3, Ord. 3046, eff. April 14, 2016)                                        Appearance -   the purpose of interfering with the enforcement of these provisions shall be
        Nuisance                                                                                     Nuisance       guilty of an infraction.
                                                                                                                    (f) Upon entry of a second or subsequent civil or criminal judgment within a
Sec.    Property                                                                                     Property       two- (2-)year period finding that an owner of property is responsible for a
5-22.08 Appearance -   (§ 3, Ord. 3046, eff. April 14, 2016)                                        Appearance -   public nuisance, except for conditions abated pursuant to California Health &
        Nuisance                                                                                     Nuisance       Safety Code § 17980, the owner shall be liable to the City for treble the costs
                                                                                                                    of the abatement.
                                                                                                                    It shall be unlawful for any owner, operator or manager of a hotel or motel in
                                                                                                     Failure to     the City to permit any violation of any provision of this chapter or to fail to
        Regulation of                                                                                keep a         comply with any requirement of this chapter. Any owner, operator or manager
Sec.    Public Lodging (§ 1, Ord. 2607, eff. February 1, 1996, as amended by § 1, Ord. 2955, eff.  register as    violating any such provision or failing to comply with any such requirement of
5-24.04 Facilities     August 4, 2012)                                                               required by    this chapter shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. Any owner, operator or manager
                                                                                                     the Code, etc. convicted of a misdemeanor pursuant to the provisions of this chapter shall be
                                                                                                                    punishable as provided in §
                                                                                                                    1-2.01 of this Code.
                                                                                                                    Sec.
                                                                                                                    5-25.08 Pursuant to Cal. Bus. & Prof. Code § 22435.7, any owner that fails to
                                                                                                                    retrieve its abandoned cart(s) within three (3) business days after receiving
Sec.                                                                                                                notice from the City, shall pay the City's administrative costs for retrieving
5-                                                                                                   Owners must    the cart(s) and providing the notification to the owner. Any owner who fails to
25.08,  Shopping Cart  (§ 1, Ord. 2759, eff. August 15, 2002)                                       retrieve       retrieve abandoned carts in accordance with this chapter in excess of three (3)
Sec.    Regulations                                                                                  abandoned      times during a six (6) month period, shall be subject to a Fifty Dollar
5-25.09                                                                                              carts.         ($50.00) fine for each occurrence. An occurrence includes all carts owned by
                                                                                                                    the owner that are impounded by the City in a one-day period. Sec.
                                                                                                                    5-25.09. Pursuant to State law, any cart not reclaimed from the City within
                                                                                                                    thirty (30) days after notification to the owner shall be sold or otherwise
                                                                                                                    disposed of by the City.
                                                                                                                    (a) Vehicles parked on the designated streets during the time of temporary
                                                                                                                    closure shall be towed pursuant to Cal. Veh. Code § 22651(n). (b) Signs giving
                                                                                                                    notice of the temporary closure shall be posted prior to enforcement of this
                                                                                                                    section, pursuant to Cal. Veh. Code § 21103. Such signs shall be posted at all
                                                                                                                    entrances to the closed streets. Signs at street entrances shall advise that a
                                                                                                                    street is temporarily closed to vehicles and pedestrians; signs shall further
                                                                                                                    advise that the closed street is a tow-away zone, that violators will be cited
                                                                                                                    for a misdemeanor offense, that violators are subject to arrest, and that the
                                                                                                                    maximum penalty is a One Thousand Dollar ($1,000) fine and six (6) months in
        Temporary                                                                                                   jail. (c) With the exception of commercial vehicles making deliveries to and
        Street                                                                                       Temporary      from commercial properties adjacent to the designated streets and individuals
Sec.    Closures Due   (§ 1, Ord. 2713, eff. June 1, 2000, as amended by § 2, Ord. 2753, eff.      street         employed by businesses adjacent to the designated streets and showing
5-26.04 to Continuing  February 14, 2002)                                                            closure;       identification, no person shall drive, stop, or park a vehicle, or be a
        Criminal                                                                                     violation      pedestrian on a designated street, including the adjacent sidewalk, that has
        Activity                                                                                                    been temporarily closed pursuant to Cal. Veh. Code § 21101.4(b). All
                                                                                                                    individuals violating the temporary street closure of the designated streets
                                                                                                                    are subject to arrest. Violation of this section constitutes a misdemeanor with
                                                                                                                    a fine of One Thousand Dollars ($1,000) per violation. This chapter shall be
                                                                                                                    operative for eighteen (18) months, pursuant to Cal. Veh. Code § 21101.4(b),
                                                                                                                    subject to extension by the City Council. The violator of the temporary street
                                                                                                                    closure shall be liable for a police services fee whenever the City's police
                                                                                                                    personnel respond to, detain and supervise a violator of temporary street
                                                                                                                    closures. The City Council shall establish the amount of the police services
                                                                                                                    fee by resolution.
                                                                                                                    It shall be unlawful for any person to be knowingly present, as a spectator, at
                                                                                                                    any motor vehicle speed contest or exhibition conducted on a public street for
                                                                                                     Spectators     the purpose of watching such speed contest or exhibition as it progresses or
        Spectators                                                                                   prohibited at  for watching preparations being made for such a speed contest or exhibition.
Sec.    prohibited at  (§ 2, Ord. 2749, eff. December 6, 2001)                                      speed contests Violations of this section shall be a misdemeanor. The City Attorney, City
5-26.07 speed contests                                                                               or             Prosecutor, or District Attorney shall have the authority to prosecute any
        or exhibitions                                                                               exhibitions.   violation of this section as an infraction in the interests of justice.
                                                                                                                    Additionally, the court may determine that the offense is an infraction in
                                                                                                                    which the case shall proceed as if the defendant has been arraigned on an
                                                                                                                    infraction complaint.
                                                                                                                    (a) It is unlawful for any person to violate any provision or fail to comply
                                                                                                                    with any requirements of this chapter. A violation of this chapter shall by
                                                                                                                    punished by:
Sec.    Sidewalk       (§ 3, Ord, 3123, eff. December 18, 2018, as amended by § 2, Ord. 3146, eff. Sidewalk       (1) An administrative fine not exceeding one hundred dollars ($100) for a first
5-31.07 Vending        December 19, 2019)                                                            Vending        violation.
                                                                                                                    (2) An administrative fine not exceeding two hundred dollars ($200) for a
                                                                                                                    second violation within one (1) year of the first violation.
                                                                                                                    (3) An administrative fine not exceeding five hundred dollars ($500) for each
                                                                                                                    additional violation within one (1) year of the first violation.
                                                                                                                    (a) Any person who has violated any code of conduct may be subject to the
                                                                                                                    suspension of his or her borrowing, visitation, and/or participation privileges
                                                                                                                    for a period of time as provided by each respective code of conduct.
                                                                                                                    (b) Any person subject to suspension of his or her borrowing, visitation, and/
                                                                                                                    or participation privileges, as authorized by subsection (a) above, shall
                                                                                                     City           remain subject to such suspension during the pendency of any administrative or
                                                                                                     Libraries,     judicial appeal.
                                                                                                     Museum of      (c) Any person who fails or refuses to leave the City facility after being
                                                                                                     History and    given the requisite notice, warning, and direction to leave, shall be guilty of
                                                                                                     Art, and       a misdemeanor which shall be punishable by a fine not exceeding One Thousand
Sec.    Penalties      (§ 2, Ord. 3194, eff. December 16, 2021)                                     Recreation and Dollars ($1,000) per violation, or by imprisonment in the County Jail for a
5-32.04                                                                                              Community      period not exceeding six (6) months, or by both such fine and imprisonment.
                                                                                                     Services       (d) Any person who returns to the City facility during any suspension period
                                                                                                     Community      shall be guilty of a misdemeanor which shall be punishable by a fine not
                                                                                                     Facilities     exceeding One Thousand Dollars ($1,000) per violation, or by imprisonment in
                                                                                                     Rules          the County Jail for a period not exceeding six (6) months, or by both such fine
                                                                                                                    and imprisonment.
                                                                                                                    (e) Each such person shall be guilty of a separate offense for each and every
                                                                                                                    day during any portion of which any violation of or failure to comply with any
                                                                                                                    provision of this chapter, is committed, continued, or permitted by such person
                                                                                                                    and shall be punishable accordingly.
                                                                                                                    (f) The penalties contained in this section are cumulative.
                                                                                                                    (a) An administrative fine not exceeding one hundred dollars ($100) for a first
        Amount of                                                                                    Barking dog or violation.
Sec.    barking dog or (§ 3, Ord. 3229, eff. January 19, 2023)                                      noisy animal   (b) An administrative fine not exceeding two hundred dollars ($200) for a
6-1.256 noisy animal                                                                                 violations and second violation within one (1) year of the first violation.
        civil fines                                                                                  civil fines    (c) An administrative fine not exceeding five hundred dollars ($500) for each
                                                                                                                    additional violation within one (1) year of the first violation.
        Standard for                                                                                 Standard for   (a) Any person who violates or fails to comply with any provision of this
        Care and                                                                                     Care and       article shall be subject to any of the penalties and procedures set forth in
Sec.    Treatment for                                                                                Treatment for  Chapter 2 of Title 1 of the Municipal Code.
6-1.403 Sale of        (§ 2, Ord. 3045, eff. April 14, 2016)                                        Sale of        (b) The provisions and procedures concerning administrative citations set forth
        Animals at                                                                                   Animals at     in Chapter 5 of Title 1 of the Municipal Code shall apply to any administrative
        Swap Meets                                                                                   Swap Meets     citations issued for violations of this article. A violation of this article
                                                                                                                    shall constitute a “transient” violation within the meaning of that chapter.
Title   Business                                                                                     Business       (b) Each violation of this article will be considered an infraction and subject
6, Ch.  Recycling      (§ 3, Ord. 2806, eff. January 21, 2005, as amended by § 5, Ord. 3039, eff.  Recycling      to penalties listed in §
3, Art. Requirements   March 3, 2016)                                                                Requirements   1-2.01.
6
                                                                                                                    (a) Violation of any provision of this Article shall constitute grounds for
                                                                                                                    issuance of a notice of violation and assessment of a fine by a Enforcement
                                                                                                                    Officer. Enforcement actions under this Article are issuance of an
                                                                                                                    administrative citation and assessment of a fine. The procedures in § 1.2.01 et
                                                                                                                    seq. shall govern the imposition, enforcement, collection, and review of
                                                                                                                    administrative citations issued to enforce this Article 8 and any rule or
                                                                                                                    regulation adopted pursuant to this Article 8, except as otherwise indicated in
                                                                                                                    this Article 8.
                                                                                                                    (b) Other remedies allowed by law may be used, including civil action or
                                                                                                                    prosecution as misdemeanor or infraction. City may pursue civil actions in the
                                                                                                                    California courts to seek recovery of unpaid administrative citations.
                                                                                                                    (c) Penalty amounts for types of violations. The penalty levels are as follows:
                                                                                                                    (1) For a first violation, the amount of the base penalty shall be Fifty
                                                                                                                    Dollars ($50.00) to One Hundred Dollars ($100.00) per violation.
                                                                                                                    (2) For a second violation, the amount of the base penalty shall be One Hundred
                                                                                                                    Dollars ($100.00) to Two Hundred Dollars ($200.00) per violation.
                                                                                                                    (3) For a third or subsequent violation, the amount of the base penalty shall
                                                                                                                    be Two Hundred Fifty Dollars ($250.00) to Five Hundred Dollars ($500.00) per
                                                                                                                    violation.
                                                                                                                    (d) Factors considered in determining penalty amount. The following factors
                                                                                                                    shall be used to determine the amount of the penalty for each violation within
                                                                                                                    the appropriate penalty amount range:
                                                                                                                    (1) The nature, circumstances, and severity of the violation(s).
                                                                                                                    (2) The violator's ability to pay.
                                                                                                                    (3) The willfulness of the violator's misconduct.
Sec.    Enforcement    (§ 1, Ord. 3187, eff. January 1, 2022)                                       Enforcement    (4) Whether the violator took measures to avoid or mitigate violations of this
6-3.811                                                                                                             chapter.
                                                                                                                    (5) Evidence of any economic benefit resulting from the violation(s).
                                                                                                                    (6) The deterrent effect of the penalty on the violator.
                                                                                                                    (7) Whether the violation(s) were due to conditions outside the control of the
                                                                                                                    violator.
                                                                                                                    (e) Appeals process. Persons receiving an administrative citation containing a
                                                                                                                    penalty for an uncorrected violation may request a hearing to appeal the
                                                                                                                    citation pursuant to §
                                                                                                                    1-4.01 et seq.
                                                                                                                    (f) Education period for non-compliance. Beginning January 1, 2022 and through
                                                                                                                    December 31, 2023, the City will conduct inspections, route reviews or waste
                                                                                                                    evaluations, and compliance reviews, depending upon the type of regulated
                                                                                                                    entity, to determine compliance, and if the City determines that organic waste
                                                                                                                    generator, self-hauler, hauler, tier one commercial edible food generator, food
                                                                                                                    recovery organization, food recovery service, or other entity is not in
                                                                                                                    compliance, it shall provide educational materials to the entity describing its
                                                                                                                    obligations under this Article 8 and a notice that compliance is required by
                                                                                                                    January 1, 2022, and that violations may be subject to administrative civil
                                                                                                                    penalties starting on January 1, 2024.
                                                                                                                    (g) Civil penalties for non-compliance. Beginning January 1, 2024, if the City
                                                                                                                    determines that an organic waste generator, self-hauler, hauler, tier one or
                                                                                                                    tier two commercial edible food generator, food recovery organization, food
                                                                                                                    recovery service, or other entity is not in compliance with this Article 8, it
                                                                                                                    shall document the noncompliance or violation, issue a Notice of Violation, and
                                                                                                                    take enforcement action pursuant to this §
                                                                                                                    6-3.811.
                                                                                                                    It shall be unlawful for any person or entity to violate any provision of the
                                                                                                                    City Health and Safety Code. Every act prohibited or declared unlawful by the
                                                                                                                    City Health and Safety Code, as well as every failure to perform an act made
                                                                                                                    mandatory by the City Health and Safety Code, is punishable as a misdemeanor,
                                                                                                                    provided, however, that the City Attorney or citing officer may specify in the
Sec.    Health &       (§ 4M, Ord. 1613, eff. September 16, 1965, as amended by § 1, Ord. 2642, effHealth &       accusatory pleadings that it shall be an infraction whenever they shall
6-4.07  Safety Code    October 16, 1997)                                                             Safety Code    determine that the interests of justice so require. Every person who causes,
                                                                                                                    aids, abets or conceals a violation of the City Health and Safety Code is
                                                                                                                    guilty of violating the City Health and Safety Code. Except as provided for
                                                                                                                    herein, all violations of the City Health and Safety Code shall be prosecuted
                                                                                                                    by the City pursuant to the terms and conditions of
                                                                                                                    Chapter 2 of Title 1 of the City Code.
                                                                                                                    (a) The cost of abatement in front of or upon each parcel of land and the costs
                                                                                                     Costs of       incurred by the City in enforcing abatement upon the parcels, including
        Weeds and                                                                                    abatement,     investigation, boundary determination, measurement, clerical, legal, and other
Sec.    Refuse         (§ 2, ord. 2956, eff. October 4, 2012)                                       fines and      related costs, as well as any fines or other financial penalties issued against
6-9.12  Abatement                                                                                    penalties as   the property, shall constitute a lien against the parcel and may be collected
                                                                                                     liens against  as a special assessment as specified in § 1-4.05 of this Municipal Code, and
                                                                                                     parcel         shall constitute a personal charge of the recipient of the notices required by
                                                                                                                    this chapter.
                                                                                                                    (a) Every person, except those persons who are specifically exempted by the
                                                                                                                    provisions of this chapter, whether acting as an individual, owner, employee of
                                                                                                                    the owner, or operator or employee of the operator, or whether acting as a mere
                                                                                                                    helper for the owner, employee, or operator, or whether acting as a participant
                                                                                                                    or worker in any way who gives massages or conducts a massage establishment or
Sec. 6-                                                                                                             room, or who gives or administers, or who practices the giving or administering
10.14   Massage        (§ 1, Ord. 2762, eff. August 16, 2002)                                       Massage        of steam baths, electric light baths, electric tub baths, shower baths, sponge
                                                                                                                    baths, vapor baths, fomentations, sunbathes, mineral baths, alcohol rubs,
                                                                                                                    Russian, Swedish, or Turkish baths, or any other type of baths, salt glows, or
                                                                                                                    any type of therapy, or who does or practices any of the other services or acts
                                                                                                                    set forth in this chapter, without first obtaining a permit and paying for a
                                                                                                                    license to do so from the City, or who shall violate any provisions of this
                                                                                                                    chapter, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor.
                                                                                                                    (b) Any owner, operator, manager, or permittee in charge or in control of a
Sec. 6-                                                                                                             massage establishment who knowingly employs a person performing as a massage
10.14   Massage        (§ 1, Ord. 2762, eff. August 16, 2002)                                       Massage        therapist, as defined in this chapter, who is not in possession of a valid
                                                                                                                    permit or who allows such an employee to perform, operate, or practice within
                                                                                                                    such a place of business shall be guilty of a misdemeanor.
                                                                                                                    (c) Any massage establishment operated, conducted, or maintained contrary to
                                                                                                                    the provisions of this chapter shall be and the same is hereby declared to be
                                                                                                                    unlawful and a public nuisance, and the City may, in addition to or in lieu of
Sec. 6-                                                                                                             prosecuting a criminal action hereunder, commence actions or proceedings for
10.14   Massage        (§ 1, Ord. 2762, eff. August 16, 2002)                                       Massage        the abatement, removal, and enjoinment thereof in the manner provided by law
                                                                                                                    and shall take such other steps and apply to such courts as may have
                                                                                                                    jurisdiction to grant such relief as will abate or remove such massage
                                                                                                                    establishment and restrain and enjoin any person from operating, conducting, or
                                                                                                                    maintaining a massage establishment contrary to the provisions of this chapter.
                                                                                                                    No person shall violate any provision or fail to comply with any of the
                                                                                                                    requirements of this chapter, the provisions of the San Bernardino County Code,
                                                                                                                    or any secondary code referred to therein. Any person violating any of the
        Control of                                                                                   Control of     provisions of filing to comply with any of the mandatory requirements of this
        Blowing Sand                                                                                 Blowing Sand   chapter, the provisions of the San Bernardino County Code, or any secondary
Sec.    and Prevention (§ 2, Ord. 2138, eff. August 20, 1981)                                       and Prevention code referred to therein, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, and upon
6-12.07 of Soil                                                                                      of Soil        conviction, shall be punishable by a fine of not more than Five Hundred Dollars
        Erosion by                                                                                   Erosion by     ($500.00), or by imprisonment for a period not exceeding six (6) months, or by
        Wind                                                                                         Wind           both such fine and imprisonment. Each person shall be guilty of a separate
                                                                                                                    offense for each and every day during any portion of which the violation of any
                                                                                                                    provision is committed, continued or permitted by such person, and shall be
                                                                                                                    punishable accordingly.
                                                                                                     (a) It shall
                                                                                                     be unlawful to
                                                                                                     willfully      (d) Violation of any of the provisions of this chapter shall be deemed an
Sec.    Smoking        (§ 1, Ord. 2389, eff. June 18, 1987)                                         mutilate or    infraction which is punishable under the applicable provisions of §
6-13.14                                                                                              destroy any    1-2.01 of this Code
                                                                                                     signs required
                                                                                                     by this
                                                                                                     chapter
                                                                                                     (b) It shall
                                                                                                     be unlawful
                                                                                                     for any person
                                                                                                     who is         (d) Violation of any of the provisions of this chapter shall be deemed an
Sec.    Smoking        (§ 1, Ord. 2389, eff. June 18, 1987)                                         required by    infraction which is punishable under the applicable provisions of §
6-13.14                                                                                              this chapter   1-2.01 of this Code
                                                                                                     to post no
                                                                                                     smoking signs
                                                                                                     to willfully
                                                                                                     fail to do so.
                                                                                                     (c) It shall
                                                                                                     be unlawful
Sec.                                                                                                 for any person (d) Violation of any of the provisions of this chapter shall be deemed an
6-13.14 Smoking        (§ 1, Ord. 2389, eff. June 18, 1987)                                         to smoke in    infraction which is punishable under the applicable provisions of §
                                                                                                     any area       1-2.01 of this Code
                                                                                                     posted as a no
                                                                                                     smoking area.
                                                                                                                    (a) Each incident in violation of this chapter is an infraction subject to:
Sec.                                                                                                                (1) A fine of $50 for a first violation.
6-      Smoke-free     (§ 2, Ord. 3112, eff. September 20, 2018)                                    Smoke-free     (2) A fine not exceeding $100 for a second violation of this chapter within one
13A.05  Parks                                                                                        Parks          (1) year.
                                                                                                                    (3) A fine not exceeding $200 for each additional violation of this chapter
                                                                                                                    within one (1) year.
                                                                                                                    Any parent or other legal guardian who consents to, permits, or otherwise
                                                                                                                    knowingly allows her, or his child under the age of eighteen (18) to possess a
Sec.    Graffiti       (§ 1, Ord. 2563, eff. January 20, 1994)                                      Graffiti       graffiti implement shall be personally liable for any and all costs to any
6-14.14                                                                                                             person incurred in connection with the removal of graffiti caused by the child,
                                                                                                                    or by the graffiti implement, and for all attorney's fees and court costs
                                                                                                                    incurred in connection with the civil prosecution of any claim for damages.
Sec.    Graffiti       (§ 1, Ord. 2563, eff. January 20, 1994)                                      Graffiti       Any violation of this chapter shall be a misdemeanor.
6-14.15
                                                                                                     No retailer
                                                                                                     shall
                                                                                                     knowingly sell
                                                                                                     to a single
                                                                                                     customer and
                                                                                                     no single
                                                                                                     customer shall
                                                                                                     acquire more
                                                                                                     than three
                                                                                                     packages, per
                                                                                                     transaction,
                                                                                                     of a product
                                                                                                     containing
                                                                                                     ephedrine. No  Any person, customer, or retailer violating any of the provisions of this
Sec.    Regulation of                                                                                retailer shall chapter shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction shall be punished
6-16.04 Ephedrine      (§ 1, Ord. 2671, eff. August 22, 1998)                                       knowingly sell by a fine not exceeding One Thousand Dollars ($1,000.00) or imprisonment for a
        Purchases                                                                                    to a single    term not exceeding six (6) months, or by both such fine and imprisonment.
                                                                                                     customer, per
                                                                                                     transaction,
                                                                                                     products
                                                                                                     containing
                                                                                                     ephedrine
                                                                                                     where the
                                                                                                     total count
                                                                                                     exceeds one
                                                                                                     hundred (100)
                                                                                                     or such other
                                                                                                     count as may
                                                                                                     be established
                                                                                                     by state or
                                                                                                     federal law.
                                                                                                     Retail butane
                                                                                                     sales
                                                                                                     regulations,
        Regulation of                                                                                including      Any person, customer, or retailer violating any of the provisions of this
Sec.    Butane         (§ 2, Ord. 3048, eff. June 2, 2016)                                          amount         chapter shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction shall be punished
6-17.04 Purchases                                                                                    restrictions,  by a fine not exceeding one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) or imprisonment for a
                                                                                                     log            term not exceeding six (6) months, or by both such fine and imprisonment.
                                                                                                     requirements,
                                                                                                     and display
                                                                                                     restrictions.
                                                                                                                    (b) Administrative Citations.
                                                                                                                    (1) In addition to the penalties provided in this section and all other legal
                                                                                                                    remedies available to the City, any person in violation of this chapter is
                                                                                                                    subject to an administrative citation and fine, without prior issuance of a
                                                                                                                    Notice of Violation. Each and every day a violation of this chapter exists
                                                                                                                    shall constitute a separate and distinct violation of this chapter.
                                                                                                                    (2) Notwithstanding subsection (b)(1), each cannabis plant present in excess of
                                                                                                                    the number of cannabis plants allowed under Section 6-18.03(c)(2)(iii) shall
                                                                                                                    constitute a separate and distinct violation of this chapter. Any violation of
                                                                                                                    Sections 6 18.03(c)(2)(iii) shall constitute a "transient" violation within the
Sec.    Cannabis       (§ 2, Ord. 3059, eff. November 3, 2016, § 2, Ord. 3236, eff. January 19,    Cannabis       meaning of Chapter 5 of Title 1 of the Ontario Municipal Code.
6-18.06                2023)                                                                                        (3) The amount of the administrative fine shall be in the amount set forth and
                                                                                                                    amended by resolution of the City Council. If no amount has been set by
                                                                                                                    resolution of the City Council, the amount of the administrative fine shall be
                                                                                                                    up to One Thousand Dollars ($1,000.00) but not less than One Hundred Dollars
                                                                                                                    ($100) per violation.
                                                                                                                    (4) The provisions and procedures concerning administrative citations set forth
                                                                                                                    in Chapter 5 of Title 1 of the Ontario Municipal Code shall apply to
                                                                                                                    administrative citations issued for violations of this chapter. To the extent
                                                                                                                    there are any conflicts between the provisions of Chapter 5 of Title 1 and this
                                                                                                                    chapter, the provisions of this chapter shall supersede and control
                                                                                                                    administrative citations issued for violations of this chapter.
        Airport Rules                                                                                Airport Rules  Any person guilty of violating any provisions of this chapter shall be deemed
Sec.    and            (§ 2, Ord. 3311, eff. September 18, 2025)                                    and            guilty of a misdemeanor and punishable by a fine not to exceed $1,000 or
7-1.903 Regulations                                                                                  Regulations    imprisonment not to exceed six (6) months in the County Jail, or both such fine
                                                                                                                    and imprisonment.
                                                                                                                    The failure of any person to comply with the provisions of this chapter within
                                                                                                                    forty-eight (48) hours after receiving a notice of a violation thereof shall be
                                                                                                                    a violation of the provisions of this chapter, and each day such noncompliance
Sec.    Public Rights- (§ 1, Ord. 1879, eff. February 5, 1976)                                      Public Rights- continues shall constitute a separate offense. The foregoing provisions
7-3.20  of-Way                                                                                       of-Way         notwithstanding, when any violation is deemed by the City to constitute an
                                                                                                                    immediate hazard to health or safety, the City shall eliminate such hazardous
                                                                                                                    violation and thereafter shall recover the costs incurred from the owner in any
                                                                                                                    lawful.
                                                                                                                    Notices of violations shall be given in writing by the City, served upon the
Sec.    Public Rights- (§ 1, Ord. 1879, eff. February 5, 1976)                                      Public Rights- owner in person, if possible. If personal service is not possible, the notice
7-3.20  of-Way                                                                                       of-Way         shall be sent by mail, receipt requested, and a copy of the notice shall be
                                                                                                                    conspicuously posted at the site of the violation.
                                                                                                                    In addition to the penalty for violations provided in
Sec.    Public Rights- (§ 1, Ord. 1879, eff. February 5, 1976)                                      Public Rights- Chapter 2 of Title 1 of this Code, when the owner fails to respond to a notice,
7-3.20  of-Way                                                                                       of-Way         the City may cause the violative condition to be corrected and the costs levied
                                                                                                                    against the property and collected from the owner in any lawful manner.
                                                                                                                    (a) In addition to the remedies provided by this chapter or elsewhere by law,
                                                                                                                    any condition caused or permitted to exist in violation of any of the
        Systematic                                                                                   Systematic     provisions of this chapter or any misrepresentation of any owner signed under
Sec.    Health and                                                                                   Health and     penalty of perjury, or any violation of any rule or regulation adopted by the
8-      Safety         (§ 1, Ord. 2894, eff. July 17, 2008)                                         Safety         City Manager pursuant to this chapter, shall be deemed unlawful and a per se
17.111  Inspection                                                                                   Inspection     public nuisance and may be enjoined or abated by the City by means of a civil
        Program                                                                                      Program        action or administrative abatement pursuant to Title 5-22 of this Code, and
                                                                                                                    each day such condition continues shall be regarded as a new and separate
                                                                                                                    offense.
                                                                                                                    (b) Except in cases where a different punishment is specifically prescribed
        Systematic                                                                                   Systematic     elsewhere in this chapter, every violation of this chapter shall constitute a
Sec.    Health and                                                                                   Health and     misdemeanor offense, punishable in accordance with §
8-      Safety         (§ 1, Ord. 2894, eff. July 17, 2008)                                         Safety         1-2.01(c); provided, that where the City Attorney determines that such action
17.111  Inspection                                                                                   Inspection     would be in the interests of justice, the City Attorney may specify in the
        Program                                                                                      Program        accusatory pleading (or the citing officer in a Notice to Appear) that the
                                                                                                                    offense shall be an infraction, punishable in accordance with § 1-2.01(b).
        Systematic                                                                                   Systematic     (c) If any property owner fails to pay the service fee, as specified in this
Sec.    Health and                                                                                   Health and     chapter, within forty-five (45) days of mailing such service fee notice, a
8-      Safety         (§ 1, Ord. 2894, eff. July 17, 2008)                                         Safety         penalty shall be assessed equal to two times the required fee, plus accrued
17.111  Inspection                                                                                   Inspection     interest on such amount (including any penalty) at a rate of ten percent (10%)
        Program                                                                                      Program        per annum commencing as of the date of the mailing of the service fee notice
                                                                                                                    until paid.
Sec.                                                                                                                (a) Any person who violates a requirement of this Article or fails to obey an
9-      Historical     (Ord. 2707, eff. December 16, 1999)                                           Historical     order issued by the Commission or comply with a condition of approval of any
1.2680  Preservation                                                                                 Preservation   certificate or permit issued under this Article shall be guilty of a
                                                                                                                    misdemeanor.
                                                                                                                    (b) Any alteration or demolition of a Historical Resource in violation of this
Sec.                                                                                                                Article is expressly declared to be a nuisance and shall be abated by restoring
9-      Historical     (Ord. 2707, eff. December 16, 1999)                                           Historical     or reconstructing the property to its original condition prior to the
1.2680  Preservation                                                                                 Preservation   violation. Any person or entity who demolishes or substantially alters or
                                                                                                                    causes substantial alteration or demolition of a structure, in violation of the
                                                                                                                    provisions of this Article, shall be liable for a civil penalty.
                                                                                                                    (c) Alteration or demolition of an Historical Resource in violation of this
                                                                                                                    Article shall authorize the City to issue a temporary moratorium for the
                                                                                                                    development of the subject property for a period not to exceed twenty-four (24)
                                                                                                                    months from the date the City becomes aware of the alteration or demolition in
Sec.                                                                                                                violation of this Article. The purpose of the moratorium is to provide the City
9-      Historical     (Ord. 2707, eff. December 16, 1999)                                           Historical     an opportunity to study and determine appropriate mitigation measures for the
1.2680  Preservation                                                                                 Preservation   alteration or removal of the historic structure, and to ensure measures are
                                                                                                                    incorporated into any future development plans and approvals for the subject
                                                                                                                    property. Mitigation measures as determined by the Planning Department,
                                                                                                                    Historic Preservation Sub-committee and/or Historic Preservation Commission
                                                                                                                    shall be imposed as a condition of any subsequent permit for development of the
                                                                                                                    subject property.
                                                                                                                    (d) In the case of demolition, the civil penalty shall be equal to one-half the
Sec.                                                                                                                assessed value of the Historical Resource prior to the demolition. In the case
9-      Historical     (Ord. 2707, eff. December 16, 1999)                                           Historical     of alteration, the civil penalty shall be equal to one-half the cost of
1.2680  Preservation                                                                                 Preservation   restoration of the altered portion of the Historical Resource. Once the civil
                                                                                                                    penalty has been paid, building and construction permits and/or a Certificate
                                                                                                                    of Occupancy may be issued.
Sec.                                                                                                                (e) The City Attorney may maintain an action for injunctive relief to restrain
9-      Historical     (Ord. 2707, eff. December 16, 1999)                                           Historical     a violation or cause, where possible, the complete or partial restoration,
1.2680  Preservation                                                                                 Preservation   reconstruction or replacement of any structure demolished, partially
                                                                                                                    demolished, altered or partially altered in violation of this Article.
                                                                                                                    Each violation of the provisions of this chapter, or of any regulation, order,
                                                                                                                    or ruling promulgated or made pursuant hereto, shall constitute a misdemeanor
                                                                                                                    and shall be punishable as set forth in
Sec.    Airport                                                                                      Airport        Chapter 2 of Title 1 of this Code. In addition, the City may institute in any
9-      Approach Zone  (§ 13, Ord. 997, eff. June 2, 1954)                                          Approach Zone  court of competent jurisdiction an action to prevent, restrain, correct, or
1.2975                                                                                                              abate any violation of the provisions of this chapter or any order or ruling in
                                                                                                                    connection with the administration or enforcement of said provisions, and the
                                                                                                                    court shall adjudge to the City such relief, by way of injunction (which may be
                                                                                                                    mandatory) or otherwise, as may be proper.
                                                                                                                    Any person who violates, causes, or permits another person to violate any
                                                                                                     Fee, and       provision of this Article is guilty of either an infraction or misdemeanor as
                                                                                                     regulations    determined by §
                                                                                                     pertaining to  1-2.01 of
                                                                                                     fees,          Chapter 2, Title 1 of the Ontario Municipal Code. Any person convicted of
                                                                                                     including the  either ran infraction or misdemeanor under the provision of this Article shall
                                                                                                     review,        be punished by a fine, imprisonment, or both according to state law.
                                                                                                     notification,  In addition to any other penalties provided in this section, the following
                                                                                                     appeal, re-    administrative penalties shall apply for any for each and every day during any
                                                                                                     inspection of  portion of which any violation of any provision of these regulations is
                                                                                                     establishments committed, continued, permitted, or caused by such violator:
                                                                                                     conducting     For the first citation in any one-year period the penalty shall be the total
Sec.    Violations and                                                                               Deemed         sum of Two Hundred Fifty Dollars ($250.00).
9-      Penalties      (Ord. 2879, eff. January 3, 2008)                                             Approved       For the second citation in any one-year period the penalty shall be the total
1.3511                                                                                               Activities,    sum of Five Hundred Dollars ($500.00).
                                                                                                     and Deemed     For the third citation in any one-year period the penalty shall be the total
                                                                                                     Approved       sum of One Thousand Dollars ($1,000.00).
                                                                                                     regulation     For each and every subsequent citation in any one-year period, the penalty will
                                                                                                     training       be One Thousand Dollars ($1,000.00) a day to a maximum of Two Hundred Fifty
                                                                                                     classes shall  Thousand Dollars ($250,000.00) a year.
                                                                                                     be in          If full payment is not received within the required time for payment, the bill
                                                                                                     accordance     will be delinquent, and all persons liable for the penalties shall be charged
                                                                                                     with the City  interest at the maximum legal rate from the date the payment period expires and
                                                                                                     master fee     a further civil penalty in the amount of One Hundred Dollars ($100.00). The
                                                                                                     schedule.      delinquent costs may be placed as a lien against the property or collected by
                                                                                                                    the City in any manner authorized by law and are recoverable in a civil action
                                                                                                                    filed by the City in a court of competent jurisdiction.
                                                                                                                    A violation of Subdivision Map Act shall be punishable in accordance with Cal.
Sec.                                                                                                                Gov't Code § 66499.31. Any violation of this section which is not also a
9-      Subdivision    (Ord. 2760, eff. August 15, 2002)                                             Subdivision    violation of the Subdivision Map Act or by any other state statute is a
2.0155  Regulations                                                                                  Regulations    misdemeanor, punishable by a fine of not more than Ten Thousand Dollars
                                                                                                                    ($10,000) or by imprisonment in the County Jail for not more than one (1) year
                                                                                                                    or by both such fine and imprisonment.
                                                                                                     Sec.
                                                                                                     10-2.02.The
                                                                                                     purposes of
                                                                                                     this chapter
                                                                                                     are to
                                                                                                     preserve
                                                                                                     parkway trees,
                                                                                                     to regulate
Sec.                                                                                                 the            Sec.
10-                                                                                                  maintenance    10-2.11. In addition to the penalty provided in
2.02,   Parkway Trees  (§ 7, Ord. 1664, eff. October 5, 1967)                                       and removal of Chapter 2 of Title 1 of this Code for violations, when the owner fails to
Sec.                                                                                                 such trees,    respond to such notice, the City may cause the violative condition to be
10-2.11                                                                                              and to         corrected and costs levied against the property and collected from the owner in
                                                                                                     establish the  any lawful manner.
                                                                                                     varieties,
                                                                                                     minimum size,
                                                                                                     methods, and
                                                                                                     locations for
                                                                                                     the planting
                                                                                                     thereof, and
                                                                                                     other related
                                                                                                     matters.
This table is a summation. Please reference the entire section to see complete details.
 
